                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




REVENUE COLLAPSES AND THE CONSUMPTION OF SMALL BUSINESS OWNERS IN
            THE EARLY STAGES OF THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC

                                         Olivia S. Kim
                                       Jonathan A. Parker
                                       Antoinette Schoar

                                      Working Paper 28151
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28151


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2020




For useful discussions, we thank Diana Farrell, Fiona Greig, and Chris Wheat. This research was
made possible by a data-use agreement between the authors and the JPMorgan Chase Institute
(JPMCI), which has created de-identified data assets that are selectively available to be used for
academic research. All statistics from JPMCI data, including medians, reflect cells with multiple
observations. The opinions expressed are those of the authors alone and do not represent the
views of JPMorgan Chase & Co. Sloan School of Management, MIT, 100 Main Street,
Cambridge, MA 02142, OSKim@mit.edu, JAParker@mit.edu, ASchoar@mit.edu. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Olivia S. Kim, Jonathan A. Parker, and Antoinette Schoar. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Revenue Collapses and the Consumption of Small Business Owners in the Early Stages of
the COVID-19 Pandemic
Olivia S. Kim, Jonathan A. Parker, and Antoinette Schoar
NBER Working Paper No. 28151
November 2020
JEL No. D12,D15,D25,E2,E63,E65,G32,G5

                                         ABSTRACT

Using detailed transaction-level data from financial accounts, this paper shows that the revenues
of small businesses and the consumption spending of their owners both decline by roughly 40%
following the declaration of the national emergency in March 2020. However, through May 2020,
the vast majority of this average decline in revenues is due to national factors rather than to
variation in local infection rates or policies. Further, there is only a modest propensity for
business owners to cut consumption in response to their individual business losses: Comparing
owners in the same county but whose businesses operate in industries differentially impacted by
local infections and state-level policies, we show that each dollar of revenue loss leads to a 1.6
cent decline in the consumption of the owner at this early stage of the pandemic. This limited
passthrough appears to be explained by three factors: (1) the liquidity of households and
businesses entering the crisis ­ consumption is twice as responsive for small business owners
who operate with low liquidity; (2) emergency Federal programs ­ median account balances in
both business and checking accounts decline in March but rebound in April and May when the
transfer programs begin; (3) pandemic induced declines in the ability to spend on consumption ­
spending on travel, restaurants or personal services dropped dramatically.

Olivia S. Kim                                   Antoinette Schoar
MIT Sloan School of Management                  MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-680                        100 Main Street, E62-638
Cambridge, MA                                   Cambridge, MA 02142
USA                                             and NBER
oskim@mit.edu                                   aschoar@mit.edu

Jonathan A. Parker
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-642
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
JAParker@MIT.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28151
   The small business sector plays an important role for the economy as a whole, typically
accounting for two-thirds of net job growth and 44 percent of U.S. economic activity (SBA,
2019). The Covid-19 pandemic has brought unprecedented challenges for small businesses
and their owners due to the collapse in demand, supply chain disruptions, and production
slowdowns associated with unsafe work environments. Small businesses typically contract
earlier and more severely than large firms when the economy slows down (Davis et al.,
1996), partly because they operate with lower overhead and fixed costs. Not only does this
seem to be true in this pandemic downturn, but the owners of small businesses may bear
the brunt of these contractions. While there is little research measuring the exposure of
small businesses owners to their firms' performance, small business owners are not well
diversified. They typically hold much of their wealth in their own businesses and depend
on their businesses for their labor incomes (81 percent of small businesses are nonemployer
businesses, FRBNY, 2019). Thus, a significant concern in the pandemic, reflected in the
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES) Act of 2020, is the damage to
the small business sector and the standard of living of its owners.
   Using de-identified data on the checking and credit-card accounts of small businesses
and households from JP Morgan Chase (JPMC) bank account records, we document how
the revenues of small businesses and the consumption of their owners has been impacted
by local infection rates and policy responses during the early stages of the pandemic. We
use transaction-level information to construct a weekly panel dataset on the revenues,
expenses, and profits of small businesses linked with the consumption of their owners
from January 2019 to the end of May 2020. Unlike other datasets covering small businesses,
our sample of businesses has significant coverage of non-employer businesses.
   We first document that the COVID-19 pandemic had an enormous impact on small
businesses and their owners in March, April and May 2020. Average revenues decline by
more than forty percent in the weeks following the declaration of the national emergency
(March 13, 2020), and show little to no evidence of recovery over the next few weeks.
Consumption spending of small business owners declines by a similar amount ­ more than
forty percent on average ­ but then partially rebounds two months into the pandemic. This


                                             1
decline in revenues is in line with prior studies that also document a dramatic decline in
small business employment (Bartik et al., 2020; Chetty et al., 2020) and finances (Farrell
et al., 2020b) during this early phase of the pandemic. Average expenses track revenues
closely, suggesting that businesses downsized immediately in response to a sudden drop
in revenues. We also find substantial exit of small businesses in February and March (just
over 2.5% of businesses per month), but a lower rate of exit in April and May (just over 1%).
The highest incidence of business closures occurs for full-service restaurants, residential
remodeling, beauty salons, and trucking.
    The large declines in both business performance and owner consumption over the few
weeks following the national emergency are similar across businesses of different size,
maintaining different levels of liquidity ex ante, and for employer versus non-employer
businesses. But we find that the average declines in revenues are much larger for businesses
in non-essential industries (roughly 50%) than for those in essential industries (roughly
30%).1 We also find some differences in partial recovery in April and May. The average
revenue decline for the smallest businesses start recovering as early as three weeks into the
pandemic, whereas the revenue drop for larger small businesses persists until the end of
our sample (end of May).2
    Second we show that the collapse of small business revenues and the consumption
of their owners is predominantly explained by nationwide factors, and that only a small
part of the collapse is related to county-level variation new infection rates or state-level
variation in policies such as shelter in place (SIP) orders. Following the declaration of the
national emergency, both new infection rates and state-level policies differ significantly
across counties and states and have low correlation with each other. Regressing outcomes
onto infection rates and SIP orders and including weekly time fixed effects to control for
national factors, we find that local infections and SIP orders have only modest direct effects
on small businesses and their owners. Specifically, an increase in new infections by two
standard deviations leads to a 1.5 percent decline in business revenues. The introduction
   1 Essential  business are classified according to the CISA guideline and verified via news searches. There is
little difference in exit rates in essential vs. non-essential industries.
    2 This finding is consistent with Bartlett III and Morse (2020) who find that microbusinesses show greater

revenue resiliency relative to bigger small businesses.


                                                       2
of a SIP order leads to a 2.5% incremental decline in business revenues and a 4.4% decline
in owner consumption. The sum of these two effects amount to only ten percent of the
average observed decline in small business revenues. Thus, most of the decline in both
revenues and consumption, while surely caused by the pandemic, is not directly related to
either local infection rates or SIP orders.
    However, new infection rates have large effects in the few places where they are
especially high. At this early stage of the pandemic, the standard deviation of county-level
new infection rates is low because only a few counties have significant infection rates.
Across the areas with the highest and the lowest infection rates in the same week, local
infections lead to a 11 percentage point difference in weekly revenues. These results are not
driven by our use of SIP orders as a summary of anti-pandemic policies. Our findings are
similar if we instead use the first principal component of a broad set of Non-Pharmaceutical
Interventions (NPIs) instead of analyzing just the imposition of SIP orders.3 Our finding
that NPIs had modest effects where they are imposed is consistent with Correia et al. (2020),
which finds that cities that had stricter NPI policies do not perform worse than those with
less stringent policies during the 1918 Flu pandemic, although we find more modest effects
of the local disease incidence while that paper finds that the main source of differences in
economic disruption was the pandemic itself.
    Our final and most novel result is that the decline in a small business's revenues
has only had a small direct effect on the consumption spending of its owner in these
first couple of months of the pandemic. The challenge in identifying the magnitude of
the consumption response to revenue declines is that the pandemic affects household
consumption decisions not only through the drop in business revenues but also directly
through the local prevalence of the disease and the local restrictions on mobility and
consumer-facing businesses. For example, business owners in hard hit areas might see a
drop in revenues but also reduce spending endogenously due to the infection risk when
leaving the house. For wage-earning households, Cox et al. (2020) finds a reduction in
   3 Specifically,we construct a composite measure of NPI strictness that reflects a state's NPI strictness
relative to other states using a principal component analysis. We find that a one standard deviation increase
in NPI strictness reduces business revenues, expenses, and owner's consumption by 2 to 3 percentage points.
The magnitude of this effect is similar to that of SIPs.


                                                     3
spending on average in the initial months of the pandemic across many types of households,
indicating that the drop in household spending extended to those whose income was not
directly affected by the pandemic.
   We estimate the propensity of owners to reduce consumption in response to revenue
declines using a two-stage least squares strategy that compares businesses in the the same
county and week that experience relatively more and relatively less severe revenue losses
in response to local infections and SIP orders because they are in different industries. That
is, our identification strategy relies on the idea that the direct effect of local factors on
the consumption of business owners is driven by local conditions that affects households
independently of their own business revenues. Therefore, we include county x time
effects in our regression to control for this endogenous variation in consumption. Further,
because consumption and revenues are co-determined for any given business, we use the
interactions between 4-digit NAICS industry indicators and local infections and SIP orders
to generate revenue changes that are plausibly orthogonal to any remaining endogenous
variation in consumption. The changes in revenues for the five least affected industries
since the onset of the national emergency ranges from zero to a 20% increase, while the
changes in revenues for the five most affected industries are as large as a 90% decline.
   Our estimates show that for every dollar decline in business revenues, expenses, or
profits, the owner of that business decreases consumption spending by only 1.6 to 4 cents.
While this average pass-through effect is relatively modest, during the national emergency
it still amounts to a significant impact on household spending due to the large average drop
in revenues. The implied dollar effect of the consumption drop driven by business revenue
losses is as large as the typical variation in weekly consumption observed prior to the onset
of the national emergency. Another way of framing the magnitude of the pass-through
effect in dollar terms is to compare average changes in revenues for the least and the most
affected sectors. We find that the consumption decline driven by business revenue losses is
as large as 15% of the overall consumption drop for the most affected sectors.
   There are several potential explanations for the low average pass-through of revenue
losses into the consumption of business owners in the early phases of the pandemic. First,


                                             4
it is possible that businesses and households went into the pandemic with enough liquidity,
debt capacity, or other sources of household income to buffer some of the initial revenue
collapse. Consistent with an important role for ex ante liquidity, we find that the pass-
through of revenues to consumption is twice as large for owners of businesses who enter
the crisis with low liquidity.
   Second, hard hit business owners may stabilize their consumption using the substantial
fiscal support provided by the federal government. Consistent with an important role for
the CARES Act, average and median balances in both business and personal accounts rise
in April and May. The average personal account balance of owners of businesses in the most
affected industries falls in March but fully recovers in April and rises in May. The average
business account balance for businesses in the most affected industries drops in March, and
again but by less in April, but then partially recovers in May.
   Third, the pandemic imposes significant restrictions on everyone's ability to spend,
which may make the common, lower level of consumption relatively insensitive to individual-
business revenue declines. While we have no direct evidence on this channel, we find
disproportionate declines in spending on goods and services that are luxuries or that
require close personal contact, such as travel, eating out, or personal services.
   In sum, in the early stages of the pandemic, the large average (40%) drop in the consump-
tion of small business owners appears to be largely divorced from the specific performance
of their individual business and mainly driven by the national crisis. The low direct effects
appear to be due to pandemic related restrictions on consumption outside the house, the
owners' own preparedness for bad times, and to the governments large fiscal responses
in the early stages of the pandemic. The pass-through of business losses into owner's
consumption may well rise over time as liquidity and government funds are exhausted
and the pandemic continues.


Related literature Several recent papers have conducted surveys of small businesses
and their owners in the early phases of the pandemic and find mass layoffs, temporary
closures, and downsizing of businesses. Bartik et al. (2020) finds that 43% of businesses
were temporarily closed by the end of March, 2020, and estimates from the U.S. Census

                                              5
Small Business Pulse Survey show that only 25% of firms had enough cash on hand to cover
3 months of operations at the end of May (U.S. Census, 2020). Bartlett III and Morse (2020)
finds that larger small businesses experienced 14% higher revenue declines than smaller
small businesses, and Humphries et al. (2020) reports that 60% of small businesses had laid
off at least one worker by the end of April. Alekseev et al. (2020) documents that increased
household responsibilities, such as taking care of children and self-isolating household
members, affected business owners' ability to focus on work during the crisis. Studies that
make use of administrative data document a sudden, 12.7% drop in median business cash
balances at the onset of the pandemic (Farrell et al., 2020b) and substantial heterogeneity
in the speed of recovery by owner's race or by income profiles of the neighborhood in
which businesses operate, with African-American businesses recovering at a slower rate
than White-owned businesses (Fairlie, 2020) and business located in less affluent areas
experiencing smaller revenue losses than those located with more affluent areas (Chetty
et al., 2020).4 Our study complements these studies by providing well-identified estimates
of the effect of local infections and NPIs on small business revenues and expenses and
by quantifying the extent to which disruptions to business revenues impacted the living
standards of their owners.
    Our work contributes to the consumption literature that estimate the marginal propen-
sity to consume out of transitory income shocks.5 Recent studies that examine household
spending dynamics during COVID-19 find that households across all income distribution
initially cut spending in the early phases of the pandemic and that spending has rebounded
most rapidly for low income households (Cox et al., 2020; Baker et al., 2020). Our paper is
the first paper to study how the living standards of small business owners are impacted by
their own business performance.
   4 Fairlie (2020) documents that African-American business owners experiencing a drop of 26% in business
activity from pre-COVID-19 levels compared to only 11% drop for White business owners by May, 2020.
Farrell et al. (2020a) similarly finds that cash balances of White-owned restaurants doubled in May compared
to only 38% increase for Black-owned restaurants.
   5 These studies estimate the extent to which households can smooth transitory variation in income

generated by, for example, randomized timing of disbursement of economic stimulus (Parker et al., 2013;
Broda and Parker, 2014), arrival of tax refunds (Baugh et al., 2020), household liquidity shock (Gross and
Souleles, 2002), and unemployment insurance (Ganong and Noel, 2019).



                                                     6
    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. We describe the data used in this
study in Section 1, including our sample construction procedures and the definition of
primary outcomes considered in the study. Section 2 presents descriptive evidence of how
small businesses performed and owners' consumption evolved in the early months of the
pandemic. We present our main findings on the effect of infections and NPIs in Section
3. In Section 4, we describe our estimation strategy for quantifying the causal effect of
revenue losses on owners' consumption and present the pass-through estimates. Section 5
discusses potential explanations behind the modest average pass-through effect of business
revenue losses. Section 6 concludes.



1     Data

    Our analysis makes use of de-identified financial accounts data provided by JPMorgan
Chase Institute (JPMCI). We use transaction-level data from both small business accounts
and personal accounts to construct a panel dataset on the revenues, expenses, and profits of
small businesses linked with the consumption of their owners. Our final dataset provides
weekly business outcomes and household consumption for 380,532 businesses and 333,128
business owners between January and May, 2020.


1.1   Samples

    We start by constructing a data set of the universe of small business checking accounts.
We define a small business to be a collection of small business checking accounts linked to
the same signer of the account.


The all businesses sample.     We apply several screening criteria to identify active busi-
nesses that primarily use financial accounts provided by JPMC to manage their business
finances. First, we exclude businesses that have more than two business checking accounts
and those with multiple location or industry assignment. We next apply several account
activity filters to ensure that the set of firms we consider are actively operating businesses


                                              7
prior to the pandemic. We limit the sample to firms with "open" business checking account
status for at least twelve consecutive calendar months. We also require that a checking
account has at least three transactions per month for at least ten months in 2019 (i.e., our
baseline period). Finally, we require a business to have an "open" account status for at
least one month in 2020 in order. This reduces our sample of 3.44 million small businesses
to 1.8 million businesses with active accounts as of the beginning of 2020. This sample is
henceforth referred to as the all businesses sample.


The business owners sample. From this all businesses sample, we next create a subsam-
ple of accounts for which we can match at least one of the owners of the small business to
a personal account at the same large financial institution. We construct a business owners
sample of paired small-business accounts and personal accounts where each observation
represents a small-business matched with the personal accounts of one of its owners.
Specifically, we start from the all businesses sample and apply several additional screening
criteria to ensure that the set of owner households we consider also use financial services
provided by JPMC to manage their personal finance. Specifically, we require that a busi-
ness owner has an active personal checking account (or accounts) that is "open" for at
least twelve consecutive months and has at least 3 transactions during all months in 2019.
Relative to the business account activity filter that we impose ­ i.e., at least 3 transactions
for 10 months in 2019­ we require personal accounts to have activity in all months. This is
because business account activity tends to be more volatile due to variation in cash flows,
whereas personal accounts are not subject to the same concern. This procedure leads to a
sample of 363,428 small business-owner pairs.


Further subsamples      We categorize observations in the business owners sample by type
of businesses along the following dimensions: employer versus non-employer, essential
versus non-essential, small versus big, and low versus high liquidity.
   A business is categorized as employer if it has payroll expenses for at least 6 months
in 2019. In our sample, 15% are employer firms. We next identify essential and non-
essential businesses based on their 4-digit North American Industry Classification System

                                              8
(NAICS) sub-sector. Specifically, we categorize businesses that operate in sectors classified
as "critical workforce" by the Department of Homeland Security (HLS)'s advisory list as
essential businesses. We make a few exceptions to this list.6 Namely, we categorize several
sub-sectors in the food and agriculture industry, such as bakeries, caterers, or full-service
restaurants, as non-essential because they are heavily affected by stay-at-home restrictions
even if food and agriculture sectors were considered to be essential and technically not
closed. According to this measure, roughly 60% are essential businesses.
    We use two measures of firm size. In our descriptive statistics, we define firm size based
on its average weekly revenues during 2019. Businesses with average weekly revenue
below the first tercile are classified as smaller, and those with weekly revenues greater
than the third tercile are classified as larger. For later estimation (in section 4), we define
firm size based on the within-industry distribution of annual revenue in 2019. Since our
estimation exploits differential industry exposure to local NPIs and infection rates, using
within-industry distribution is a better measure of relative size. Businesses with 2019
revenue below the median for their industry are classified as small, and those above the
median for their industry are classified as large.
    Business liquidity is computed as the ratio of average cash balances at the end of each
month in 2019 to average monthly expenses in 2019. We then multiply this figure by thirty
to express liquidity as the number of days of operating expenses that a business could pay
out of its cash balances were its revenues to stop. Businesses are classified based on the
within-industry distribution. Businesses in the bottom quarter of the distribution of cash
buffer days within its NAICS4 sub-sector are classified as low liquidity, those in the top
quarter are classified as high liquidity.


Supplemental Data.          We supplement this administrative financial accounts data with
county-level infections data from the New York Times (New York Times, 2020) and state-
level non-pharmaceutical interventions from Keystone Strategy (Keystone, 2020).
   6 This  list is intended to help local officials to make informed decisions, so individual jurisdictions may
differ in their own requirements of essential versus non-essential distinctions. It is nonetheless a good proxy
for whether a business is considered to be essential at the local level.



                                                      9
1.2    Measurement of Business and Owner Outcomes

    Our main outcomes of interest are weekly business revenues, expenses, and profits, and
household consumption.


Business outcomes of firms To construct operating revenues for each small business, we
first compute total credit transactions (i.e., inflows) into business checking accounts for
each firm and week. We next identify financial transactions or non-business income that
are unlikely to represent operating revenues received from providing goods and services,
and subtract these amounts from total inflows.


      Operating Revenue = Total Inflows - Financial Inflows - Non-business income                       (1)


Financial inflows include any inter-personal transfers, fee reversals, or miscellaneous
account activities such as SWEEP inflows, or loans from financial institutions. Non-business
income includes government transfers, such as unemployment insurance, tax refunds, or
veterans benefits, income from gig platforms, or other interest income.
    To construct operating expenses, we categorize all debit transactions (i.e., outflows) on
business checking, debit card, and credit card accounts for each firm and week.7


         Operating Expense = Fuel + Equipment + Groceries + Materials + Retail+

 Retail Durable + Wholesale + Entertainment + Food + Insurance + MiscBizExpense+

               Services + Travel + Payroll + Tax + Debt Payment + Utilities+

                           Cash Withdrawal + Check + Uncategorized                                      (2)


Spending categories are identified using a combination of transaction tags provided by
JPMCI, such as the Merchant Category Code (for spending on cards), identity of a transac-
tion counterparty, or the channel of payment. We are able to classify detailed categories of
business expenses, but not of operating revenues because counterparty identity for credit
   7 Deposit account transactions refer to non-debit checking account transactions, while debit transactions
refer to those using debit cards.


                                                    10
transactions is often redacted to preserve anonymity of the business.
   We code both operating revenues and expenses as continuing zeros following account
closures. This approach eliminates a possible survivorship bias that could spuriously make
business outcomes appear better due to dropping exiting firms that perform the worst
through the pandemic.
   We define Profit as the difference between revenues and expenses, and Profit Margin as
profit divided by average operating revenue in 2019.
   Finally, we code Exit as a binary variable that equals one if the small business closes or
has closed its accounts, and equals zero otherwise. If a business has two deposit accounts,
both accounts must be closed to be coded as having exited. This method of measuring exit
likely underestimates true exit rates, and exit may be measured with delay because firms
may be inactive for some time before closing an account. Since we do not consider this
dormancy period as exit, the effects that we estimate on exit are likely to be conservative
estimates for true exit through May 2020.


Household consumption of owners        We construct business owner households' consump-
tion by categorizing all debit transactions on the owners' personal deposit accounts, debit
card, and credit card accounts:


        Consumption = Fuel + Groceries + Pharmacy + Retail + Retail Durable+

  Auto Repair + Insurance + Medical + Entertainment + FoodAway + Personal Svcs+

          Professional Svcs + Other Svcs + Travel + Rent + Gov't + Utilities+

                       Cash Withdrawal + Check + Uncategorized                            (3)


   For credit card spending, we follow Ganong and Noel (2019), and measure spending
as of the time when the goods and services are purchased, rather than when the card bill
is paid. In addition to household consumption, we categorize and track household debt
payments as they are major household expenses. We supplement business and household
outcomes with demographic information of businesses and their owners, such as owner's



                                             11
gender and age, business industry, incorporation type, and location.
   Relative to other account-level analyses, one advantage of our use of linked small-
business and personal accounts is that we observe some business expenses in personal
account and some personal expenses in business accounts and can re-classify them. That is,
there are instances where it appears that the business owner uses their business accounts for
transactions that are clearly for personal use (e.g., child care, medical expenses, hair salon,
etc). We exclude these transactions from operating expenses and re-categorize them as
household spending. Similarly, when we observe business spending (e.g., payroll, business
insurance, etc) from personal accounts, we re-categorize them as operating expense.
   One disadvantage of account level data in general is that we cannot capture business
activities or household spending patterns if a business or household has financial accounts
with other financial services company. However, given that the sample of households
we study have both of their business and personal checking accounts provided by JPMC
to manage their finances, combined with our activity filters, we believe that the account
activity that we can track in our data capture the majority, if not all, of their business and
personal finances.


Scaled outcome variables          To compare businesses of different sizes, we normalize our
outcome variables (except profits) using two alternative scaling factors. The first scaling
factor is the weekly average of the outcome in 2019. We denote variables scaled with this
factor by the superscript avg (for 2019 average). So for business or owner i in week t we
have:

                                             avg     Yi,t
                                           Yi,t =                                            (4)
                                                    Y i,2019

                   1
where Y i,2019 =   52   s2019 Yi,s and Yi,s represents operating revenue, operating expenses, or
consumption. This first normalization has the advantage of adjusting by a constant factor
for each firm-household pair and so measuring changes in outcome relative to a constant
baseline.
   The second scaling factor is the centered 9-week average of the same outcome a year ago.

                                                   12
We denote variables scale with this factor by the superscript sa (for seasonal adjustment),
as in

                                                         Yi,t
                                         Yisa
                                           ,t =                                              (5)
                                                  Y i,(t-56,t-48)

                                =t-48
where Y i,(t-56,t-48) =   1
                          9   s
                              s=t-56 Yi,s . The second normalization factor has the advantage of
adjusting for seasonal fluctuations, so that one is comparing the firm-household outcome
to a similar period in the previous year. We take the 9-week average so that the scale factor
does not add volatility to the outcome variable from the weekly volatility during 2019.
   Unlike revenues, expenses, or consumption which is each scaled by its own weekly
average in 2019, we transform profits (i.e., Revenuei,t - Expensei,t ) into a profit margin
measure, or percentage of sales turned into profits, by normalizing profits by weekly
average or centered-9 week average of operating revenue a year ago. All of the scaled and
unscaled outcome variables are winsorized at the 2nd and 98th percentile.


1.3     Descriptive Statistics

   Businesses in the business owners sample are smaller ­ both on average and across
the distribution ­ relative to those in the all businesses sample, as shown in Panels A (all
businesses sample) and F (business owners sample) of Table 1. Panels B through E show
the distributions of revenues, expenses, and profits for subsamples of the all businesses
sample. Average revenues and expenses track each other closely for all types of businesses
with the exception of smaller small businesses (Panel D), which has higher average weekly
expenses than revenues. Employer businesses (Panel C) tend to be larger and are similar in
size to large small businesses (those in the top tercile of weekly revenues in 2019, Panel E).
Across all business types, a median firm does not break even (median profits are negative),
and median weekly expenses exceed median weekly revenues by 70. Our measure of
weekly consumption represents about 20% of business revenues and expenses (Table 1
Panel F).
   At the bottom of Table 1, we show that businesses in the all businesses sample are


                                                    13
concentrated in 5 industries, in which more than half of all businesses in the sample
operate. A large share of businesses (more than 70%) are pass-through entities, and less
than 30% of all businesses are known to be female-owned.
   How do the characteristics of the small businesses that use our financial institution
compare to the national distribution? Table 2 compares our data to external benchmarks.
Roughly 85% of businesses sampled in our data are nonemployer businesses, similar to 81%
in the U.S. overall. Thus, a key advantage of our data is better coverage of nonemployer
businesses realtive to traditional data sources (Alekseev et al., 2020). However, relative
to the benchmark, our sample under-represents businesses that existed for more than 10
years and over-represents businesses that operate in professional services, real estate, and
transportation sectors. Among nonemployer businesses, our sample of firms tend to be
bigger in terms of annual receipts relative to the nationwide distribution.


1.4   Measurement of Infections and NPIs

   To estimate the effect of local disease prevalence on business performance and owner's
consumption, we obtain measures of new infections from New York Times (2020). We
aggregate new cases in every county from the daily to the weekly level, and divide by
ex ante population to obtain the weekly rate of new infections per 1, 000 residents at the
county level:

                                              New Casesc,t
                              Dc ( i ), t =                × 1000                        (6)
                                              Populationc

where c indexes counties and c(i ) denotes the county in which business i is located. For
                                                              Cum =
studying exit rates, we cumulate this variable across weeks: Dc ( i ),t t
                                                                        s=0 Dc(i ),t . It is

important to note that the infection rates that we use in this study do not accurately
measure the true infection rates due to limited testing capability and efforts as well as
other factors. However, the rates that we use reflect the available public information about
the prevalence of the disease, and so these measures are more appropriate than would
be the true rates for measuring the effect of local infection rates on business outcomes


                                                  14
and owners' consumption. However, the effects we measure are obviously the effects of
reported rather than actual infection rates. We obtain measures of NPI policies at the state
level from Keystone (2020).



2    Average business and owner outcomes

    This section shows that the performance of small businesses performed and the con-
sumption of their owners declined dramatically in the early months of the pandemic.
Following this analysis, Section 3 studies the relative roles of national vs. local infection
rates and state-level policies in these severe declines. Section 4 then measures the extent
to which owners' living standards are affected by their own business' revenue losses and
how this differs across businesses.
    Consistent with other studies, our data show sharp declines in all measures of economic
activity following declaration of the COVID-19 national emergency (March 13, 2020).
Figure 1 displays the average weekly dollar amounts (not scaled) of business revenue,
expense, profit, and owner's consumption for our business owners sample. Figure 2 plots
the average percent change in seasonally adjusted outcomes (our second scaling factor)
for this same sample, relative to the average during the two months before the national
emergency. Revenues, expenses, and consumption drop by more than 40% two weeks
into the national emergency and remain low for six weeks until the end of May when they
partly rebound. Business expenses track revenues closely, indicating that businesses on
average downsized their operations. Profits fall steadily over the period by about $200 per
week relative to their pre-pandemic average and by about 10% of revenues relative to their
pre-pandemic average. Finally, the consumption of small business owners declines along
with business revenues. Thehe two series track each other in the weeks that follow; when
business revenue increases, owner consumption increases.While the set of businesses in
the business owners sample tend to be smaller than those in our all businesses sample, we
find that the experiences in the two samples are very similar. Appendix Figures A.1 and
A.2 repeat Figures 1 and 2 for a random subset of all businesses and shows a very similar


                                             15
pattern to that of our business owners sample and very similar magnitudes in percent.
    Figure 3 shows average changes in business revenues for different types of small
businesses. Panel A shows that essential businesses experienced a 35 - 40% decline in
revenues two weeks into a national emergency while non-essential businesses see a much
larger decline of closer to 60%. This gap is consistent with the fact that non-essential
businesses were both more impacted by consumers and workers reacting to the disease
and subject to more restrictions on operations by local government orders. This gap in
performance between essential and non-essential businesses also remains roughly constant
as both types of businesses rebound slightly. Panel B shows that larger small businesses
experienced bigger revenue declines relative to smaller small businesses. Differences
between employer and nonemployer businesses and between businesses that operate with
high and low levels of liquidity are much smaller (Panels C and D).
    The pattern of changes in expenses by type of business is very similar to that of revenues
(Appendix Figure A.3). The pattern of changes in consumption by business type is also
similar except for some differences for owners of businesses with different levels of liquidity
(Appendix Figure A.4).8
    These declines in business revenues, expenses, and profits are unlikely to be driven by
business exits (i.e., closure of business account(s)) because exit does not increase following
the declaration of the national emergency when revenues fall. Panel A of figure 4 shows
the number of business closures in 2020 by month and panel B reports the cumulative
number of business closures in 2020 in our business owners sample.9 Among exiting firms,
a significant number of firms exited in February even before the national emergency was
declared. The incidence of business closure peaks in our sample in March. Full-service
restaurants, residential remodeling, beauty salons, and trucking industries are among the
   8 Both types of businesses have similar drops in consumption in the first month after national emergency
is declared, however, consumption recovers more rapidly for owner households that operate businesses
with lower liquidity. To the extent that low liquidity businesses represent owner households with lower
income, this result is consistent with existing studies that document faster spending recoveries for low-income
households (Cox et al., 2020).
    9 While 8% of businesses in the all businesses sample exit by the end of May, only 2% of all small businesses

in the business owners sample exit.




                                                       16
sectors with the highest incidence of business closures.10
    Both businesses and owner households make what appear to be significant inter- and
intra-temporal spending adjustments in the early months of the pandemic. Figures 5 and 6
plot the average weekly dollar amounts of expenses on detailed spending categories for
businesses and their owners using the expense measures described in section 1.2. We find
that both businesses and households increase spending on fuel and groceries in the week
prior to the national emergency and that they sharply cut back spending on travel, food
(i.e., restaurants, bars, bakeries, etc), entertainment, and personal services immediately
after the national emergency is declared, similar to the household stocking up behavior
documented in Baker et al. (forthcoming).
    Businesses increase spending on durable retail and materials, and the level of spending
on these categories remain elevated after the national emergency is declared relative to the
pre-pandemic average. This spending pattern may be due to businesses in some industries,
such as chemical product or detergent manufacturing firms, scaling up their operation
due to increased demand and/or businesses increasing spending on personal protective
equipment to ensure safe working conditions. Interestingly, the average weekly spending
on groceries remain elevated for both businesses and households in weeks following the
national emergency. This provides suggestive evidence that business owners' business
and personal finances may be integrated to some extent. This fungibility across financial
accounts raises the possibility that our estimates in Section 4 of the revenue to income
pass-through may be underestimates.
    Overall, the account-level data show that small businesses experienced slightly more
than a 40% decline in revenues and expenses following the declaration of the national
emergency, and that the owners of these business also reduced consumption by a similar
magnitude. Consumption, but not revenues or profits, recovers just under half this decline
during April and May. The next section builds on these descriptive facts by quantifying
the extent to which local infection rates and state-level NPI policies affected small business
  10 See Appendix Figure A.5 which displays the top ten industries with the highest incidence of business
closures during our sample period. This figure also shows that businesses in the essential industries are as
likely to exit as those in nonessential industries.



                                                    17
and owner outcomes.



3       The Effects of Infections and State-level Policies

     This section shows that both business outcomes and owner consumption declined
dramatically as local infection rates increased and states enacted policies to slow the
disease. In a simple regression framework without controls (besides business-owner fixed
effects), infections and non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) explain almost the entire
decline in business outcomes and consumption. However, comparing across businesses in
different counties and states, the direct effect of both infections and state policy responses
are modest. Where infections rates were high, infections had significantly larger effects
than NPIs on business outcomes and owner consumption.


3.1      Effects of Covid-19 Infections and Shelter in Place Orders

     While states introduced a wide range of NPIs in response to rising infection cases, in
this subsection we focus on the effects of shelter in place (SIP) orders and a composite
measure of NPI strictness. Among NPIs, SIP orders are one of the most common and most
strict measures. SIP orders impose direct restrictions both on the ability of many businesses
to operate and on the ability of people to consume many types of goods and services. Panel
A of Appendix Figure 7 shows the share of states with SIP orders imposed by week and
that there is substantial variation in the imposition of SIP orders across states.11
     There is also substantial heterogeneity in both timing and incidence of infection rates
across different counties. Figure 8 shows the evolution of infection rates per 1, 000 for
three counties that represent low, medium, and high growth regions. Panel A shows new
cases and panel B shows cumulative cases per 1, 000. The example counties with low
(Colorado, TX) and medium (Dakota, MN) caseloads use the left axis because their new
infection rates per 1, 000 people are so much lower than the counties with the higher rates,
for which we use the example of New York, plotted using the right axis. Not only do the
    11 (Panel   A of Figure A.6 shows the number of states imposing and lifting these order respectively.


                                                         18
new infection rates have very different levels, but also quite different timing. Figure 9
displays the average infection rate across all counties over time (in percent). The average
county-level infection rates was 0.48 cases per thousand residents at the peak of our sample
period, and at most 87% of the states have enacted SIP.
   To quantify the impact of infections and SIP orders on businesses and their owners'
consumption, we estimate variants of


                       Yi,t = i +  1 Dc(i),t +  2 1[SIPs(i),t ] + Xi,t +   i ,t             (7)


where Yi,t denote our outcomes of interest (as defined in Section 1.2) and our main ex-
planatory variables, Dc(i),t and 1[SIPs(i),t ], denote infection rates per 1, 000 residents and
an indicator for whether a state has SIP order in effect. See Section 1.4 for details on
variable definition. We include firm fixed effects, i , in all specifications to account for
time-invariant, unobserved differences across firms. We include different sets of fixed
effects, denoted by Xi,t to compare firms in the same week, in the same industry, and/or of
the same size. The results are reported in Table 3. The first four columns report the results
of estimating equation (7) with dependent variables normalized by prior year average,
 avg
Yi,t , and the last four columns report the results with seasonally adjusted dependent
variables normalized by centered-9-week average of the respective outcomes a year ago,
Yisa
  ,t . Reported coefficients are multiplied by 100 for readability and can be interpreted as
changes in percentage points.
   In columns 1 and 5 of Table 3, we first present coefficient estimates when excluding
fixed effects for week (and for business type) so that these results measure not only the
effect of local infections\SIPs, but also of the effect of the rise in average infections\SIPs
nationally and as well as anything else correlated over time with these national averages
during the onset of the pandemic. Each new case per 1, 000 residents is associated with
a 0.8 or 1.2 percentage point decline in weekly business revenues while the imposition
of a SIP order leads to 16 or 30 percent decline in revenues (where `percent' is percent of
average 2019 weekly revenues or the nine-week average of revenues centered around the
same week in 2019). The estimated impacts of infections across all outcomes in Columns 1

                                                19
and 5 of Table 3 imply that the local and national increases in the infections rates and SIP
orders together explain in this broad sense almost the entire decline in business outcomes
and owner's consumption.
   The remaining columns of Table 3 show that the effect of local infections and SIP orders
controlling for what is occurring nationally is modest, and accounts for only a small share
of the large declines that Section 2 documents. Columns 2 and 6 of Table 3 include week
fixed effects in Xi,t , and columns 3, 4, 7, and 8 also include interactions of these week
effects with categorical variables for industries or with categorical variables for firms size
terciles. Each new case per 1, 000 residents in a week leads to a 0.4 to 0.6 percent decrease in
revenues in that week, and a SIP order leads to a 2.3 to 2.6 percent decline in revenues, both
relative to 2019. To put this number in context, the standard deviation of the infection rate
following the national emergency is 1.21, so that a two standard deviations increase in the
infection rate leads to a 1.2 ( 2.42 cases per thousand ×0.5) percent decline in revenues,
or roughly half the effect of a SIP order. Because the infection rate is so highly skewed
early in the pandemic, a slightly more informative way to compare the impact of infection
rates and SIP orders is to compare areas with high and the low infection rates in the same
week. For example, when New York County, NY peaked at 22.5 cases per thousand, many
counties had no new cases. The local infection rate reduced average business revenues
in New York County by 11 ( (22.5 - 0) × 0.5) percentage points of 2019 revenues while
local infections caused no revenue reductions in a county with no local infections. This
impact is substantially larger than the roughly 2.5 percent decline due to a SIP order. Thus,
early in the pandemic in the typical county, the effect of a SIP order has a much larger
impact on business outcomes and consumption than the low infection rate, however in
areas with high infection rates, the infection rates drive much larger declines in revenues.
   Panels B through C of Table 3 that local infection rates and SIP orders both have slightly
larger effects on expenses than on revenues, and as a result, local infections and SIP orders
have slightly positive effects on our measure of profit margins.12 These findings suggest
that local infections and SIP orders cause businesses to cut back expenses more than
  12 As   shown in Appendix Figure A.7, the average profit margin declines over time during the pandemic.



                                                     20
revenues, by using up inventory, postponing bill payments, or "eating" capital, potentially
at significant future cost.
    As shown in Panel D of Table 3, local infections also have stronger effects on the
consumption of small business owners than on their revenues, decreasing consumption
by 0.5 to 0.8 percent of 2019 consumption per new case per thousand residents. Similarly,
state-level SIPs have much stronger effects on consumption than on revenues, decreasing
consumption by 3.1 to 4.4. percent. We find that local infections have little effects on exit
rates and that SIP also do not lead to higher exit rates once we account for time effects
during the early stages of the pandemic (Panel E).
    These estimated effects remain stable and robust across different specifications that
include time × industry or time × size bin fixed effects. We note that we find similar
effects for revenues, expenses, and profit margins in the all businesses sample, not just
for businesses that we can match to their owners (See Appendix Table A.1). Finally, it is
possible that infection rates of SIP orders have persistent effects, but we find no additional
effect of cumulative cases in a county or weeks over which SIPs have been imposed in a
state. Thus, as we discuss further at the end of Section 3.2, local infections and SIPs are
roughly sufficient statistics for the impact of local disease outcomes and policy responses
on business outcomes at this early point in the pandemic (and perhaps partly because both
infection rates and NPIs are persistent processes).
    Figure 10 summarizes these findings. In Panels A, B, and D, the black, solid lines with
circles plot average revenues, expenses, and consumption as a percent of 2019 averages
relative to their pre-national emergency averages. In panel C this line plots profit margins
relative to their pre-pandemic average. From these lines we subtract the average effect of
local infections and SIP orders, that is the average of: Yi,t - ^ 1 Dc ( i ), t - ^ 2 1[SIPs(i),t ] - Xi,t .

The gap between the actual changes in business outcomes (black line) and average changes
net of the effect of local differences (red or blue lines) show the combined effect of infections
and SIP orders. The blue, dashed line with ×'s subtracts the effect estimated when time
effects are included in equation (7) and the red, dashed lines with triangles subtracts the
effects estimated without time effects in equation (7) (i.e., excluding Xi,t ). The gap between


                                                    21
the actual average changes in outcomes and the average changes after subtracting the
effect of local differences (i.e., the gap between the black and red lines) is large, indicating
that the effect of infections, SIP orders, and nationwide factors explain most of the entire
decline in business outcomes and owner's consumption. When we remove the effect of the
national average of the infection rates and SIP orders and any correlated factors, the gap
between the actual changes in business outcomes and the average changes net of the effect
of local differences (i.e., the gap between the black and blue lines) is dramatically smaller,
indicating that local infections and SIP orders explain only a small part of the average
decline.


3.2    Effects of Infections and NPI tightness

    In this subsection, we construct a summary measure of NPIs and show that the conclu-
sions of the previous subsection ­ that both local infections and NPIs had modest effects
­ still hold for this alternative measure of state policies. Figure 7 shows that many states
adopted multiple NPI policies at the same time.13 Since packaged policies can reinforce
and complement one another, correlated policies and heterogeneity in policy duration
across states complicate the measurement of NPI effects.
    We address this challenge by conducting principal-component analysis (PCA) and
construct a simple "NPI strictness" measure that captures the intensity of state-specific
packaged NPI policies relative to other states. We perform principle components analysis
on the NPIs listed in Figures 7 during the period after the national emergency is declared.
Appendix Table A.4 reports the detailed PCA results. We focus on the first principal
component, which we call Strictness, which explains 76% of variance and weighs positively
on all restrictions. We estimate the impact of infections and NPI tightness on businesses
outcomes and owner's consumption using the following specification


                     Yi,t =  + i +  1 Dc(i),t +  2 Strictnesss(i),t + Xi,t +       i ,t                (8)
  13 AppendixFigure A.6 presents this information in terms of when various policies are imposed and lifted.
Appendix Figure A.8 shows that SIP is highly correlated with various other NPI policies.



                                                   22
which is analogous to equation (7).
    We find that NPI strictness has effects on business and owner outcomes that are very
similar to the modest effects that we found for SIP orders. And the use of NPI strictness
in place of SIP does not alter any of our conclusions about the modest effect of infections.
Table 4 reports the effect of infection rates on outcomes (simply the estimated  1 ) and the
effect of NPI strictness per standard deviation increase in NPI strictness (the estimated  2
times the standard deviation of the first NPI factor). Reported coefficients are multiplied by
100 for readability and can be interpreted as changes in percentage point. A one standard
deviation increase in NPI strictness reduces business revenues, expenses, and owner's
consumption by 2 or 3 percentage points when we account for time effects. Appendix
Table A.6 reports the effect of NPI tightness without controlling for local infections. The
magnitude is similar to the specification controlling for infections.
    Finally, we return to the possibility that infection rates of SIP orders have persistent
effects and that our estimates are perhaps missing substantial delayed effect of local
conditions. This is surely an important possibility in the summer and fall of 2020, but our
analysis can only cover the early stages of the pandemic. In our sample, covering the effect
of infections and policies through the end of May, we find no role for persistent effects of
local conditions.14
    In sum, we find only modest effects of local infection rates and SIP policies on business
revenues and owner consumption, suggesting that business disruptions are primarily
attributable to national factors unrelated to local infections. Further, there is a low cor-
relation between county-level infections and state-level policies, so we can reasonably
estimate the contribution of each separately. Our finding of a weak effect of SIP policies is
consistent with Correia et al. (2020) who find that cities that had stricter NPI policies do not
perform worse than those with less stringent policies and that the main source of economic
disruption was the pandemic itself rather than NPIs during the 1918 Flu pandemic. But
we also find that local disease incidence also plays only a small role in differences in local
outcomes.
  14 Appendix Table A.5 reports the effect of current and past infections on SIP (panel A) and on NPI tightness

(panel B).


                                                      23
4     The Effect of Revenue Losses on Owner Consumption

    Our analyses so far show that local infection rates and state-level policies have negative
but modest direct effects on the performance of small businesses and on the consumption
of their owners in the early stages of the pandemic. Instead the largest part of the drop
in outcomes is explained by national factors. This section shows that the causal effect of
individual business's revenue declines on the owner's consumption is also quite modest
in the early stages of the pandemic. The vast majority of the documented decline in con-
sumption of business owners is likely due to the restrictions on the ability to consume from
infections and NPIs, a general increases in uncertainty and wealth losses not directly related
to differences in revenue losses across industries, and government transfers following the
CARES Act.


4.1   The Effect of Business Revenues on Owner Consumption

    Before turning to regression analysis, we simply compare the average changes in
business revenues and owners' consumption for the least and most affected NAICS 4-digit
industries as measured by their average change in revenues since the onset of the national
emergency. The least affected industries include beer, wine, and liquor stores; nursing care
facilities; funeral homes and cemeteries; toilet preparation and detergent manufacturing;
and chemical product manufacturing firms. The most affected industries include vending
machine operators; taxi or limo service; consumer goods rental; travel/tour agencies; and
drinking places.
    In this simple comparison, there is almost no difference in the consumption of the
owners of the least affected industries and the consumption of the owners of the most
affected industries despite large revenue differences. Average revenues for the least affected
industries actually increases by roughly 20% while average revenue for the most affected
industries declines by nearly 90% following the declaration of the national emergency. Yet
as Figure 11 shows, there is little difference in average consumption. The Figure plots
revenues in blue against owners' consumption in red for the five least affected industries


                                              24
(solid lines), and five most affected industries (dashed lines).15 If business's revenue losses
were significantly passed through to owner's consumption, we would expect to see a larger
drop in consumption for worse performing industries. However, the consumption changes
are similar across industries suggesting that business losses did not cause much decline in
owner consumption early in the pandemic.
    This comparison does not provide a clean measure of the extent to which owners are able
to insure their consumption against firm-specific revenue losses because both household
and businesses are affected by the pandemic.16 Specifically, this simple relationship does
not account for differences in the location of different industries which would imply
different consumption declines due to local infection rates and NPIs and possibly make
this figure misleading.17 To rule out this possibility and to quantify the consumption effect
of revenue losses, we turn to regression analysis that controls for local conditions.18
    To measure the owner's consumption decline that is caused by the decline in the perfor-
mance of that owner's business, we compare the consumption of owners of businesses that
are located in the same county but that operate in sectors that are differentially affected
by local infection rates and state-level SIP orders. Our identifying assumption is that
industry-specific exposure to infections and policies are not correlated with differences in
the consumption of business owners other than through differential business performance,
  15 Appendix    Figure A.9 also plots average revenues and consumption for the bottom and the middle three
industry performance deciles and show similar patterns. Appendix Figures A.10 and A.11 plot changes in
revenues and consumption for each of these individual sectors.
   16 For example, (Chernozhukov et al., 2020) analyze consumers' voluntary precautions in response to

new information and policies out of fear of being infected, and Cox et al. (2020) show that wage-earning
households, most of whom work for large businesses, also reduced spending on average in the initial months
of the pandemic.
   17 That is, suppose that some of the least affected industries are in the areas with the highest infections

(e.g. finance in Boston) where consumption dropped the most. And some of the most affected industries are
concentrated in areas that are otherwise the least affected (e.g. potato farmers and meat packers which were
located in low infection and NPI areas). Such differences in location would generate a negative relationship
between industry declines in revenues and the consumption of the owners, as the owners of the least affected
industries would have their consumption driven down the most by high local infection rates and tight NPIs
directly. This correlation works in the opposite direction of the direct effect of business revenues on owner
consumption.
   18 We confirm that running a simple naive OLS regression of consumption on revenues leads to attenuation

bias relative to our IV estimates. Appendix Table A.7 reports naive estimates. One potential explanation for
this attenuation bias is if business owners that operate under-performing businesses systematically hold
higher consumption buffer relative to high-performing businesses.



                                                     25
within a county in a particular week. The intuition for this approach is that some indus-
tries, like restaurants are hit harder by local conditions than others, like chemical product
manufacturing businesses. This industry variation generates revenue losses in response to
local conditions that are plausibly orthogonal to the effect of local conditions directly on the
business owner's consumption which is similar for the owners of both types of businesses.
This variation is also unrelated to any individual-specific or business-specific changes in
revenues driven by owners preferences or consumption needs.
   Specifically, we instrument business revenues, expenses, and profits with industry-
specific exposure to local infection rate and state-level NPIs. The exclusion restriction is
that the only channel through which infections and NPIs can differentially affect the con-
sumption of the owners across businesses is through differential exposure of the owner's
business industry to infections and NPIs. We estimate the following two stage least squares
regression:


              Yi,t = i +   FS
                           j 1[ j= j(i )] NPIs(i ),t +  j 1[ j= j(i )] Dc(i ),t + c(i ),t +
                                                        FS
                                                                                              i ,t    (9)
                            j                            j

              Ci,t = i +  IV Yi,t + c(i),t + i,t                                                     (10)


where the two key variables in equation (9) are interactions of NAICS 4 industry indica-
tors with state-level NPIs and with county-level infection rates respectively. These terms
measure the industry-specific effect of local infections and state level policies on business
outcomes. The term c(i),t represents week × county fixed effects which control for differ-
ences in the average effect of infections and NPI on revenues through all channels and for
the different locations of different industries. The second-stage, equation (10) includes the
same fixed effects and so identifies the effect of revenue declines on owner consumption
only from the differences across industries in the response of business revenues to the local
disease incidence and state-level policies, within a given county and in a given week. We
restrict the sample to NAICS 4 sub-sectors with at least 30 firms. Our first-stage endoge-
nous variables, Yi,t , include normalized business revenues, expenses, and profit margin,
and the second-stage outcome is normalized consumption of the owner household, Ci,t .


                                                    26
    The marginal propensity to cut consumption in response to business losses at this
stage of the pandemic is modest. Table 5 shows the results of estimating equation (9) and
(10) with Yi,t and Ci,t measured in levels (dollars) so as to directly measure the marginal
propensity to cut consumption in response to business losses. In the Table, the odd columns
only use variation by industry due to SIP or NPI strictness and the even columns use both
variation by industry due to infections and SIP/NPI strictness as the excluded instruments.
The first two columns in each panel A and B use SIP, and the last two columns in each
panel use NPI tightness as the NPI measure. Panel A includes county × time fixed effects
and panel B includes only state × time fixed effects. Outcomes are in dollars (level) and all
specifications include firm-household pair fixed effects. The main lesson of the table is that
for each dollar reduction in business revenues or expenses in a week, consumption declines
by between 1.2 and 2.2 cents. The third row shows that a dollar reduction in profits lead to
reduction in consumption of 3.4 to 4.1 cents.
    To put these estimates in perspective, the average drop in revenues after the national
emergency was declared (relative to its pre-pandemic average) is about -$925. Therefore,
the implied consumption drop due to revenue losses is -925× (roughly) 0.016  -$15
per week. This corresponds to roughly 8% of average weekly consumption drop relative
to its pre-pandemic average. This decline is modest relative to an average decline in
consumption of roughly $400. However, the average weekly variation in consumption is
around $9.4 in normal times, so that the decline in consumption of small business owners
that is directly due to their business losses during the pandemic is as large as the typical
weekly variation in consumption in normal times.19
    One concern with the results in Table 5 is that business differ dramatically in size and
large businesses might have many owners over which dollar losses are spread. To address
this concern, we estimate equations (9) and (10) with our scaled measures of business
  19 Note  that Figure 11 shows almost no difference in the decline of consumption between the most and least
affected industries, which highlights the importance of comparing outcomes within counties. The industries
in the least (most) affected industries are disproportionately located in counties where the consumption
drops are the largest (smallest). Thus, the decline in consumption between owners of businesses in the least
and most affected industries is similar because of the offsetting effects of a small pass-through of revenue
drops into consumption (larger for the most affected) and the differential impact of their locations (larger for
the least affected).


                                                      27
outcomes. This specification estimates the percent reduction in owner consumption for
each percent decline in own-business outcomes (or for decline in profits as a percent of
revenues).We report the complete set of results of this analysis in Appendix Table A.8. We
find a similar but slightly smaller sensitivity of consumption to own-business revenues as
for the levels specification reported in Table 5. A one percent reduction in revenues due to
differential industry exposure leads to reduction in consumption by 0.1 to 0.2 percent. This
implies that the average revenue decline of roughly 40% causes a decline in consumption
of 4 to 8 percent, or $37 to $74 per week for the average small business owner.


4.2    The Consumption Sensitivity to Revenues Across Business Types

    In this section we show that some business owners are less able to insure against
revenue losses than others. Specifically, we estimate differences in the consumption impact
of revenues along four dimensions of business type: employer vs. non-employer businesses;
low vs. high ex ante liquidity; small vs. large businesses; and pass-though entities vs.
C-corporations. As described in Section 1, we measure liquidity by the ratio of 2019 average
account balances to typical spending, or `cash buffer days,' and firm size by 2019 average
weekly revenues. For this analysis, we use the within-industry distribution of business
liquidity and size to define the subgroup because there are large difference across industries
in the size of businesses and in how much liquidity they hold.             20

    Panels A and B of Table 6 show that the consumption of owners of non-employer
businesses is more sensitive to revenue losses than is the consumption of owners of
businesses with employees. In general, Table 6 reports  IV from equations (9) and (10) by
subgroup in the same pattern as Table 5. Panels A and B show that for a dollar reduction in
revenue, owners of businesses with employees reduce their consumption by 1.1 cents, but
this causal effect is twice as large (2.4 cents) for owners of non-employer businesses.
    Panels C and D of Table 6 show that owners of businesses with low liquidity are more
sensitive to revenue losses than those with high liquidity. Owner of businesses with low
  20 Appendix  Figure A.12 shows the distribution of the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles of within-industry
distributions of liquidity and size. The differences across industries are large.



                                                    28
reduce their consumption by 2.4 cents per dollar decline in revenue, while owners of
businesses with high liquidity reduce their consumption by roughly half as much, 1.4 cents
per dollar decline in revenue.
    Panels E and F of Table 6 show that owners of smaller businesses have a greater
sensitivity to revenue losses than owners of larger small businesses. This categorization
is distinct from but similar to the categorization of employer vs. non-employer. Smaller
owners of small small businesses reduce consumption by 6 cents per dollar revenue decline
while owners of larger small businesses cut back consumption by only 1.3 cents per dollar
decline.
    As with our main results, we confirm that the substantive conclusions are very similar
when equations (9) and (10) are estimated using scaled business outcomes and scaled
consumption. Consistent with dollar effects, we find that owners of businesses with low
liquidity exhibit higher consumption responses to revenue losses than owners of businesses
with high liquidity (Appendix Table A.9).
    Finally, Table 7 shows the sensitivity of the consumption of owners by incorporation
status. We find that living standards of owners of pass-through entities are more sensitive to
business losses relative to C-corporations. A dollar reduction in revenue leads consumption
to drop by 1.8 cents for pass-through entities (i.e., sole proprietors and S-corporations) but
only by 1 cent for C-corporations.
    In sum, while on average the owners of many small businesses experienced only limited
pass-through of business revenue losses into consumption in the early part of the pandemic,
the owners of some businesses have seen more substantial declines in their consumption
spending. In particular, for a businesses with low liquidity, roughly 15% of the average
consumption drop of the owner can be attributable to revenue losses, while only 4.5% are
be attributable for high liquidity business owner households.21
  21 We calculate these shares by multiplying the respective MPCs of high vs. low liquidity businesses by
the largest average weekly drop in revenues. Specifically, the largest average weekly drop in revenues
(consumption) relative to the pre-pandemic level was -$1,371 (-$226) for owners with low liquidity whereas
it was -$868 (-$265) for those with high liquidity businesses. Multiplying their respective MPCs, we get
consumption declines of -$33 for low and -$12 for high liquidity households. Expressed as a share of their
average weekly declines in consumption, they correspond to roughly 15% (33/226) for low liquidity and
4.5% (12/265) for high liquidity businesses.


                                                   29
5    Explanations for the Modest Impact of Revenue Losses
     on Business Owners' Consumption

    There are three potential explanations behind the low average pass-through of revenue
losses to the living standards of business owner households in the early phases of the
pandemic. First, it is possible that businesses have sufficient ex ante liquidity, debt capacity,
or other sources of household income, so that the owners can keep consumption stable
through temporary revenue losses. Second, hard hit business owners may be able to
stabilize their consumption using the substantial fiscal support provided by the federal
government. Third, the pandemic imposes significant restrictions on everyone's ability
ability to spend, which may make the common, lower level of consumption relatively
insensitive to individual-business revenue declines. Our evidence is consistent with all of
these explanations.
    First, liquidity matters. Consumption responses to revenue declines are twice as large
for small business owners who enter the crisis with low liquidity relative to those with
high liquidity. This heterogeneity implies that ex ante liquidity plays an important role for
owner's ability to smooth consumption and that business owners on average had sufficient
financial means to weather revenue declines.
    Second, our data have indirect evidence that owners are insuring consumption against
revenue losses using funds provided by Federal relief payments to households and short-
term grants and loans to small businesses. The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic
Security Act (CARES Act) included the Economic Impact Payments and Federal Pandemic
Unemployment Compensation (FPUC) for households.22 , CARES also included the Pay-
check Protection Program (PPP) and the expansion of Small Business Administration's
Economic Injury Disaster Loans program for small businesses.
    Figure 12 shows that both businesses and households begin to build up significant
financial buffer in their business and personal checking accounts during the time period
   22 In addition to increasing UI generosity, the FPUC expanded unemployment insurance (UI) eligibility

criteria to include business owners and self-employed individuals who would traditionally not be eligible to
receive UI benefits.



                                                    30
when a large share of EIP payments were sent out (on April 15), and when the first-round
(April 3) and second-round (April 27) of PPP started. By the end of May, median businesses
and owners, respectively, have 10% and 18% higher balances in their business and personal
checking accounts relative to January, 2020. Figure 13 also provides suggestive evidence
that the stimulus measures might be minimizing the direct impact of revenue losses on
owner's consumption. This figure plots median changes in business owner's business and
personal account balances relative to January for the businesses and owners of businesses
that are in the most and least affected industries (the same set of industries shown in Figure
11). The most affected businesses experience a 15% decline balances in March followed
by another 5% decline in April, but then balances recover half their losses in May. The
balances of the personal accounts of the owners of the most affected industries decline by
10% in March but then fully recover (on average) in April, consistent with the arrival of the
Economic Impact Payments in household accounts.
    Finally, our results are also consistent with the interpretation that the pandemic re-
stricted owner's consumption even for businesses that were less hard hit. Although
we have no direct evidence on this channel, we see that especially spending on luxury
consumption categories and those that require people to leave the house, such as travel,
eating out, or personal services, dropped dramatically after the declaration of the national
emergency.



6    Conclusion

    This paper documents that small businesses and their owners experienced unprece-
dented disruptions of up to 40% drop in weekly revenues, expenses, and consumption
in the early phases of the pandemic. We find that the majority of this decline was due to
nationwide factors and that local infections and state-level policies like shelter in place
orders and NPI strictness had only moderate additional direct effects on business outcomes
and owners' consumption. Quantitatively, an increase in the new infection rate of two
standard deviations leads to a 1.5 percentage point declines in business revenues, and the


                                             31
imposition of a shelter in place order leads to a 2.6 percentage point decline in business
revenues.
   Using differential industry exposure to NPIs and infection rates, we find only a modest
impact of small business losses on their owners consumption in the early stages of the
pandemic. Because of the large declines in revenue, the observed consumption decline
driven by revenue losses is still non-trivial, roughly as large as the typical weekly variation
in consumption in normal times and about 8% of the average drop in weekly consumption.
We also find that living standards of business owners that operate with low levels of
liquidity are particularly sensitive to changes in business performance.
   There are several reasons to expect the pass-through of business losses into owner's con-
sumption to rise over time as the pandemic unfolds. As discussed in Section 5, businesses
and owners started the pandemic with some liquidity, and on average their funds were
replenished by fiscal stimulus measures. However, since these programs are temporary
in nature, the pass-through of business losses into owner's living standards may grow
substantially as businesses and owners use up liquidity.




                                              32
References
A LEKSEEV, G., S. A MER , M. G OPAL , T. K UCHLER , J. S CHNEIDER , J. S TROEBEL , AND N. C.
  W ERNERFELT (2020): "The Effects of COVID-19 on U.S. Small Businesses: Evidence from
  Owners, Managers, And Employees," Working Paper.

B AKER , S., R. FARROKHNIA , S. M EYER , M. PAGEL , AND C. YANNELIS (forthcoming):
  "How Does Household Spending Respond to an Epidemic? Consumption During the
  2020 COVID-19 Pandemic," Review of Asset Pricing Studies.

B AKER , S. R., R. FARROKHNIA , S. M EYER , M. PAGEL , AND C. YANNELIS (2020): "Income,
  Liquidity, and the Consumption Response to the 2020 Economic Stimulus Payments,"
  Working paper.

B ARTIK , A. W., M. B ERTRAND , Z. C ULLEN , E. G LAESER , M. L UCA , AND C. T. S TANTON
  (2020): "How Are Small Businesses Adjusting to COVID-19? Early Evidence from a
  Survey," Proceedings of the Natural Academy of Sciences, 117, 17656­17666.

B ARTLETT III, R. P. AND A. M ORSE (2020): "Small Business Survival Capabilities And
  Policy Effectiveness: Evidence from Oakland," National Bureau of Economic Research
  Working Paper.

B AUGH , B., I. B EN -D AVID , H. PARK , AND J. A. PARKER (2020): "Asymmetric Consumption
  Smoothing," American Economic Review, Forthcoming.

BDS (2016): "Business Dynamics Statistics," U.S. Census Bureau.

B RODA , C. AND J. A. PARKER (2014): "The Economic Stimulus Payments of 2008 and the
  Aggregate Demand for Consumption," Journal of Monetary Economics, 68, S20­S36.

C HERNOZHUKOV, V., H. K ASAHARA , AND P. S CHRIMPF (2020): "Causal Impact of Masks,
  Policies, Behavior On Early COVID-19 Pandemic in the U.S." Working Paper.

C HETTY, R., J. F RIEDMAN , N. H ENDREN , M. S TEPNER , AND T. O. I. T EAM (2020): "The
  Economic Impacts of COVID-19: Evidence from a New Public Database Built from
  Private Sector Data," Working Paper.

C ORREIA , S., S. L UCK , AND E. V ERNER (2020): "Pandemics Depress the Economy, Public
  Health Interventions Do Not: Evidence from the 1918 Flu," Working Paper.

C OX , N., P. G ANONG , P. N OEL , J. VAVRA , A. W ONG , D. FARRELL , AND F. G REIG (2020):
  "Initial Impacts of the Pandemic on Consumer Behavior: Evidence from Linked Income,
  Spending, and Savings Data," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.

D AVIS , S. J., J. H ALTIWANGER , AND S. S CHUH (1996): "Small business and job creation:
  Dissecting the myth and reassessing the facts," Small Business Economics.



                                            33
FAIRLIE , R. W. (2020): "The Impact of COVID-19 on Small Business Owners: Evidence of
  Early-Stage Losses from the April 2020 Current Population Survey," National Bureau of
  Economic Research Working Paper.

FARRELL , D., C. W HEAT, AND C. M AC (2020a): "Small Business Financial Outcomes
  during the COVID-19 Pandemic," JP Morgan Chase Institute.

------ (2020b): "Small Business Financial Outcomes during the Onset of COVID-19," JP
  Morgan Chase Institute.

FRBNY (2019): "Report on Nonemployer Firms: Small Business Credit Survey," Tech. rep.,
  Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

G ANONG , P. AND P. N OEL (2019): "Consumer Spending During Unemployment: Positive
  and Normative Implications," American Economic Review, 109, 2383­2424.

G ROSS , D. B. AND N. S. S OULELES (2002): "Do Liquidity Constraints and Interest Rates
  Matter for Consumer Behavior? Evidence from Credit Card Data," Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 117, 149­185.

H UMPHRIES , J. E., C. N EILSON , AND G. U LYSSEA (2020): "The Evolving Impacts of
  COVID-19 on Small Businesses Since the CARES Act," Cowles Foundation Discussion
  Paper.

K EYSTONE (2020): "Coronavirus City and County Non-pharmaceutical Intervention Roll-
  out Date Dataset," Keystone Strategy.

NES (2018): "Nonemployer Statistics," U.S. Census Bureau.

N EW Y ORK T IMES (2020): "Coronavirus (Covid-19) Data in the United States," The New
  York Times.

PARKER , J., N. S OULELES , D. S. J OHNSON , AND R. M C C LELLAND (2013): "Consumer
  Spending and the Economic Stimulus Payments of 2008," American Economic Review, 103,
  2530­2553.

SBA (2019): "Small Businesses Generate 44 Percent Of U.S. Economic Activity," Tech. rep.,
  Small Business Administration, Office of Advocacy.

SUSB (2017): "Statistics of U.S. Businesses," U.S. Census Bureau.

U.S. C ENSUS (2020): "Small Business Pulse Survey: Tracking Changes During The Coron-
 avirus Pandemic," U.S. Census Bureau.




                                           34
                    Table 1: Descriptive statistics of weekly outcomes in 2019 ($)
Notes: This table reports weekly business and household outcomes in 2019 in dollars. Outcomes are
winsorized at the 2nd and 98th percentile. Columns 1 and 2 report the sample mean and standard
deviation. Columns 3 to 5 report the pseudo-distribution presented as means of 10 observations in the
pth percentiles. Columns 6 and 7 report the number of firms and households in the sample. Panel A
reports statistics using the all businesses sample. Panels B and C report those using only nonemployer
and employer sample. A firm is considered to be an employer firm if a business had payroll expenses for
at least 6 months in 2019. Panels D and E sample small and large firms. Firm size is determined by 2019
average weekly revenues­ firms with less than the first tercile of average revenue ($787) are "small" and
those with greater than the third tercile ($3,572) are "large". Panel F uses the business owners sample,
which serves as the main analysis. Business and owner characteristics are reported below Panel F, and
uses the all businesses sample.         Table 1. Descriptive Statistics
                                               Weekly Outcomes in 2019 ($)

                         Mean            SD             p20           p50          p80       N firms     N HHs
                              Winsorized
                          (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)       (5)           (6)        (7)
                                                                  A. All Sample
 Revenue                 5,722         14,088             0             345      5,831       1,799,935     ---
 Expense                 5,781         12,580            38            1,068     6,577       1,799,935     ---
 Profit                   -58          8,801           -2,204           -70      1,371       1,799,935     ---
                                                                 B. Nonemployer
 Revenue                 3,867         10,801             0             125      3,785       1,531,922     ---
 Expense                 3,925         9,504             12             757      4,330       1,531,922     ---
 Profit                   -74          7,228           -1,696           -57      1,000       1,531,922     ---
                                                                   C. Employer
 Revenue                16,324         23,108             0            5,893     27,743      268,013       ---
 Expense                16,392         20,352           1,518          7,588     27,813      268,013       ---
 Profit                   33           14,885          -8,274          -452      6,800       268,013       ---
                                                                     D. Small
 Revenue                  289           968               0              0        300        599,979       ---
 Expense                 1,027         3,505              0             200      1,103       599,979       ---
 Profit                  -674          2,711            -864            -75        0         599,979       ---
                                                                     E. Large
 Revenue                15,033         21,188             0            6,458     23,524      599,978       ---
 Expense                14,093         18,411           1,279          6,701     21,959      599,978       ---
 Profit                  833           14,274          -6,878           -57      7,637       599,978       ---
                                                              F. Owner Subsample
 Revenue                 4,370         10,220             0             252      4,918       363,682     333,434
 Expense                 4,612         9,569             30             910      5,605       363,682     333,434
 Profit                  -203          6,495           -1,895           -60      1,131       363,682     333,434
 Consumption              993          1,508             79             458      1,414       363,682     333,434
                                                     G. Business and Owner Characteristics
 Business Age            6.9            6.9              1.8            5.1       10.1       1,799,935     --
 Owner Age               47.1           12.9            35.0           46.0       59.0           --      333,434

 Industry                             N Firms         Sh (%)       Business Location         N Firms     Sh (%)
 Professional Services                282,690          15.7        California                350,872      19.5
 Real Estate and Leasing              212,489          11.8        New York                  324,829      18.0
 Other Services                       211,961          11.8        Texas                     228,899      12.7
 Construction                         164,675          9.1         Florida                   160,455      8.9
 Health Care and Social Asst.         136,392          7.6         Illinois                  153,704      8.5

 Business Ownership                   N Firms         Sh (%)       Owner Gender              N HHs       Sh (%)
 S-Corp                               373,985          20.8        M                         158,112      47.4
 Sole Prop                            373,104          20.7        F                         99,309       29.8
 LLC - Member Managed                 371,762          20.7        Missing                   76,013       22.8
 C-Corp                               216,242          12.0
 LLC - Manager Managed                167,460          9.3




                                                              35
                                       Table 2: Sample Representativeness
Notes: This table compares the representativeness of the sample used in this study to various U.S. Census
external benchmarks. Column 1 reports nationwide shares. Columns 2 and 3 report the same statistics using
the 2019 all businesses and the business owners samples. See section 1.1 for details on the construction of the
all businesses and the business owners samples. Panel A compares the share of employer and nonemployer
firms. The population statistic is from 2017 Statistics of U.S. Business (SUSB, 2017). We classify establishments
with less than 5 employees in the SUSB data or those with no payroll expenses in our data to be nonemployer
firm. Panel B compares the share of firms by firm age. We exclude new firms (age =0) to make the population
statistic more aligned with our sample criteria because we require firms to have existed for at least a year to
be included in our sample. The population statistic for firm age is from 2016 Business Dynamics Statistics
(BDS, 2016). Panel C compares annual receipts in dollars for nonemployer firms using 2018 Nonemployer
Statistics (NES, 2018). To make our sample comparable to NES, we also restrict our sample to nonemployer
firms. Panel D compares industry shares using 2017 SUSB.
                                                 Table 1. Sample Benchmarking

                                                                   Population                    Sample
                                                                   Nationwide       All Business     Owner Sample
                                                                    Share (%)        Share (%)          Share (%)
                                                                        (1)              (2)               (3)
                                                     A. Employer vs. Nonemployer
                  Nonemployer                                         81.00             85.11             85.82
                  Employer                                            19.00             14.89             14.18
                                                   B. Firm age (excluding new firms)
                  1                                                    7.36             15.09             16.09
                  2                                                    6.34             11.75             12.61
                  3                                                    5.63             9.37              9.89
                  4                                                    5.16             7.95              8.24
                  5                                                    4.63             7.30              7.45
                  6 ~ 10                                              20.17             29.50             31.05
                  11 ~ 15                                             50.70             19.04             14.66
                                             C. Annual Receipts in dollars (nonemployer only)
                  < $5,000                                            24.48             11.32             14.28
                  $5,000-$9,999                                       15.54             5.12              5.80
                  $10,000 - $24,999                                   23.70             11.90             12.42
                  $25,000 - $49,999                                   14.30             14.04             13.97
                  $50,000 - $99,999                                   10.36             17.09             16.88
                  $100,000 - $249,999                                  7.81             20.13             19.19
                  $250,000 - $499,999                                  2.52             9.81              8.78
                  > $500,000                                           1.29             10.60             8.68
                                                               D. Industry
                  Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing/Hunting               0.37             0.62              0.52
                  Mining, Quarrying, and Oil/Gas Extraction            0.31             0.28              0.23
                  Utilities                                            0.10             0.11              0.10
                  Construction                                        11.57             10.76             10.79
                  Manufacturing                                        4.09             3.10              2.87
                  Wholesale Trade                                      4.92             3.69              3.37
                  Retail Trade                                        10.68             7.78              8.10
                  Transportation and Warehousing                       3.05             5.62              6.20
                  Information                                          1.31             2.26              2.65
                  Finance and Insurance                                3.93             2.06              1.90
                  Real Estate and Rental and Leasing                   5.10             13.26             10.99
                  Professional, Scientific, and Technical Svcs        13.38             15.81             16.39
                  Management of Companies and Enterprises              0.44             0.51              0.34
                  Administrative and Waste Manag.                      5.74             6.02              6.47
                  Educational Services                                 1.54             1.81              1.95
                  Health Care and Social Assistance                   10.80             7.58              7.47
                  Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation                  2.15             2.84              3.43
                  Accommodation and Food Services                      8.90             4.01              4.22
                  Other Services (excl. Public Administration)        11.49             11.78             11.96
                  Industries not classified                            0.13             0.13              0.11



                                                               36
                     Table 3: Effects of Shelter in Place (SIP) controlling for Infections (%)
Notes: This table reports estimates of local infections and shelter in place (SIP) on business outcomes and
consumption of the owners. For panels A through D, the first row of each panel reports the effect of each new
case per 1,000 residents and the second row reports the effect of SIP. The first row of panel E reports the effect of
cumulative infections per 1,000 and that of cumulative number of weeks that SIP has been in effect. Columns
1 through 4 report estimates using outcomes normalized 2019 weekly average, and the estimated coefficients
can be interpreted as change as percent of 2019 weekly average. Columns 5 through 8 report estimates using
seasonally-adjusted outcomes, and the coefficients can be interpreted as change as percent of 2019 9-week centered
average. All regressions include firm and household pair fixed effects. Columns 2 and 6 include time effects,
columns 3 and 7 include time × NAICS 2-digit industry effects, and columns 4 and 8 include time × size bin
effects to flexibly control for time-varying factors related to industry and firm size. Size bins are as defined
in Table 1. Coefficients are multiplied by 100 and represented in a percent unit. Standard errors are reported in
parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.
                                            Table 3. Effects of Shelter in Place (SIP) controlling for Infections

                                   Increase as percent of 2019 weekly average                        Increase as percent of 2019 9-week centered average
                             (1)               (2)             (3)            (4)                      (5)             (6)             (7)            (8)
                                                                                        A. Revenues
 New cases                  -.803     ***     -.480     ***     -.438     ***     -.415     ***      -1.23    ***    -.583    ***    -.545   ***    -.509    ***
                             (.03)            (.031)            (.031)            (.031)             (.053)          (.054)          (.054)         (.054)
 Shelter in place           -15.7     ***     -2.44     ***     -2.33     ***     -2.42     ***     -30.70    ***    -2.58    ***    -2.64   ***    -2.56    ***
                            (.113)            (.213)            (.213)            (.213)             (.199)          (.374)          (.375)         (.374)
                                                                                        B. Expenses
 New cases                  -1.10     ***     -.839     ***     -.806     ***     -.808     ***     -1.405    ***    -.819    ***    -.790   ***    -.791    ***
                            (.024)            (.024)            (.024)            (.024)              (.04)           (.04)          (.041)         (.041)
 Shelter in place          -13.09     ***     -3.16     ***     -2.94     ***     -3.15     ***     -25.20    ***    -3.73    ***    -3.70   ***    -3.70    ***
                             (.09)            (.169)            (.169)            (.169)              (.15)          (.282)          (.283)         (.282)
                                                                                          C. Profit
 New cases                   .095     **       .224     ***      .247     ***      .265     ***       .100    *       .208    ***     .248   ***     .277    ***
                            (.038)            (.039)            (.039)            (.039)             (.053)          (.054)          (.055)         (.054)
 Shelter in place           -5.95     ***      .937     ***      .810     ***      .953     ***      -5.24    ***     1.19    ***     1.09   ***     1.21    ***
                            (.144)            (.272)            (.273)            (.272)               (.2)          (.378)          (.378)         (.378)
                                                                                     D. Consumption
 New cases                  -.824     ***     -.547     ***     -.514     ***     -.541     ***     -1.375    ***    -.831    ***    -.788   ***    -.815    ***
                            (.024)            (.024)            (.024)            (.024)             (.039)           (.04)           (.04)          (.04)
 Shelter in place          -14.27     ***     -3.26     ***     -3.12     ***     -3.24     ***     -25.15    ***    -4.41    ***    -4.29   ***    -4.39    ***
                            (.089)            (.168)            (.168)            (.168)             (.149)          (.279)           (.28)         (.279)
                                                                                           E. Exit
 Cumulative cases           -.005     ***      -.005    ***     -.005     ***     -.005     ***      -.005    ***    -.005    ***    -.005   ***    -.005    ***
                           (.0002)            (.0002)          (.0002)           (.0002)            (.0002)         (.0002)         (.0002)        (.0002)
 Shelter in place            .183     ***      -.019    ***     -.022     ***     -.019     ***       .183    ***    -.019    ***    -.022   ***    -.019    ***
                            (.001)             (.003)           (.003)            (.003)             (.001)          (.003)          (.003)         (.003)

 Number of Obs           6,930,012          6,930,012         6,930,012         6,930,012      6,259,378        6,259,378       6,259,378       6,259,378

 Firm-Household FE            X               X                  X                 X                X               X               X                X
 Time FE                                      X                                                                     X
 Time x Industry FE                                              X                                                                  X
 Time x Size Bin FE                                                                X                                                                 X
 Notes: Coefficients are reported in percentage points.




                                                                            37
       Table 4: Effects of Non-Pharmaceutical Intervention (NPI) Strictness and Infections (%)
Notes: This table reports estimates of infections and NPI strictness on business outcomes and consumption of the
owners. The first rows of panels A through D report the effect of each new case per 1,000 residents, and the first
row of panel E reports the effect of cumulative infections per 1,000 residents. The second row of each panel reports
the effect of NPI strictness per standard deviation increase in NPI strictness. NPI strictness is the first principal
component in a principal component analysis of state-level NPIs and captures the intensity of state-specific
packaged NPI policies relative to other states. The first component explains 76% of variance and weighs positively
on all restrictions. Columns 1 through 4 report estimates using outcomes normalized 2019 weekly average, and
the estimated coefficients can be interpreted as change as percent of 2019 weekly average. Columns 5 through 8
report estimates using seasonally-adjusted outcomes, and the coefficients can be interpreted as change as percent
of 2019 9-week centered average. All regressions include firm and household pair fixed effects. Columns 2 and 6
include time effects, columns 3 and 7 include time × NAICS 2-digit industry effects, and columns 4 and 8 include
time × firm size bin effects to flexibly control for time-varying factors related to industry and firm size. Size bins
are as defined in Table 1. Coefficients are multiplied by 100 and represented in a percent unit. Standard errors
are reported in parentheses. *** p <   0.01,
                                     Table     ** p <
                                           4. Effects    0.05,
                                                      of NPI    * p < controlling
                                                             Strictness 0.10.     for Infections
                                             (Reporting Estimates per Standard Deviation Increase in Strictness)

                                     Increase as percent of 2019 weekly average                             Increase as percent of 2019 9-week centered average
                            (1)                  (2)              (3)                   (4)                (5)              (6)             (7)              (8)
                                                                                              A. Revenues
New cases                  -.599       ***     -.494     ***     -.451     ***         -.429      ***      -.715    ***     -.597     ***     -.559     ***     -.524     ***
                            (.03)              (.031)            (.031)                (.031)              (.053)           (.054)            (.054)            (.054)
NPI Strictness              -8.5       ***     -2.15     ***     -.548     ***         -.523      ***     -17.26    ***     -2.86     ***     -.748     ***     -.694     ***
                           (.054)              (.207)            (.056)                 (.05)              (.095)           (.364)            (.099)            (.087)
                                                                                              B. Expenses
New cases                  -1.01       ***     -.858     ***     -.824     ***         -.827      ***     -1.162    ***     -.841     ***     -.813     ***     -.813     ***
                           (.024)              (.024)            (.024)                (.024)               (.04)            (.04)            (.041)            (.041)
NPI Strictness             -6.73       ***     -2.67     ***     -.681     ***         -.645      ***     -13.25    ***     -3.51     ***      -.93     ***      -.86     ***
                           (.043)              (.165)            (.045)                (.039)              (.071)           (.274)            (.074)            (.066)
                                                                                                C. Profit
New cases                   .262       ***      .231     ***      .254     ***          .272      ***       .272    ***      .217     ***      .257     ***      .286     ***
                           (.038)              (.039)            (.039)                (.039)              (.053)           (.054)            (.055)            (.054)
NPI Strictness             -3.69       ***      .854     ***      .234     ***          .204      ***      -3.38    ***       1.0     ***       .28     ***       .24     ***
                           (.069)              (.265)            (.072)                (.063)              (.095)           (.367)            (.099)            (.088)
                                                                                           D. Consumption
New cases                  -.702       ***     -.566     ***     -.533     ***         -.559      ***     -1.126    ***     -.855     ***     -.812     ***     -.840     ***
                           (.024)              (.024)            (.024)                (.024)              (.039)            (.04)             (.04)             (.04)
NPI Strictness             -7.41       ***     -2.43     ***      -.63     ***          -.59      ***     -13.24    ***     -3.47     ***      -.92     ***      -.83     ***
                           (.042)              (.163)            (.044)                (.039)               (.07)           (.272)            (.074)            (.065)
                                                                                                 E. Exit
Cumulative cases             .001      ***     -.005     ***     -.005     ***         -.005      ***       .001    ***     -.005     ***     -.005     ***     -.005     ***
                           (.0002)            (.0002)           (.0002)               (.0002)             (.0002)          (.0002)           (.0002)           (.0002)
NPI Strictness               .537      ***      .018     **       .005     **           .003                .537    ***      .018     **       .005     **       .003
                            (.002)             (.009)            (.002)                (.002)              (.002)           (.009)            (.002)            (.002)

Number of Obs            6,928,131           6,928,131         6,928,131          6,928,131            6,257,500          6,257,500         6,257,500         6,257,500

Firm-Household FE            X                 X                  X                     X                  X                 X                 X                 X
Time FE                                        X                                                                             X
Time x Industry FE                                                X                                                                            X
Time x Size Bin FE                                                                      X                                                                        X
Notes: Coefficients are reported in percentage points.




                                                                                 38
                Table 5: Marginal Propensity to Consume out of Business Outcomes
Notes: This table reports 2SLS-IV estimates of the owner households' consumption response per dollar change in
business revenue, expense, and profit margin using equation (10). Columns 1 and 2 use variation by industry due
to SIP or SIP and infections and Columns 3 and 4 use that due to NPI strictness or NPI strictness and infections
as the excluded instruments. NPI strictness is as defined in Table 4. Outcomes are in dollars (level), and all
regressions include firm and household pair fixed effects and time × county fixed effects. Therefore, the estimated
coefficients can be interpreted as consumption declines (in dollar unit) per each dollar reduction in business
outcomes. Firms that operate in sub-industries with less than 30 firms are dropped from the estimation. ***
p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p <Table
                             0.10. 5. Marginal Propensity to Consume out of Business
                                                  (Dollar Effects)

                                Variation by industry due to            Variation by Industry due to
                                                      SIP                               NPI strictness
             Endogenous           SIP           and infections         NPI strictness   and infections
              Variable             (1)                (2)                   (3)               (4)

         Revenue                   .015     ***         .011     ***        .016     ***      .012       ***
                                  (.001)               (.001)              (.001)            (.001)

         Expense                   .020     ***         .013     ***        .022     ***      .014       ***
                                  (.001)               (.001)              (.001)            (.001)

         Profit Margin             .036     ***         .034     ***        .041     ***      .039       ***
                                  (.004)               (.003)              (.004)            (.003)

         Number of Obs          7,531,326           7,188,993           7,531,326          7,188,993

         Firm-Household FE          X                   X                   X                 X
         Time x County FE           X                   X                   X                 X




                                                        39
                    Table 6: Marginal Propensity to Consume out of Business by Subgroup
Notes: This table reports 2SLS-IV estimates of the owner households' consumption response per dollar
change in business revenue, expense, and profit margin using equation (10) by business type. Odd numbered
columns in each panel use variation by industry due to SIP or NPI strictness and even numbered columns in
each panel use that due to SIP and infections or NPI strictness and infections as the excluded instruments.
NPI strictness is as defined in Table 4. Outcomes are in dollars (level), and all regressions include firm
and household pair fixed effects and time × county fixed effects. Therefore, the estimated coefficients can
be interpreted as consumption declines (in dollar unit) per each dollar reduction in business outcomes.
Panels A and B reports estimates using subsamples of nonemployer and employer firms. Panels C and
D reports estimates using subsamples of low and high liquidity firms. Panels E and F report estimates
using subsamples of small and large firms. Liquidity is computed as the ratio of 2019 average monthly cash
balances to expenses multiplied by 30 and can be interpreted as a firm's average cash buffer days, or the
number of days of operating expenses that a business could pay out of its cash balances were its revenues
to stop. "Low (high) liquidity" sample includes firms with lower (higher) than the first (third) quartile of
cash buffer days within its sub-industry (NAICS 4-digit). "Small" ("Large") firms includes those with lower
(higher) than median annual sales in 2019 within its sub-industry. Firms that operate in sub-industries with
less than 30 firms are dropped
                            Tablefrom    the estimation.
                                  10. Transmission of Business*** p<
                                                               Shocks to 0.01, **
                                                                         Owner's             * p < 0.10.
                                                                                  p < 0.05, (Subgroup)
                                                                                 Consumption
                                                                        (Dollar Effects)

                     Variation by Industry due to       Variation by Industry due to             Variation by Industry due to        Variation by Industry due to
                                           SIP                            NPI strictness                               SIP                             NPI strictness
    Endogenous           SIP          & Infections     NPI strictness     & Infections               SIP          & Infections      NPI strictness     & Infections
     Variable            (1)               (2)               (3)                (4)                  (5)               (6)                (7)                (8)
                                             A. Nonemployer                                                                 B. Employer
Revenue                 .019      ***     .012     ***      .021      ***      .014      ***        .010      ***     .009      ***      .011      ***      .010      ***
                       (.001)            (.001)            (.001)             (.001)               (.001)            (.001)             (.001)             (.001)

Expense                  .022     ***      .013     ***       .024     ***      .015       ***       .016     ***       .011     ***      .017     ***      .012      ***
                        (.002)            (.002)             (.002)            (.002)               (.002)             (.001)            (.001)            (.001)

Profit                   .052     ***      .033     ***       .064     ***      .042       ***       .013     ***       .026     ***      .017     ***      .028      ***
                        (.006)            (.005)             (.006)            (.005)               (.005)             (.004)            (.004)            (.004)

Number of Obs        6,406,312          6,115,116        6,406,312           6,115,116           1,103,674          1,053,507         1,103,674          1,053,507
                                              C. Low Liquidity                                                            D. High Liquidity
Revenue                  .024     ***       .017    ***      .024      ***      .017       ***       .013     ***       .008     ***      .014     ***      .010      ***
                        (.002)             (.001)           (.002)             (.001)               (.002)             (.002)            (.002)            (.002)

Expense                  .025     ***      .016     ***       .025     ***      .017       ***       .026     ***       .012     ***      .027     ***      .014      ***
                        (.002)            (.002)             (.002)            (.002)               (.003)             (.003)            (.003)            (.003)

Profit                   .074     ***      .045     ***       .070     ***      .043       ***       .001               .010     **       .007              .016      ***
                        (.009)            (.006)             (.008)            (.006)               (.006)             (.005)            (.006)            (.005)

Number of Obs        1,883,508          1,797,894         1,883,508          1,797,894           1,865,204          1,780,422         1,865,204          1,780,422
                                                  E. Small                                                                       F. Big
Revenue                  .056     ***       .039     ***      .064     ***      .046       ***       .012     ***       .009     ***      .013     ***      .010      ***
                        (.005)             (.005)            (.005)            (.005)               (.001)             (.001)            (.001)            (.001)

Expense                  .054     ***      .036     ***       .064     ***      .044       ***       .016     ***       .010     ***      .017     ***      .012      ***
                        (.005)            (.005)             (.005)            (.005)               (.001)             (.001)            (.001)            (.001)

Profit                   .061     ***      .046     ***       .061     ***      .047       ***       .033     ***       .033     ***      .036     ***      .036      ***
                        (.015)            (.011)             (.014)            (.011)               (.003)             (.003)            (.003)            (.003)

Number of Obs        3,720,530          3,551,415         3,720,530          3,551,415           3,788,268          3,616,074          3,788,268         3,616,074

Firm-Household FE         X                 X                 X                   X                   X                 X                  X                 X
Time x County FE          X                 X                 X                   X                   X                 X                  X                 X




                                                                             40
        Table 7: Marginal Propensity to Consume out of Business by Incorporation Status
Notes: This table reports 2SLS-IV estimates of the owner households' consumption response per dollar
change in business revenue, expense, and profit margin using equation (10) by business incorporation status.
Panel A reports estimates using a sample of pass-through (sole proprietors and S-corporations) entities and
panel B reports estimates using a sample of C-corporations. Columns 1 and 3 use variation by industry
due to SIP and Columns 3 and 4 use that due to SIP and infections. Outcomes are in dollars (level), and all
regressions include firm and household pair fixed effects and time × county fixed effects. Therefore, the
estimated coefficients can be interpreted as consumption declines (in dollar unit) per each dollar reduction
in business outcomes. Firms that operate in sub-industries with less than 30 firms are dropped from the
        Table
estimation.    A7. Transmission
            Standard             of Business
                      errors are reported                       < 0.01, ** p <by
                                                          *** p Consumption
                                             Shocks to Owner's
                                          in parentheses.                         Incorporation
                                                                                     * p < 0.10. Status
                                                                               0.05,
                                              (Dollar Effects)

                                Variation by Industry due to           Variation by Industry due to
                                                      SIP                                     SIP
              Endogenous            SIP          & Infections              SIP          & Infections
               Variable             (1)               (2)                  (3)                (4)
                                        A. Pass-through                           B. C-corp
         Revenue                   .017      ***     .013     ***         .010      ***      .006    ***
                                  (.001)            (.001)               (.002)             (.002)

         Expense                    .023     ***      .014       ***      .017     ***      .010     ***
                                   (.002)            (.002)              (.003)            (.002)

         Profit                     .026     ***      .040       ***     -.012              .001
                                   (.006)            (.005)              (.008)            (.006)

         Number of Obs           3,388,066         3,234,063            892,606           852,033

         Firm-Household FE          X                 X                    X                 X
         Time x County FE           X                 X                    X                 X




                                                     41
                                     Figure 1: Average business and household outcomes in 2020
Notes: This figure shows average weekly dollar levels of business revenues, expenses, profits, and
household consumption from the week starting December 30th, 2019 to the week starting May 25th,
2020. Dotted vertical lines denote the week of national emergency, which was declared the week starting
March 9th, 2020. Blue horizontal lines denote the average of respective outcomes between January 13,
2020 to February 9, 2020 (i.e., two months before the week of national emergency).


                    A. Revenues                                                                                                      B. Expenses
             5500                                                                                                             5500
                                                                                                                                                                          q

             5000                                        q
                                                                                                                              5000
                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                      q                                       q
                                                                                                                                              q
                                         q
             4500                                                                                                             4500        q                   q
                         q q                 q               q                                                                                        q               q
 Level ($)




                                                                                                                  Level ($)
                                                     q                                                                                                                            q
                                     q
                                                 q                                                                                                                q
                     q                                                                                                                                                                                        q
             4000                                                                                                             4000                q
                                                                                                                                                                                          q                       q
                                 q                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                          q           q
                                                                                             q                                                                                                                            q
             3500                                                        q                       q q
                                                                                                                              3500                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                         q                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                     q           q                       q
             3000                                                            q       q                                        3000

             2500                                                                                                             2500
                    -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12                                                                                  -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12
                        Weeks Since National Emergency                                                                                   Weeks Since National Emergency

                    C. Profits                                                                                                       D. Consumption
              120                                                                                                             1200
                                                                                                                                                                          q
                0
                                                 q                                                                                                        q
                                             q       q                                                                                q
             -120                                                                                                             1000        q
                         q       q q
                                                                                                                                              q
 Level ($)




                                                                                                                  Level ($)




                                         q                                           q                                                                q                       q
             -240            q                                       q                                                                                                q
                                                             q                                                                                                q                                               q
                                                         q                   q
                                                                 q                                                                                q               q
                                                                                 q                                                                                                q       q
             -360                                                                                    q                         800                                                                        q
                                                                                         q q
                                                                         q                               q                                                                                                        q q
                                                                                                 q                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
             -480    q
                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                      q

                                                                                                                                                                                      q
             -600                                                                                                              600
                    -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12                                                                                  -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12
                       Weeks Since National Emergency                                                                                    Weeks Since National Emergency




                                                                                                             42
                   Figure 2: Average percent change in business and owner outcomes relative to 2019
Notes: This figure shows average weekly changes in business revenues, expenses, profits, and household
consumption from the week starting December 30th, 2019 to the week starting May 25th, 2020. Outcomes
are normalized by the centered 9-week average from a year ago, and the change is defined as a percent
change from its own average between January 13, 2020 and February 9, 2020 (i.e., two months before the
week of national emergency). Dotted vertical lines denote the week of national emergency, which was
declared the week starting March 9th, 2020.


                        A. Revenues                                                                                                          B. Expenses
                   30                                                                                                                   30

                   20                                        q                                                                          20                                        q

                                             q                                                                                                                    q
                   10                                                                                                                   10    q
 Percent change




                                                                                                                      Percent change
                             q                                                                                                                    q q
                                 q
                    0    q               q       q                                                                                       0                                            q
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                         q       q                                                                                                    q
                  -10                                                                                                                  -10                                    q
                                     q               q                                                                                                    q                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                  -20                                                                            q                                     -20                                                                                q q
                                                                     q                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                             q                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                             q                                                                                                                                    q
                  -30                                                                                q                                 -30
                                                                                                         q                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                  -40                                                                q                                                 -40                                                                    q
                                                                         q       q                                                                                                            q
                                                                                         q                   q
                  -50                                                                                                                  -50
                        -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12                                                                                      -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12
                            Weeks Since National Emergency                                                                                       Weeks Since National Emergency

                        C. Profit Margins                                                                                                    D. Consumption
                   10                                                                                                                   20                                        q
                                                 q       q                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                        10    q
                                                                                                                                                  q
                    5                    q                                                                                                            q
                                                     q                                                                                   0
 Percent change




                                                                                                                      Percent change




                                             q               q                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                              q       q
                    0        q                                               q                                                         -10                q           q                                               q
                                 q                               q       q                                                                                                q
                                     q

                  -5                                                 q
                                                                                             q                                         -20                                                q                                   q
                                                                                 q                                                                                                                                q       q
                                                                                         q                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                     q           q                                                                                                q
                         q                                                                           q
                                                                                                         q                             -30
                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                  -10                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                      q       q
                                                                                                                                       -40
                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                  -15                                                                                                                  -50
                        -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12                                                                                      -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12
                            Weeks Since National Emergency                                                                                       Weeks Since National Emergency




                                                                                                                 43
                               Figure 3: Average changes in business revenues in 2020 by subgroup
Notes: This figure shows average weekly changes in business revenues from the week starting December
30th, 2019 to the week starting May 25th, 2020. Outcomes are normalized by the centered 9-week average
from a year ago, and the change is defined as a percent change from its own average between January 13,
2020 and February 9, 2020 (i.e., two months before the week of national emergency). Dotted vertical lines
denote the week of national emergency, which was declared the week starting March 9th, 2020. Panel A
plots weekly changes in revenues for essential and non-essential businesses; Panel B for small and large
businesses; Panel C by employer and non-employer firms; and panel D by low vs. high liquidity firms.
Essential industry categorization based on the advisory list provided by the Department of Homeland
Security (HLS). "Small" ("Large") firms includes those with lower (higher) than median annual sales in
2019 within its NAICS 4-digit sub-industry. A firm is considered to be an employer firm if a business
had payroll expenses for at least 6 months in 2019. Low (high) liquidity sample includes firms with
lower (higher) than the first (third) quartile of cash buffer days within its sub-industry.

                        A. Essential vs. Non-essential                                                                                   B. Small vs. Big

                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                           q
                   20                                                                                                               20
                                           q               q                                                                                              q               q
                                           q                                                                                                q q           q
                           q
                           q q
 Percent change




                                                                                                                  Percent change                      q       q
                    0    q
                         q             q       q                                                                                     0    q q q               q
                                                                                                                                                      q               q       q
                                                       q       q
                                                       q       q                                                                                                      q       q
                                                   q                                                                                                                                                        q
                                   q                                                                                                              q               q
                                                                                                                                                                  q                       q             q
                                                   q                                         q                                                    q
                                   q                                       q
                  -20                                              q                                                               -20                                            q                             q
                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                  q                                 q
                                                                                                 q
                                                                   q                                 q                                                                                                      q
                                                                                             q                                                                                            q q q
                                                                               q q       q
                                                                       q q                                                                                                                          q q         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                  -40                                                                q
                                                                                                 q q
                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                   -40                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                         q                                                                                    q q
                                                                       q           q q                                                                                                              q                   q
                                                                               q
                  -60                                                                                                              -60
                        -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12                                                                                  -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12
                              Weeks Since National Emergency                                                                                   Weeks Since National Emergency
                                       q       Non-essential                   q    Essential                                                                     q       Big         q       Small


                        C. Employer vs. Non-employer                                                                                     D. Low vs. High Liquidity


                                                           q                                                                                                              q
                   20                                                                                                               20                                    q
                                                                                                                                                          q
                                           q
                                                                                                                                                          q
                             q
                             q
                               q
                                           q
                                                           q                                                                              q q
                                                                                                                                            q q               q
 Percent change




                                                                                                                  Percent change




                         q     q               q                                                                                                      q
                    0                  q
                                       q                                                                                             0                        q
                                                                                                                                                                      q       q
                                                       q       q                                                                          q           q
                         q                             q                                                                                                                      q
                                   q               q                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                   q               q                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                   q                                                                                                                      q                 q
                  -20                                                      q
                                                                                           q                                       -20                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                   q                                                                                                              q
                                                                                         q q                                                                                              q             q       q
                                                                                                 q                                                                                                              q q
                                                                                         q       q q                                                                                                              q
                                                                           q                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                 q                                                                                                    q       q
                  -40                                                  q       q q q
                                                                                                                                   -40                                                        q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                       q       q                         q                                                                            q           q
                                                                                   q                     q                                                                                                              q


                  -60                                                                                                              -60
                        -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12                                                                                  -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12
                              Weeks Since National Emergency                                                                                   Weeks Since National Emergency
                                       q       Non-employer                    q    Employer                                                          q   High liquidity                  q    Low liquidity




                                                                                                             44
                                               Figure 4: Business closures in 2020
Notes: This figure shows the number of business closures in the all businesses sample in 2020 by month.
This sample includes 1.8mil businesses that were active in 2019 and have an open account for at least
one month in 2020. Panel A shows the number of business closures by month, and panel B shows the
cumulative number of business closures. Exit is defined as the closure of a business checking account. If
a business has two business checking accounts, both accounts must be closed to be coded as exit.



                             A. Number of Business Closures in 2020
                                                                    53,280
                    50,000
                                                  46,292

                    40,000
 Number of firms




                                                                                               29,980
                    30,000

                                                                                     20,672
                    20,000

                    10,000

                                     148
                        0
                                    Jan            Feb               Mar              Apr      May
                                                                    Month

                              B. Cumulative Number of Business Closures in 2020
                                                                                               150,372
                    150,000

                                                                                     120,392
                    120,000
 Cumulative total




                                                                     99,720
                     90,000


                     60,000
                                                   46,440

                     30,000

                                      148
                          0
                                     Jan            Feb              Mar              Apr       May
                                                                    Month




                                                               45
                                                  Figure 5: Average business expenses in 2020 across spending categories
Notes: This figure plots detailed categories of average weekly dollar levels of business expenses in 2020.
See section 1.2 for details on business expense categorization. "Goods" expenses are plotted in black.
"Services" are plotted in blue. "Other major expenses" are plotted in red. Uncategorizable cash, check, or
wire transfer expenses are plotted in green. Dotted vertical lines denote the week of national emergency,
which was declared the week starting March 9th, 2020.

          Fuel                                                                                                                                Durable retail                                                                                                                                                               Misc. biz svcs                                                                                                                                               Utilities
                                                                              q                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5.0                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   42                                                    q


                                                                                                                                          9
                                                                                      q                                                                                                                                 q                                                                               q



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q



    30                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q




                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                          8                                                                                     q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4.0                                                                                   q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   38
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q



    25                                                                                                                                    7
                                                                                                                                  q   q


                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3.5                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q                                                               36                                                                                                                        q


                                                                                                                                          6                                                                                                                                                                          3.0
                                                                                                                      q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   34
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q       q               q                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                  q                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q                                                                                                                   q                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q                                                                                                                                           q                                                 q       q                       q                                       q


    20
                                                                      q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q                                               q             q                                   q                                   q
                                                                                                  q           q                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q               q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2.5
                                                                                                      q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                             q                                                                           q


                                                                                                                                          5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   32
                      q               q                                                                                                                                                                 q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q                                 q       q
              q               q               q       q       q                                           q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                        q                               q
                                                                                                                                                            q                   q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                    q                           q



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q                                         q
          q                                                                                                                                     q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q                                                                                                                                                                                         q




         -10 -5                                                                   0                           5               10              -10 -5                                                                0                                           5                                   10                     -10 -5 0                                                                                                        5                           10               -10 -5                                               0                                   5                               10


          Groceries                                                                                                                                 Wholesale                                                                                                                                                                  Prof. biz svcs                                                                                                                                                Debt pymt
                                                                                      q


                                                                                                                                          12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     200                                                                               q                                                                                                                                     q




    30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                              q



                                                                                                                                          11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     180                                                                                       q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   160       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q       q                       q               q



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     160                                                                                                                                           q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q


                                                                                                                                          10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q


    25                                                                        q
                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   140                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     140
                                                                                                                                  q                                                                                                     q                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q                                                                             q
                                                                                                                      q


                                                                                                                                           9
                                                                                                      q                       q       q                                                                                                                                                                 q                                                                                                                                          q                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                  q               q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q                                                                                             q
                                                                                                          q   q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                                                                                                             q                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q


    20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             120
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     120
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q


                                                                                                                                           8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                q                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q




    15    q
              q       q       q
                                      q
                                              q
                                                      q
                                                              q
                                                                      q


                                                                                                                                           7        q
                                                                                                                                                        q       q
                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                q       q                                       q       q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q                                                    100           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q       q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   100                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q




         -10 -5                                                                   0                           5               10               -10 -5                                                                       0                                       5                               10                     -10 -5 0                                                                                                            5 10                                      -10 -5 0                                                                                    5 10


          Equipment                                                                                                                                 Entertainment                                                                                                                                                          Travel                                                                                                                                                       Cash
                                                                                  q       q


                                                                                                                                          2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   65                                                    q



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     10
                                                                                                                              q   q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                          q           q




    2.0
                                                                                              q                       q

                                                                                                                                          1.8                                                                                       q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   55    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q




                                                                                                                                          1.6
                                                                                                                  q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q

                                                                                                  q           q
                                                                                                      q



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   50
                                                                                                          q




    1.5                                                                                                                                   1.4                                                                       q                   q                                                                             6    q   q       q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q       q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q




                                                                                                                                          1.2                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q   q                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   45                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q   q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4
                                                                          q                                                                             q                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q                       q


                                                                                                                                          1.0
                  q       q
                                  q       q                       q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q   q                                                                                     q
                                                  q       q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                    q       q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q                                                                                             q                               q



    1.0
                                                                                                                                                            q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q


                                                                                                                                          0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q                       q
                                                                                                                                                                    q                               q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
              q                                                                                                                                                             q                               q                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q                                                                                                                                     q




          -10 -5 0                                                                                            5               10                -10 -5 0                                                                                                            5                               10                    -10 -5                                                                   0                                       5                           10               -10 -5                                               0                                   5                               10


          Materials                                                                                                                                 Food                                                                                                                                                                       Payroll                                                                                                                                                           Check
    35
                                                                                                                                  q                                                                                     q                                                                                                          q                           q                               q                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                              q       q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     300
                                                                                                                          q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1600
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q




    30
                                                                              q       q
                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                      q

                                                                                                                                          20                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q




    25
                                                                                                  q   q
                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                              q




                                                                                                                                          15                                                                    q                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     250
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1400                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q                                              q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                q                                                                                                                                      q



    20                                                                                                                                              q           q       q       q                       q                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q                                               q
                                                                                                                                                        q                               q



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     200
                                                                      q                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q       q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q                                                                                                                                                         q
                                      q


                                                                                                                                          10
              q       q       q                               q
                                              q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q                                           q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q




    15    q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q       q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1000                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q




         -10 -5                                                                   0                           5               10               -10 -5                                                                       0                                       5                               10                     -10 -5 0                                                                                                            5 10                                          -10 -5 0                                                                                    5 10


          Retail                                                                                                                                    Insurance                                                                                                                                                              Tax                                                                                                                                                                   Uncat
    20
                                                                              q       q
                                                                                                                                          30                                                                            q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     50                                                                                        q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1300              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q



    18                                                                                                                    q

                                                                                                                                          25                                            q                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     40                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q       q



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1100
                                                                                                                              q   q                 q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q



    16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                              q                       q               q



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q                                                                               q
                                                                                                          q                                                                                                                                                                                 q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q


    14
                                                                                                      q           q                                                                                                                                                                 q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                                               q
                                                                                                                                                        q                                                                                                                                                                                              q                                                                                       q


                                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                              q



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    900
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                  q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                                q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                      q                                                                                                         q                                       q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q


    12
              q                                                       q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                q                                                                                                                          q                                                           q       q                       q                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                q               q       q                                                                                      q                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q




    10
          q           q               q
                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                        q                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q   q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    800                                                                              q               q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     10
                              q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                              q                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q                                                                                                                                                                                              q                                                                                                                     q




         -10 -5                                                                   0                           5               10               -10 -5                                                                       0                                       5                               10                    -10 -5                                                                   0                                       5                           10                    -10 -5 0                                                                                    5 10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                46
                                      Figure 6: Average household expenses in 2020 across spending categories
Notes: This figure plots detailed categories of average weekly dollar levels of business owner's house-
hold expenses in 2020. See section 1.2 for details on household expense categorization. "Goods" expenses
are plotted in black. "Services" are plotted in blue. "Other major expenses" are plotted in red. Uncatego-
rizable cash, check, or wire transfer expenses are plotted in green. Dotted vertical lines denote the week
of national emergency, which was declared the week starting March 9th, 2020.

          Fuel                                                                                                                                      Auto repair                                                                                                                                                            Travel                                                                                                                                Debt pymt
    20                                                                        q
                                                                                      q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q       q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           350                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q




    18                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                          3.0                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15                                                                                q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           300
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q


    16
                                                                                                                                  q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                      q                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                              q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     10
                      q       q       q                                                                                                                                             q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
              q                                                                                                               q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           250
                                                                                                                                                            q


                                                                                                                                          2.5
                                                      q       q
          q                                   q                                                                           q                                         q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                        q                   q                               q                                                                   q


    14
                                                                                                                                                                                                    q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q               q
                                                                                                                      q                                                                     q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q                                                                                                                                                                              q                      q                                                                   q
                                                                                                                  q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                                   q




    12
                                                                                                              q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q   q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           200
                                                                                                                                          2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q                                                                                                                                                              q                                                                                                          q                   q
                                                                                                  q   q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q                                                                                                                                                          q       q
                                                                                                          q                                                                                                                                     q                                                                                                                                                                              q                                                                                  q




         -10 -5                                                                   0                           5               10                -10 -5 0                                                                                                            5                               10                    -10 -5                                                                   0                           5               10                -10 -5 0                                                     5 10


          Groceries                                                                                                                           Entertainment                                                                                                                                                                Insurance                                                                                                                             Cash
    55
                                                                                      q

                                                                                              q

                                                                                                                                          9
                                                                                                                                                q

                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     45
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           100                                        q




    50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            90    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q




                                                                                                                                          8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q




    45                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                          q

                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q                                                                                            40                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q   q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q




                                                                                                                                          7
                                                                                                              q   q           q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            70
                                                                                                          q                           q                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                        q


    40
                                                                                                                                                                                                q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     35
                                                                                                                                                    q                           q                                                                                                                                                                                                      q                                       q
                                                                                                  q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                              q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                                                                                          q   q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q



    35    q
                                                                                                                                          6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            60                                                        q       q



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q                   q                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                      q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q



    30                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q                                                                                                                          q                   q
                                      q


                                                                                                                                          5
                                                      q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q       q                                                                                                  q           q       q
              q               q                                                                                                                                                                                                             q                       q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                      q                                       q                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                              q                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q                                                                                          q                                                                                                                                                  q




         -10 -5                                                                   0                           5               10              -10 -5                                                                0                                           5                                   10                    -10 -5                                                                   0                           5               10                -10 -5 0                                                     5 10


          Pharmacy                                                                                                                                  Food away                                                                                                                                                              Medical                                                                                                                               Check
                                                                                          q


                                                                                                                                          40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     16                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           200        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q




    4.5                                                                                                                                             q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     14                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           180                                        q




                                                                                                                                          35
                                                                                              q                                                                                                                                 q


                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           160            q



    4.0
                                                                                                                                                        q                       q       q                                                                                                                                              q



                                                                                                                                          30                                                                                                                                                                         12                                                                                                                            q              q



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           140
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q                                                                                                                                                                          q                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                                                  q                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                  q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q                   q                       q
                                                          q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q                                                                      q                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q   q
                                                                                                                          q                                                                                                                                                                 q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           120
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q                                                                                                                                  q


                                                                                                                                          25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q


    3.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q                                                                  q       q                       q
                                                                          q                                                                                                                                                                                                         q                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
              q   q



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           100
                          q                       q                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                  q       q


                                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                                  q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q                                                                                                  q           q
                                                                                                                              q                                                                                                         q                               q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      8
                                                                  q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                      q


    3.0
                                                                                                          q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q                   q
                                                                                                  q   q                               q                                                                                                                         q                                                                                                                                                  q



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                              q   q                                                                                                                             q                                                                                                                                                                          q                                                                                      q




          -10 -5 0                                                                                            5               10               -10 -5                                                                       0                                       5                               10                    -10 -5                                                                   0                           5               10                -10 -5 0                                                     5 10


          Retail                                                                                                                                    Prof. svcs                                                                                                                                                             Utilities                                                                                                                             Uncat
                                                                              q       q                                                                                                                                     q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     44                                                                        q                                                                                      q




    60                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                          5.0                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     42                                                                                                                                    200    q




    55    q                                           q
                                                                      q
                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                          4.5           q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           150
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q                                                       q
              q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q                                                                                                                                              q       q           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q


                                                                                                                                          4.0
                      q       q                               q                                                                                                                     q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q



    50
                                      q       q                                               q                                                                                                                     q                                                                           q                                                                                                                      q       q                                                                  q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     38
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q                                                       q                                                                                                      q                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q                               q                                                               q                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                            q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q           q
                                                                                                                  q                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                              q                                                                                                                                                                                     q       q                                                                                                                      q




    45                                                                                                q
                                                                                                          q                               3.5               q

                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                    q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     36
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q       q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           100                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q


                                                                                                                                          3.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     34
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                  q                                                                                                                                             q                                                                                                                                                                                                      q                                                          q                                   q




         -10 -5                                                                   0                           5               10                -10 -5 0                                                                                                            5                               10                    -10 -5                                                                   0                           5               10                -10 -5 0                                                     5 10


          Durable retail                                                                                                                      Persnl. svcs                                                                                                                                                                 Gov't
    24                                                                                                                                    6
                                                                                                                                  q                                                                             q                                                                                                                          q                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                      q


                                                                                                                              q                                                                                         q



                                                                                                                                          5
                                                                                                                          q


    22                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                    q   q   q       q           q
                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2.5                                                                                       q




    20                                                                                                            q                       4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q




    18                                                                        q
                                                                                      q       q
                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                          3                                                                                     q                                                                       q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2.0       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q               q       q




                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q                              q


    16                                                                q
                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                          q                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.5
          q                                                                                       q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q       q


                                                                                                                                          1
              q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q


    14
                      q       q                       q                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q                                                                                      q                                                       q
                                      q                       q                                                                                                                                                                             q       q               q
                                              q                                                                                                                                                                                                             q               q                                                                                                                                      q




         -10 -5                                                                   0                           5               10              -10 -5                                                                0                                           5                                   10                     -10 -5 0                                                                                            5               10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                47
                                  Figure 7: Share of states with NPI policies in effect
Notes: This figure shows the share of states that have respective NPIs enacted over time. Dotted vertical
lines denote the week of national emergency, which was declared the week starting March 9th, 2020.
For example, panel A shows that more than 80% of the states in our sample imposed shelter in place
restrictions 5 weeks into the national emergency. "Nonessential", "Public venue", "Religious gathering",
and "School" refer to closures or restrictions on the said activities. The numbers in parenthesis for
"Gathering limit" restrictions refer to gathering limits (e.g., limit of 10 people). Source: State-level NPI
data are obtained from Keystone Strategy.

                A. Shelter in place                            E. School                                      I. Gathering limit (100)
          1.0                                            1.0                     qqqqqqqqqq             1.0
                                qqqq                                            q
          0.8                                            0.8                                            0.8
                                    q
                                                 Share
                                                         0.6
  Share




                                                                                                Share
          0.6                        q                                                                  0.6
                               q
          0.4                         q                  0.4                                            0.4                 q qqqqqq qq
                                       qq                                                                                    q      q
          0.2                                            0.2                                            0.2
                            q                                             q
          0.0    qqqqqqqqqqq                             0.0    qqqqqqqqqq                              0.0    qqqqqqqqqqq
                -10 -7 -4 -1 2 5 8 11                          -10 -7 -4 -1 2 5 8 11                          -10 -7 -4 -1 2 5 8 11
                Weeks Since National Emergency                 Weeks Since National Emergency                 Weeks Since National Emergency

                B. Nonessential                                F. Social distancing                           J. Gathering limit (500)
          1.0                   qqqq                     1.0                                            1.0
          0.8                       q                    0.8                                            0.8
                               q                                                 qqqqqqqqq
                                     q                                          q
  Share




          0.6
                                                 Share




                                                                                                Share
                                                         0.6                                            0.6
                                         q
          0.4                             q              0.4                                            0.4
                                           q                                    q
                              q                                                                                            qqqqqqqqqqqq
          0.2                                            0.2                                            0.2
                                                                          q
          0.0    qqqqqqqqqqq                             0.0    qqqqqqqqqq                              0.0    qqqqqqqqqq
                -10 -7 -4 -1 2 5 8 11                          -10 -7 -4 -1 2 5 8 11                          -10 -7 -4 -1 2 5 8 11
                Weeks Since National Emergency                 Weeks Since National Emergency                 Weeks Since National Emergency

                C. Public venue                                G. Gathering limit (10)
          1.0                   qqqq                     1.0
                               q                                                 qqqqqq
          0.8                       q                                           q      q
                                     q                   0.8
                                                                                        qq
                              q
  Share




          0.6                         q
                                                 Share




                                                         0.6
                                       q
          0.4                           q                0.4                    q
          0.2                                            0.2
          0.0    qqqqqqqqqqq                             0.0    qqqqqqqqqqq
                -10 -7 -4 -1 2 5 8 11                          -10 -7 -4 -1 2 5 8 11
                Weeks Since National Emergency                 Weeks Since National Emergency

                D. Religious gathering                         H. Gathering limit (25)
          1.0                                            1.0
          0.8                                            0.8
                                  qqq
  Share




                                                 Share




          0.6                   qq                       0.6
                               q     q
          0.4                         qq                 0.4
          0.2                 q         q                0.2                 qqqqqqqqq
                                                                           qq
          0.0    qqqqqqqqqqq                             0.0    qqqqqqqqqqq
                -10 -7 -4 -1 2 5 8 11                          -10 -7 -4 -1 2 5 8 11
                Weeks Since National Emergency                 Weeks Since National Emergency




                                                                           48
                                           Figure 8: County-level infections per capita
Notes: This figure shows county-level infections per 1,000 residents for three counties that illustrate areas
with low, medium, and high-risk for disease growth. Disease growth is determined using terciles of
cumulative infection rates per 1,000 in the county. Counties with lower than the first tercile of cumulative
infection rates (1.01) are classified as "low-risk" counties; counties with infection rates above the first but
below the third tercile (2.94) are "medium-risk"; and those with above the third tercile are "high-risk"
areas. The counties illustrated in this figure have the highest cumulative infections per 1,000 residents
within each risk bin. Panel A plots the number of new cases and panel B plots the cumulative number
of cases per 1,000 residents. For panel A, the example counties with low (Colorado, TX) and medium
(Dakota, MN) caseloads use the left axis. The example county with high (New York, NY) use the right
axis. County-level population corresponds to total population estimate as of July 1, 2019. Dotted vertical
lines denote the week of national emergency, which was declared the week starting March 9th, 2020.
Source: Population data from the U.S. Census Bureau and Coronavirus data from New York Times,
based on reports from state and local health agencies.


                         A. Number of New Cases per 1,000 People

                                                                                      New York, NY
                   2.0                                                                                                 20
                                                                                         (right)
 Cases per 1,000




                                                                                                                            Cases per 1,000
                   1.5                                                                                                 15

                                                                                                    Dakota, MN
                   1.0                                                                                 (left)          10

                                                                       Colorado, TX
                   0.5                                                                                                 5
                                                                           (left)

                   0.0                                                                                                 0
                          -10    -8    -6       -4      -2      0      2      4     6           8       10       12
                                                     Weeks Since National Emergency
                       B. Cumulative Number of Cases per 1,000 People
                   8
                                                                                                                      150
                                                                            New York, NY
                   6                                                           (right)
 Cases per 1,000




                                                                                                                            Cases per 1,000




                                                                                                                      100
                                                                                                Dakota, MN
                   4
                                                                                                   (left)

                                                                             Colorado, TX                             50
                   2
                                                                                 (left)


                   0                                                                                                  0
                         -10    -8    -6      -4      -2      0      2      4     6         8          10    12
                                                   Weeks Since National Emergency


                                                                 49
                            Figure 9: Average county-level infection rates per thousand and shelter in place by week
Notes: This figure shows the average county-level infection rates per 1,000 residents (red) and the share
of states that enacted shelter in place order (black). The red line shows that the average county-level
infection rates at the peak corresponds to 0.48 cases per thousand residents. The black line shows that at
most 87% of states in the sample have enacted shelter in place. County-level population corresponds to
total population estimate as of July 1, 2019. Source: Population data from U.S. Census and Coronavirus
data from the New York Times, based on reports from state and local health agencies. NPI data from
Keystone Strategy.
                                                Average county-level infection rates and shelter in place by week
                                          100
 Infection rates or share of states (%)




                                           80


                                           60


                                           40


                                           20


                                           0
                                                  -10    -8        -6         -4      -2      0      2      4     6                         8          10        12
                                                                                   Weeks Since National Emergency
                                                              Average county-level infection rates per 1,000   Share of states with shelter in place in effect




                                                                                                   50
Figure 10: Decomposition of average changes in business outcomes and household consumption
 Notes: This figure shows a decomposition of the observed decline in business outcomes and owner's
 consumption. Outcomes are normalized by the centered 9-week average from a year ago, and the change
 is defined as a percent change from its own average between January 13, 2020 and February 9, 2020
 (i.e., two months before the week of national emergency). Black lines plot average weekly changes in
 respective outcomes. Red and blue lines plot average changes net of changes predicted by the effects
 of local infections and SIP on these outcomes. Specifically, we subtract predicted changes in outcomes
 using the estimated effects of local infections and SIP reported in columns 5 and 6 of Table 3 that include
 time effects (blue) and do not include time effects (red): Yi,t -   ^ 1 Dc ( i ), t - ^ 2 1[SIPs(i),t ] - Xi,t . Since the
 combined effects of local infections and SIP on revenues, for example, are negative, the red line in panel
 A can be interpreted as average changes in revenues that would have prevailed in the absence of changes
 in infections, SIP, or other factors that correlate with infections and SIP. The gap between the black and
 red lines capture the effect of revenue changes explained by infections and SIP. Since the blue lines are
 constructed using estimates including time-effects, the gap between the blue and black lines capture the
 effect of local infections and SIP that is solely driven by cross-sectional differences. Dotted vertical lines
 denote the week of national emergency, which was declared the week starting March 9th, 2020.
            A. Revenues                                                                                         B. Expenses
       30                                                                                                  30

                                                 q                                                                                                   q

                                 q                                                                                                   q
       10                                                                                                  10    q
                 q                                                                                                   q q
                     q
             q               q       q
                                                                                                                                 q                       q
                                             q       q                                                                                   q
      -10                                                                                                 -10                                    q
                         q               q                                                                                   q                                                           q
                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                             q q
                                                         q                           q                                                                                               q
                                                                 q                                                                                                   q
                                                                                 q                                                                                                                   q
      -30                                                                                                 -30
                                                                                         q                                                                                   q
                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                         q                                                                                       q               q
                                                             q       q
                                                                             q                   q
      -50                                                                                                 -50
            -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12                                                                     -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12
                Weeks Since National Emergency                                                                      Weeks Since National Emergency

            C. Profit Margins                                                                                   D. Consumption
       10                                                                                                  30
        8                            q       q
                                                                                                                                                     q
        6                                                                                                                            q
        4                    q                                                                             10    q
                                                                                                                     q
                                         q                                                                               q
        2
                                 q               q
                                                                                                                                 q
        0                                                        q                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                 q       q
                 q                                                                                        -10                q                                                           q
       -2            q                               q                                                                                       q
                                                             q
                         q
       -4                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                             q                                   q
                                                         q                                                                                                                           q       q
                                                                     q                                                                                               q                               q
       -6                                                                q
                                                                             q
                                                                                     q                    -30
             q                                                                           q                                                                                   q
                                                                                             q
       -8
                                                                                                                                                                         q       q
                                                                                                 q
      -10
                                                                                                                                                                 q
      -12                                                                                                 -50
            -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12                                                                     -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12
                Weeks Since National Emergency                                                                      Weeks Since National Emergency

                                                                                                     51
Figure 11: Average changes in business revenues and owners' consumption by industry perfor-
mance
 Notes: This figure shows average weekly changes in business revenues (blue) and owners' consumption
 (red) for businesses in the most and the least affected industries. Outcomes are normalized by the
 centered 9-week average from a year ago, and the change is defined as a percent change from its own
 average between January 13, 2020 and February 9, 2020 (i.e., two months before the week of national
 emergency). Dotted vertical lines denote the week of national emergency, which was declared the week
 starting March 9th, 2020. Solid lines show the average change in outcomes for the five least affected (i.e.,
 best performing) NAICS 4-digit industries in terms of their average drop in revenues since the onset of
 the national emergency, and dashed lines show the average change in outcomes for the least affected
 (i.e., worst performing) industries. For this analysis, we restrict the sample to industries with at least 100
 businesses. The least and the most affected industries are reported in Appendix Figure A.10.


                      40
                                                                         q
                                                                              q                             q

                      20                                                                   q    q
                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                              q
                            q                         q          q
                                 q                                                q
                                       q         q         q
                                                           q             q                                            q
                       0                         q
   Percent change




                                 q                    q
                                       q
                                                                     q                                                               q
                                                                                                        q
                            q                                    q
                                            q                        q
                                                                              q        q
                    -20

                    -40
                                                                                  q


                    -60
                                                                                           q
                                                                                                            q
                    -80                                                                q
                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                      q              q
                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                q

                    -100
                           -10        -8        -6        -4        -2      0      2      4     6               8             10         12
                                                                 Weeks Since National Emergency
                                     Least affected industries       Most affected industries       q   Consumption       q        Revenue




                                                                             52
                                       Figure 12: Median business and owner's checking account balances from January
Notes: This figure shows median end of month business (blue) and owner's personal (red) checking
account balances. Panel A shows median dollar levels of account balances and Panel B shows median
percent change in account balances since January, 2020. For panel A, owner's personal checking account
balances use the left axis and business checking account balances use the right axis.


                                              A. Median Business and Household Checking Account Balances ($)
                                      2,500                                                                      q         5,000
                                                                                         Business Checking
                                                                                           Account (right)

                                      2,250                                                                                4,500



                                      2,000                                                      q                         4,000
                                                                       q
                                                        q
                                                                                q
                                                                                                Household Checking
                                      1,750                                                        Account (left)
                                                                                                                           3,500



                                      1,500                                                                                3,000
                                                     Jan              Feb      Mar             Apr             May
                                                                              Month

                                           B. Median Change in Business and Household Checking Account Balances
                                      20
 Percent Change since January, 2020




                                                Business Checking Account
                                                Household Checking Account
                                      15


                                      10
                                                                                                                      q


                                       5


                                       0            q
                                                                                                       q
                                                                        q

                                                                                    q
                                      -5
                                                   Jan                 Feb        Mar                Apr             May
                                                                                 Month




                                                                               53
                                        Figure 13: Median changes in checking account balance by industry performance
Notes: This figure shows median changes in end of month business (blue) and owner's personal (red)
checking account balances from January, 2020 by industry performance. Solid lines show the for the five
least affected (i.e., best performing) NAICS 4-digit industries in terms of their average drop in revenues
since the onset of the national emergency, and dashed lines show the average change in outcomes for the
least affected (i.e., worst performing) industries. For this analysis, we restrict the sample to industries
with at least 100 businesses. The least and the most affected industries are reported in Appendix Figure
A.10.

                                       30
                                                                                                                              q
 Percent Change since January, 2020




                                       25
                                       20
                                       15                                                                  q


                                       10
                                        5                                               q

                                        0         q                q
                                                                   q
                                       -5
                                                                                                                              q
                                      -10
                                      -15                                               q
                                                                                                           q
                                      -20
                                      -25
                                                 Jan             Feb                   Mar                Apr                May
                                                                                      Month
                                                          Least affected industries         q   Business Checking Account

                                                          Most affected industries              Household Checking Account




                                                                                  54
