                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             BLACK AND WHITE:
             ACCESS TO CAPITAL AMONG MINORITY-OWNED STARTUPS

                                       Robert W. Fairlie
                                         Alicia Robb
                                       David T. Robinson

                                      Working Paper 28154
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28154


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2020




We are grateful for comments and suggestions from Pat Bayer, Elijah Brewer, Scott Frame, John
Graham, Melinda Petre, Amit Seru, Per Stromberg, participants at the AEA meetings, the Society
for Government Economists meetings, the CESifo Conference on Entrepreneurship and
Economics, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland and
Kauffman Foundation Conference on Entrepreneurial Finance, the International Conference on
Panel Data, the APPAM meetings, as well as seminar participants at Illinois, IFN Stockholm,
McGill University, Stockholm University, Stockholm School of Economics, University of British
Columbia, University of Melbourne, University of Southern California, and Vanderbilt
University. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Robert W. Fairlie, Alicia Robb, and David T. Robinson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Black and White: Access to Capital among Minority-Owned Startups
Robert W. Fairlie, Alicia Robb, and David T. Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 28154
November 2020
JEL No. J15,J71,L26

                                          ABSTRACT

We use confidential and restricted-access data from the Kauffman Firm Survey and matched
administrative data on credit scores to explore racial disparities in access to capital for new
business ventures. The novel results on racial inequality in startup financing indicate that black-
owned startups start smaller and stay smaller over the entire first eight years of their existence.
Black startups face more difficulty in raising external capital, especially external debt. We find
that disparities in credit-worthiness constrain black entreprenuers, but perceptions of treatment by
banks also hold them back. Black entrepreneurs apply for loans less often than white
entrepreneurs largely because they expect to be denied credit, even when they have a good credit
history and in settings where strong local banks favor new business development.


Robert W. Fairlie                                David T. Robinson
Department of Economics                          Fuqua School of Business
Engineering 2 Building                           Duke University
University of California at Santa Cruz           100 Fuqua Drive
Santa Cruz, CA 95064                             Durham, NC 27708
and NBER                                         and NBER
rfairlie@ucsc.edu                                davidr@duke.edu

Alicia Robb
333 18th Street
Boulder, CO 80302
alicia@nextwaveimpact.com
1        Introduction

More than half a century after the passage of the Civil Rights Act, economic differences
between whites and African-Americans continue to be a source of social and political
tension in the United States. Median black and white households live under substantially
different economic circumstances. For example, the median household income for black
families is $37,000; for white families the number is $63,000. One out of four black families
live in poverty; the poverty rate for white families is 9 percent (U.S. Census Bureau 2016).
Inequality is even higher for wealth and financial assets. For example, the ratio of median
household net worth for black families to that of white familes is 11 to 1, and only 7
percent of black families own stocks or mutual funds compared with 23 percent of white
families (U.S. Census Bureau 2019).
        Entrepreneurship is often viewed as a mechanism for promoting economic mobility,
wealth accumulation and job creation in minority communities, representing a poten-
tial tool for alleviating these racial disparities (Bradford and Osborne 1976; Borjas 1999;
Boston, 1999, 2006; Bradford 2003). Yet, access to financial capital is a critical element of
new business formation (Kerr and Nanda 2011; Simoes et al. 2016). This paper explores
racial differences in capital market outcomes associated with launching a new businesses.
Although previous research provides evidence that established minority-owned firms ex-
perience higher loan denial probabilities, we know little about the racial differences in
financing that occur when firms are initially started.1 To our knowledge, our analysis is
the first to provide a detailed analysis of race, financing, and creditworthiness at the time
a business is first launched.
        To explore these racial differences, we use the confidential, restricted-access version of
the Kauffman Firm Survey (KFS) with matched administrative data on credit scores. The
KFS is the only dataset that provides panel data on startups with detailed information
on financing outcomes, credit worthiness and credit expectations. The panel structure of
    1
    See Bostic and Lampani 1999, Cole 1999, Cavalluzzo, Cavaluzzo and Wolken 2002, Blanchflower,
Levine and Zimmerman 2003, and Blanchard et al. 2008 for evidence of racial disparities in loan outcomes
among established businesses in the SSBF. See Bates (1989, 1991) for evidence of racial disparities in total
capital and loan outcomes from a sample of businesses started in the past 6 years in the 1987 CBO.

                                                     1
the KFS allows us to focus on both the initial capital that firms receive in their founding
year, as well as later capital injections secured over the firm's next seven years of oper-
ations. Ultimately this allows us not only to measure initial differences, but also study
whether any differences diminish or persist over time as a startup builds an observable
track record of performance.
   The panel structure of our data offers two key advantages relative to previous work
on racial differences in funding, which has focused on cross-sectional differences in firms
that are already operating. First, it allows us to avoid problems with restropective ques-
tion recall bias and survival bias found with cross-sectional data. Second, if we restrict
our analysis to the sample of firms that survive eight years, the initial racial differences
in startup capital are considerably smaller than if we look at the full sample, which in-
cludes firms that do not survive. This suggests that conditioning on survival understates
the degree of racial differences in access to capital. Previous research has highlighted the
differences in rates of job creation, responsiveness, and growth between young firms and
small firms (Hurst and Pugsley, 2011; Haltiwanger, Jarmin and Miranda, 2013; Adelino,
Ma and Robinson, 2016). Previous research showing racial differences in capital access in
a cross-section of established businesses could be attributed to racial differences in human
capital that have played out over time, inducing sorting of minority-owned businesses
into low-growth industries where small firms are the dominant mode of organization.
Our work instead demonstrates that there are within-industry, within-geography differ-
ences in access to capital at firm inception, which may have important implications for
understanding racial differences in regional economic growth and employment.
   Our analysis proceeds in three steps. In the first step we demonstrate large racial dif-
ferences in the sources and amounts of financial capital that are used to launch businesses.
Black-owned startups start smaller in terms of overall financial capital and invest less on
average as they mature. Racial differences in outside debt account for more than half of
the difference in total financial capital. Indeed, the ratio of debt to total capital (i.e., the
leverage ratio) for black-owned startups is persistently below that observed for white-



                                               2
owned startups. But, the disparities do not end here: alternative sources of capital such
as loans from friends and family, personal equity and credit cards do little to attenuate
these differences. Black-owned startups also have lower levels of all other major sources
of funding than do white-owned startups.
   The second step is to explore the underlying causes of these financing patterns. Through-
out the paper, we use the term access to capital to capture the amount of capital obtained by
a particular business, understanding that this quantity is an equilibrium capital market
outcome affected by both supply-side and demand-side factors. Large racial disparities
in access to capital could reflect racial differences in either demand for capital, in the
underlying quality of the business opportunity, or in attitudes towards credit markets.
Under these demand-side explanations, black borrowers obtain less capital because they
need or want less, because they are more risk averse (perhaps the stigma of bankruptcy
affects them more greatly) or because they anticipate rejection when they apply for credit.
There are also supply-side channels, through which race matters to lenders. A long lit-
erature in economics going back to Becker (1971) and Phelps (1972) debates whether this
ultimately traces back to taste-based discrimination rooted in racial animus or instead sta-
tistical discrimination based on differences in endowments and incomplete information.
Under both sets of explanations the race of the borrower affects the level of capital they
receive.
   Although we cannot definitively rule out any particular explanation, our data allow
us to paint a rich descriptive picture of racial differences in access to capital by exploring
these potential explanations in considerable detail. First, because we have new confiden-
tial administrative data on credit ratings from Dun & Bradstreet that have been matched
to all businesses in the restricted-access version of the KFS, as well as information on
founder net worth, we can condition on an extensive set of founder and business char-
acteristics that are correlated with race, and likely affect lending decisions. Thus, we can
identify key traits contributing to inequality and can examine whether correlated traits
are the primary source of racial disparities. After we control for industry, business credit



                                              3
scores, founder net worth, education and experience, as well as many business charac-
teristics that may ultimately be endogenous to the amount of funding received, we can
explain about one-third of the initial funding gap between black-owned and white-owned
startups. Lower credit scores among black startups contribute the most among correlated
traits.
       Nevertheless, as is common with much work that attempts to explain firm-level differ-
ences in capital structure, our analysis cannot fully account for the unobserved differences
in opportunity sets that might drive firm-level differences in borrowing. Including fixed
effects for business location dramatically increases the explanatory power of our regres-
sions, but does little to alter the estimated differences between black- and white-owned
businesses in initial size. That is, including a fixed effect for the core-based statistical
area (CBSA) of the business raises the regression R2 from around 15% to around 30%,
and specifications including zipcode fixed effects produce R2 values over 60%.2 In short,
racial differences across neighborhoods within the same city are as large as racial differ-
ences across cities.
       Moreover, the initial differences in funding are not erased by later injections of cap-
ital. In order for black- and white-owned businesses to converge in size, black-owned
businesses would need substantially larger capital injections in the years after inception
to make up for differences at founding. Racial differences in the size of later injections of
new funding are smaller than the initial differences, but they remain significantly smaller
in later years. Thus, on average, businesses started by black founders do not converge to
the size of white-owned businesses as they age.
       This persistent difference in funding is driven primarily by differences in the amount
of bank loans and other bank credit products, which in turn are not substituted by other
sources of capital. Lower amounts of banking services could reflect worse treatment by
banks, less demand for banking services, or could reflect differences in borrower attitudes
   2
    Core-based statistical areas include metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) but also include "micropoli-
tan" statistical areas, defined by the US Census as "areas that have at least one urban cluster of at least
10,000 but less than 50,000 population, plus adjacent territory that has a high degree of social and economic
integration with the core as measured by commuting ties."



                                                     4
and expectations, and ultimately less willingness to approach banks. One important ad-
vantage of our data is that they include measures of loan application expectations, even
among those who did not seek funding. Typically, differential average participation rates
confound the measurement of discrimination; here, detailed questions in the KFS mea-
suring the demand for loans, the rate of loan rejections, and the expected fear of denial
among borrowers who chose not to attempt to borrow allow us to explore how expecta-
tions of discrimination may impact participation in financial markets.
   Black entrepreneurs apply for bank loans less frequently than white entrepreneurs.
This stems largely from differences in the fear of rejection. Overall, black entrepreneurs
are about three times more likely to state that they did not apply for credit when needed
for fear of having their loan application denied. Similarly, black-owned startups are about
three times less likely than white-owned startups to report that their loan requests are
always approved. These differences persist even after controlling for credit scores and
net worth: indeed, even black founders in the top quartile of the credit score distribution
are more than twice as likely to report a fear of denial than white founders with below
median credit scores. These effects are stronger in areas where historical and current
racial tension is higher, and weaker in areas where racial tensions are less severe, which
suggests that actual or perceived statistical or taste-based discrimination could be a factor
in these results.
   Banks use both hard information (objective, easily codified and transmitted informa-
tion like credit scores) and soft information (potentially more precise, but subjective and
difficult to verify information) in their lending decisions, and to varying degrees based
on bank characteristics. Because black-owned startups tend to be at a hard-information
disadvantage relative to white-owned startups, we next explore whether they face fewer
constraints in settings where soft information is potentially more actionable. Given that
large national banks tend to rely more on hard information when making lending deci-
sions, while local banks tend to rely more on soft information (Berger, Miller, Petersen,
Rajan, and Stein, 2005; Petersen and Rajan, 2002), we exploit regional variation in the



                                             5
strength of local banks to ask whether these attitudes and outcomes are different in re-
gions where soft information could play a bigger role in the lending decision. Areas with
stronger local banks are indeed areas where the average founder is less afraid of loan de-
nial, and where average business loan amounts to startups in our sample is higher. But
these effects are exclusive to white-owned startups. Black founders are not less afraid of
loan denial in these markets; if anything, they are somewhat more likely to report that
they did not apply for fear of denial in regions with stronger local banks. In these areas,
white-owned startups receive larger amounts of bank debt on average but black-owned
startups do not.
   The third step and final piece of our analysis attempts to assess the importance of
these differences to cumulative capital disparities. For this, we use decomposition tech-
niques developed by Blinder (1973) and Oaxaca (1973) to assess how much of the size
difference between black-owned and white-owned businesses is attributable to the char-
acteristics we observe. We can explain around one-half of the total difference in firm size
with observables. Of these, business credit scores and founder net worth (which presum-
ably measures collateral) account for about two-thirds of the difference. Differences in
education and experience account for only a modest portion of the difference. If the aver-
age black-owned business had the observable characteristics of the average white-owned
business, it would be about 75% larger.
   This paper adds to the literature on racial differences in financial market outcomes.
Chatterji and Seamans (2012) find that the expansion of credit card availability stimulated
entry into entrepreneurship especially for black entrepreneurs, and find that the strongest
results in areas with high rates of historical racial discrimination. Dougal, Gao, Mayew
and Parsons (2017) find that historically black colleges pay higher issuing costs for bonds
than other higher-education bond issuers, and attribute these higher spreads to racial
animus among wealthy white bond purchasers. Earlier studies provide cross-sectional
evidence from the SSSBF of racial differences in lending markets for established busi-
nesses (Bostic and Lampani 1999; Cole 1999; Cavalluzzo, Cavaluzzo and Wolken 2002;



                                            6
Blanchflower, Levine and Zimmerman 2003; Blanchard et al. 2008; Mitchell and Pearce
2011). Apart from our study being the first to focus on new business ventures, rather than
more-established, existing businesses, our work departs from earlier work in the breadth
and depth of our empirical measures of overall capital sources, creditworthiness and loan
expectations, and use of longitudinal data on a cohort of firms.
    The balance of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe the restricted-
access KFS panel that follows startups from their founding through seven years of oper-
ations after their startup year and the matched Dun and Bradstreet (D&B) administra-
tive data on credit scores. In Section 3, we examine whether there are differences in the
use of financial capital (levels and detailed sources) between black and white firms at
startup and in the years following startup. Section 4 explores potential causes of racial
differences in financial capital. In Section 5, we explore racial differences in credit mar-
ket explanations. Section 6 explores the potential role of racial bias in capital markets,
and Section 7 explores the question of how much of the racial gap in funding disappears
after controlling for startup characteristics. Section 8 concludes. An online appendix pro-
vides additional details regarding racial differences in survival, profitability, and funding
sources.


2    The Kauffman Firm Survey

We use the confidential, restricted access version of the Kauffman Firm Survey (KFS)
to study how startups access capital markets. The KFS is a longitudinal survey of new
businesses in the United States, collecting annual information for a sample of 4,928 firms
that began operations in 2004. The underlying sample frame for the KFS is Dun and
Bradstreet (D&B) data.
    The KFS data contain unprecedented detail on the financing patterns of startups, as
well as detailed information on both the firm itself and up to ten business owners of the
firm. In addition to the 2004 baseline year data, we also use the seven years of follow
up data covering calendar years 2005 through 2011. Detailed information on the owners



                                              7
includes race, gender, age, education, previous startup experience, and previous work ex-
perience. Detailed information on the firm includes industry, physical location, employ-
ment, sales, intellectual property, and financial capital used at start-up and over time. The
detailed financing information in the KFS allows us to examine the relative importance
of each source of financing at start up and over time. The confidential, restricted-access
version of the KFS includes credit scores, continuous measures of key variables, such
as financing, and more detail on industries and geographic locations than the publicly-
available KFS. The KFS was also designed using sample weights to be representative of
all new businesses in the U.S. economy and not restricted to a narrow set of industries or
business types.
   Our administrative data on credit scores from D&B for all firms in the KFS allows for
a novel analysis of racial differences among startups. Credit scores are not available on
most surveys, perhaps because most entrepreneurs do not know readily know what their
scores are. To be sure, the Survey of Small Business Finances (SSBF) includes information
on credit scores, but only for larger, more established, and older businesses (Cavalluzo
and Wolken 2005). While the KFS contains unprecedented detail on the business for-
mation process, the availability of business credit scores allows us to control for many
differences in firm characteristics that would be observable by bank lending personnel
but typically unobservable to the econometrician.
   The KFS is the only large, nationally representative, longitudinal dataset providing
detailed information on new firms and their financing activities. Most previous research
on the use of financial capital among small businesses has relied on cross-sectional data
on existing businesses. For example, the Survey of Business Owner (SBO) data provide
information on the amount of startup capital, but provide only retrospective information
for surviving businesses and do not provide information on the relative importance of
the different sources of financing. Another commonly-used dataset, the Federal Reserve
Board's Survey of Small Business Finances (SSBF), provides information on recent financ-
ing, but does not provide information on financing at startup or the early stages of firm



                                             8
growth (and was discontinued after 2003). Furthermore, both the SBO and the SSBF are
cross sectional surveys that do not provide information on firm financing over time for
the same sets of firms. Finally, fundraising levels in the KFS are measured annually, and
are thus less prone to recall bias as is the case with both the SBO and the SSBF.
   We restrict our attention to the set of firms that either survived over the sample pe-
riod or that have been verified as going out of business over the sample period. In most
analyses, we condition on survival in that year, but we also conduct robustness checks
taking alternative approaches to addressing survival. Our main results are not sensitive
to the approach, and we discuss the robustness check results below. We also specifically
focus on firms that have a white or black primary owner. These restrictions result in a
sample of 3,551 startups out of the total sample of 4,124 startups with owners of any race
that began operations in 2004 and either continued through the final year in the sample
period (2011) or can be verified to have exited sometime over the period.
   We assign owner demographics at the firm level based on the primary owner. For
firms with multiple owners (35 percent of the sample), the primary owner is designated
by having the largest equity share in the business. In cases where two or more owners
owned equal shares, hours worked and a series of other variables are used to create a rank
ordering of owners in order to define a primary owner following the algorithm proposed
in Ballou et al (2008). We include businesses with owners of all races in the regression
analysis, but focus our comparisons on black- and white-owned businesses. Following
standard conventions in the literature, the white category includes only non-Hispanic
whites. Using these definitions, we find that 9.1 percent of the KFS sample of startups is
black-owned. The percentage of black-owned startups does not notably change over time
indicating similar survival rates. In the seventh year after startup we find that 8.4 percent
of the KFS sample is black-owned.
   Because so much of our analysis centers around founder net worth and creditworthi-
ness, we also compare the distribution of net worth among startup owners in our data
with that of the broader U.S. population as a whole. The most recent government source



                                             9
for data on U.S. net worth is from the 2013 Survey of Income and Program Participation
(SIPP). Figure 1 compares the KFS and SIPP net worth distributions. Solid bars represent
the U.S. population and dotted bars represent startup owners. The bottom two quartile
categories are collapsed because of reporting restrictions. Additionally, the quartiles are
inexact due to data availability in the published net worth statistics from SIPP.


                                   Insert Figure 1 here


    There are two key findings here. First, both black and white owners have net worth
distributions to the right of their respective population net worth distributions. Thus,
both black and white startup owners are less likely to be from the lower tail of the wealth
distribution than the population as a whole. Second, the wealth disparity between whites
and blacks found in the overall U.S. population also holds among startup owners. Black
startup owners have a wealth distribution to the left of the white startup owners distri-
bution, and the same holds for the U.S. population.


3    Are There Racial Differences in Access To Startup Capital?

Table I reports average amounts of capital by type of capital for startups (and Figures
1 and 2). The KFS contains finely detailed sources of funding for startups, which are
reported along with summary statistics in Appendix Table I. To facilitate an analysis of
broad patterns in the data, in most of our analysis we follow Robb and Robinson (2014)
and group the detailed categories into six broad buckets based on the source of capi-
tal and the structure of the capital (reported in Table I). The three alternative sources of
capital are owners, insiders, and outsiders; the two alternative types of capital are debt
and equity. The distinction between sources captures whether the funding source is the
founder, informal channels such as friends or close associates of the founder who are not
direct owners of the business, or formal channels such as banks, venture capital firms,
and angel investors. Robb and Robinson (2014) make distinctions along these lines be-
cause the personal balance sheets of business owners and the balance sheets of the firms



                                            10
themselves are often deeply intertwined at the time the business is founded, and there-
fore there is little practical distinction between, for instance, a business credit card and a
personal credit card, or a personal bank loan and a business bank loan.

                                     Insert Table I Here

   In the initial year of the KFS, black-owned startups are started with substantially less
capital than white entrepreneurs. The average level of startup capital among black en-
trepreneurs is $35,205 compared with $106,720 for white entrepreneurs. Racial differences
in the sources of capital are also pronounced. In the year the business is founded, black
owners contribute around $19,500 of personal equity, compared with around $34,500 for
white business owners. Inside equity­equity stakes taken by family members or other
business insiders­are relatively modest for both groups, but are about five times larger
for white-owned than black-owned startups.
   Differences in outside equity--venture capital, angel financing, and the like are even
more stark. The average black-owned startup has around $500 of outside equity, whereas
the average white-owned business has more than $18,500 from outside equity at found-
ing. These numbers are a reflection of the fact that while outside equity is relatively
uncommon for white-owned businesses, it is exceedingly rare for black-owned startups.
   Owner debt includes personal loans extended to the business by the founder. These
are small on average for both black-owned and white-owned firms, but white-owned
businesses have higher average amounts here as well, by a factor of five in the initial
year. Inside debt­money lent to the firm by family members or business insiders­is about
the same order of magnitude as owner debt, although there is no statistically significant
difference across racial groups.
   The largest quantitative difference between white- and black-owned startups is in the
amount of outside debt associated with their businesses. Outside debt includes personal
loans, business loans, personal and business credit cards, as well as other types of loans
made by banks either directly to business owners for the purpose starting their business
or else to the business itself. Robb and Robinson (2014) show that on average, this is

                                             11
the largest source of financing for firms in the KFS. Here, we see that this is only true
of white-owned firms. At startup, black-owned firms borrow about one-half as much
as they put in of their own capital, whereas white-owned firms borrow about 1.7 times
what they put in of their own capital. In the year of founding, white-owned firms on
average borrow nearly six times as much black-owned firms. Although the amount of
outside debt accessed by black-owned startups grows steadily over time, average outside
debt for black-owned startups is substantially lower than that seen among white-owned
firms.

                                     Insert Figure 2 here

   In the later years of the survey, there is significant convergence in the average amounts
of personal equity injected into the business, but this largely reflects the fact that personal
equity injections from white startup owners dramatically decline in the years after found-
ing: the average amount drops to around $11,000 in years 1-3 after startup and to around
$4,000 by years 4-7 after startup on average for white-owned businesses. On average,
insider equity (that is, equity injections from friends, family or other non-business owner
acquaintances) is a negligible source of financing for most firms after founding, and the
differences between white- and black-owned startups is not statistically significant. In-
deed, across most of the individual categories, differences in new capital cease to be sta-
tistically different after the initial founding year. Because these numbers track new dollars
coming into the firm, however, this means that the accumulated difference in size grows
over time.

                                     Insert Figure 3 here

   In the appendix, we dig deeper into the differences in access to debt for minority
and white-owned startups by looking at the specific sources of debt financing. This is
presented in Table A.4 digs. In the founding year, there are differences between black and
white owned businesses across a wide array of debt sources. Only one percent of black
owners obtain business loans, compared with 7% for white-owned firms. While 30% of

                                              12
white-owned businesses use business credit cards in their founding year, only 15% of
black owned businesses do. Similarly, 18% of white business owners rely on personal
loans for their business in the founding year, while only 14% of black-owned startups do.
All these differences are statistically significant.
    What sources offset these differences? As we show in the Appendix, it is not the
case that black-owned startups rely more on personal credit cards. In fact, the opposite
is true. Instead, black-owned startups appear to rely more on informal borrowing from
family members: 14% of black-owned startups relied on family loans in their founding
year, while only 9% of white-owned businesses do. Interestingly, the average amounts
borrowed from family and other sources are not statistically different between minority
and non-minority businesses. This could be a reflection of liquidity constraints in the
network of family members that are stronger for black-owned startups than for white-
owned firms (Fairlie and Robb 2008). Average amounts of capital from personal bank
loans and business bank loans are statistically smaller for black-owned startups. Black-
owned startups continue to rely on family loans to a greater degree than white-owned
firms in the three years following the firm's founding. This suggests that access to formal
debt channels remains limited for minorities.
    All told, the descriptive evidence thus far indicates that black-owned startups access
less formal credit. It suggests that they partially substitute for this with a heavier re-
liance on informal channels and personal equity, but this substitution is an imperfect one
(perhaps due to lower levels of personal and family wealth). This results in businesses
that start with smaller amounts of financial capital and that do not converge over time.
To illustrate this, Figure 4 reports average firm size, for all firms as well as white- and
black-owned firms, over time from startup to seven years after startup.


4    What Explains Racial Differences in Access to Capital?

In this section, we investigate the causes of racial inequality in financial capital reported in
the previous section. We focus on the question of whether credit scores, and other founder



                                               13
and business characteristics limit the ability of black startups to obtain comparable levels
of financial capital as white startups. We first examine differences in access to capital in
the firm's initial year, then examine differences as the startup ages.

4.1     Differences in Initial Capital

We begin by examining the difference in total capital raised across all sources. Given its
importance, we then turn to examining differences in the amount of outside debt. The
final step is to examine differences in business bank loans.

4.1.1   Total Financial Capital

Table II models variation in the natural log of the total amount of capital (from all sources)
in the startup year based on race, owner characteristics and business characteristics. In-
dustry fixed effects at the two-digit NAICS level are included in all specifications to cap-
ture general differences in capital levels based on types of businesses started. The inclu-
sion of industry fixed effects partly addresses the concern that black and white businesses
differ in their need for capital because they cluster in industries with different capital re-
quirements.
   In column (1) we report the baseline specification, which includes only a dummy for
the race of the founder and industry fixed effects with no additional controls. The loading
on the black-owned startup dummy variable illustrates that black-owned startups have
total capital investments that are roughly 0.73 log points lower in terms of initial total
capital than white-owned businesses.


                                    Insert Table II Here


   The remaining columns of the table in some sense seek to explain away this differ-
ence with a variety of control variables. Including the credit score lowers the loading on
the black-owned startup dummy from -0.73 to -0.60. Credit scores are much lower among
black startups than white startups, and the loading on the credit score indicates that credit




                                             14
scores have a large positive effect on the amount of capital raised.3 We find that moving
up 10 percentile points in the credit score distribution is associated with an increase in fi-
nancial capital by roughly 20 percent. These results are consistent with previous research
focusing on larger, established businesses, which finds that credit scores have a negative
effect on loan denial rates (Cavalluzzo and Wolken 2005). But, even after controlling for
credit scores, the black indicator estimate remains large and statistically significant.
       In Column (3) we introduce founder net worth. Although founder net worth is not
available in the survey until the fourth followup year, we rely on the high persistence
in net worth, especially as measured categorically in the KFS. We treat this as a proxy of
owner's net worth in the startup year and note some caution in interpreting the estimates.
The net worth categories included in Column (3) indicate that high net worth individuals
launch businesses at a much larger scale than others. Controlling for net worth attenu-
ates the loading on the black-owned startup indicator variable but does not diminish its
statistical significance.
       Next we include measures of formal education (in the form of dummy variables for
levels), prior work experience to starting the business (both industry specific and non-
industry specific), and previous entrepreneurial experience. These are included in Col-
umn (4), and capture the human capital of the entrepreneur. Education and prior work
experience in the same industry have been found to be important determinants of busi-
ness success in previous research (Van Praag et al. 2005; Parker 2009). We find some
evidence that education is important, but no evidence of important effects for prior work
experience. Previous entrepreneurial experience is positively associated with capital in-
vestments, perhaps due to prior knowledge of finding capital. Rather than further erase
the difference between white-owned and black-owned startups, controlling for human
capital widens the racial difference slightly. The loading on the black-owned startup
dummy remains statistically significant in these specifications.
       Columns (5) and (6) introduce a range of detailed additional controls for business
   3
   In unreported regressions, we tested whether credit scores had a different effect for white and black
owned startups and found no statistically significant difference.



                                                  15
type, growth goals and performance. These variables may be endogenous to the amount
of capital the firm was able to raise, but including them does not diminish the racial dif-
ference in total capital. In column (5) we add controls for firm characteristics to condition
on the fact that black and white founders may open different types of businesses with dif-
ferent capital needs. We include dummies for whether the firm sells a product or service,
whether it is based out of the founder's home, and whether it has patents or other intel-
lectual property. In column (6) we include a dummy for whether the business is full-time
or part-time, its incorporation status, and employment level (i.e. employees). Interest-
ingly, when we control for the type of business started (i.e., whether it sells a product or
service, whether it has intellectual property, and whether it is incorporated) the effect of
prior startup experience drops in half and becomes statistically insignificant: serial en-
trepreneurs, on average, start observationally different types of businesses than first-time
entrepreneurs.
   The inclusion of controls for business characteristics in Columns (5) and (6) has little
affect on the measured racial difference in startup capital, but the controls themselves in-
dicate that home-based businesses invest less capital, and product-centered businesses
and businesses with intellectual property invest more capital, as would be expected.
When we further add additional controls for firm performance and growth goals, such
as whether the business is full-time or part-time, its incorporation status, and employ-
ment level, the black-founder loading does not change. Although many of these controls
may well be endogenous, the stability of the black-owner loading across different speci-
fications suggests that remaining black/white differences in capital use are not primarily
driven by easily observable differences in firm characteristics. Moreover, the addition
of these variables does not substantially change the coefficient estimates on credit scores
and human capital measures, which suggests that credit scores are not simply proxying
for the type of business.
   In the remaining two columns we attempt to control for the effect that business loca-
tion may have on demand conditions, unobservable business quality, and hence demand



                                             16
for capital. In Column (7) we introduce Core-Based Statistical Area (CBSA) fixed effects.
CBSAs include the standard MSAs but add to them `micropolitan' statistical areas, which
the Census describes as 1a new set of statistical areas that have at least one urban cluster
of at least 10,000 but less than 50,000 population, plus adjacent territory that has a high
degree of social and economic integration with the core as measured by commuting ties.'
As column (7) shows, including a CBSA fixed effect does little to change the point esti-
mates on the main initial lending outcomes. This suggests that unobserved differences
in business quality captured by coarse location measures--the difference between being
located in Duluth, Minnesota instead of Mobile, Alabama, for example--does little to
explain away the observed racial difference in startup capital.
   In Column (8) we include zipcode-level fixed effects. Because this results in an ex-
tremely large number of model parameters, we cannot use the sampling weights included
in Columns (1)-(7), thus we urge caution in comparing the point estimate on the Black-
owned Startup indicator with the preceding estimates. In addition, this parameter is
only identified using survey zipcodes which contain both black and white survey re-
spondents, limiting the sample size. Nevertheless, there remains a statistically significant
racial difference in total capital. Thus, black-owned startups access less capital than their
white-owned neighbors in the same zip code.

4.1.2   Outside Debt

Given the importance of outside debt as illustrated in Section 3, we now turn to exploring
the potential causes of racial differences in access to outside debt. Exploring potential
explanations for differences in outside debt may also be useful for shedding further light
on the importance of credit scores and provide a useful consistency check on this variable.
Credit ratings are undoubtedly one of the most important pieces of information used by
banks and other financial institutions in loan determination. Table III reports regression
results, which follow the same format as Table II, except that the dependent variable is
the log of total outside debt instead of the log of total financial capital.

                                     Insert Table III Here

                                              17
   The results for the determinants and patterns across the regression specifications for
outside debt are similar to those for total financial capital. Credit scores exert a strong
influence on the ability of businesses to find outside debt. Even controlling for an exten-
sive list of business characteristics proxying for need and ability to raise capital (i.e. make
products, intellectual property, home-based, part-time, incorporated, and employment)
the coefficient on credit scores is large, positive and statistically significant. The results
for human capital measures are also similar, with previous startup experience demon-
strating the strongest association with outside debt capital, but also some evidence of the
influence of education and work experience. Wealth is a stronger predictor of outside
debt, which may be due to the importance of personal wealth as collateral in obtaining
loans. Racial differences persist even after controlling for business location using either
coarser CBSA fixed effects or narrower zipcode fixed effects.

4.1.3   Business Bank Loans

To zero in on borrower/lender effects, we refine our analysis one step further by exam-
ining only business bank loans. Whereas total capital includes all sources of debt and
equity financing, and total outside debt includes many forms of debt (e.g. credit cards)
that do not require any interaction between a borrower and a loan officer, by studying
business bank loans separately we are honing in on the empirical setting in which there is
the greatest scope for personal interactions between the borrower and lender to influence
outcomes.


                                    Insert Table IV Here


   Table IV reports regressions of the log of business bank loans on the same set of observ-
ables that were used to explain total capital and total outside debt. The results are largely
consistent with the previous analysis, in that about 1/3 of the initial industry-adjusted
racial difference is attenuated with controls for credit score, net worth, and business char-
acteristics. The raw magnitude of the racial difference is smaller for business bank loans
than for total debt, which reflects the fact that differences in access to business bank loans

                                              18
are not attenuated by access to other forms of outside debt. These results remain statisti-
cally significant in the presence of location fixed effects.

4.2      Differences in Capital at Later Stages

The previous tables examine racial differences in the year of founding and demonstrate
that controlling for a rich set of observable characteristics only partially removes the large
difference in funding between white-owned and black-owned startups. In Table V we
ask whether these racial differences abate over time, as startups build track records that
might help them overcome information asymmetries with lenders. We repeat the same
basic specification from Column (6) of the previous three tables, but form two groups, one
for years 1-3 and one for years 4-7 after startup. We include followup year fixed effects in
each model to absorb variation over time in access to capital.4
       In Columns (1) and (2), the dependent variable is the log of business bank debt that
the business received; this is the narrowest of the three sources of capital investigated
in the preceding tables, the source of capital with the greatest scope to be influenced
by direct, personal borrower/lender interactions. In both the years 1-3 period and the
years 4-7 period, there continues to be a statistically significant difference between black-
owned and white-owned businesses in the amount of business bank debt they receive.
In terms of magnitudes, the years 4-7 point estimate is about 1/3 the size of the point
estimate in the initial survey year, meaning that the black-white funding gap persists but
is considerably smaller.
       Columns (3) and (4) focus on total outside debt from all sources. In the years 1-3
sample, the point estimate is about half as large as the comparable point estimate in the
initial year, meaning that about half the black-white difference is erased over the next
   4
    These followup year fixed effects also capture differences in survival rates between black and white
startups. The results are not sensitive to their inclusion. We also examine the sensitivity of the results
to survival bias by conditioning the sample on including only firms surviving through the last year in
the survey (year 7 after startup). Taking this approach, we also find similar results. To push the analysis
further, we also take an approach that is in the spirit of a bounds analysis (e.g. Fairlie, Karlan and Zinman
2015). We estimate the regressions assuming as a lower bound that all non-surviving businesses would
have used zero financial capital in that year. And, as a potential upper bound we alternatively impute all
non-surviving firm observations as equal to the median level of financial capital among surviving firms.
The regression results are not sensitive to this imputation.


                                                     19
three years of the firm's life. In the years 4-7 period, the difference between black-owned
and white-owned businesses is no longer statistically significant. The final two columns
broaden the scope further to include all forms of financial capital. Here the differences
between black-owned and white-owned businesses ceases to be statistically significant,
even in the years 1-3 sample.
    Taken together, these point estimates illustrate that differences in bank lending to
black-owned and white-owned businesses persist over time, but that over time black
borrowers are able to substitute into other forms of capital. The fact that we are able to
condition on a rich set of observables means that the remaining differences are unlikely
to be explained by creditworthiness, collateral, aspects of the business operating strategy,
or the industry in which operates. It is important to recognize that the dependent vari-
able here is measured in terms of new dollars flowing in during a given survey year: it
is a measure of the flow of new capital, not the outstanding stock of capital. This in turn
means that the initial differences in funding do not dissipate; they do not converge in the
level of cumulative total capital over time. In the Appendix we provide estimations that
include zipcode-level fixed effects. These specifications produce results that are quality
similar to those presented here.


5    Do Black Borrowers Expect To Be Treated Differently

The previous section asks whether observable differences in borrower characteristics that
might be important for lenders can explain the large unconditional differences in the lev-
els of capital that white-owned and black-owned businesses receive. In this section, we
ask whether differences in attitudes and expectations about the bank borrowing expe-
rience are important for understanding differences in access to capital. To explore this
question, we use survey information in the KFS that gauges demand and unmet need for
credit among entrepreneurs.
    Access to measures of attitudes towards borrowing among entrepreneurs is rare in
survey data sets, but beginning in the third followup year, the KFS included a series



                                            20
of questions gauging borrowing intentions. The new questions ask whether the startup
business applied for a loan that year, and whether it did not apply for a loan that year
because of a fear of rejection. Among those startups that did apply, a follow-up question
asks whether they were always approved, always denied, or sometimes approved and
sometimes denied.
       Racial differences in responses to these questions are analyzed in Table VI. We re-
port survey-weighted averages by minority ownership status, both for the sample as a
whole, as well as splits based on notable points in the distribution of credit scores. White
entrepreneurs are more likely to apply for loans than black entrepreneurs, which poten-
tially reflects different capital needs, but could also reflect different attitudes and expec-
tations of the loan application process. When we focus on borrowers with below-median
credit scores, there is no statistical difference in the rates of loan application, but among
above-median borrowers, loan application rates are lower for blacks than for whites.
       Turning to those who did not apply for loans that year, we also study racial differ-
ences in whether they did not apply for fear of rejection in Table VI.5 There are massive
differences in fear of rejection between white and black business owners. Overall, black
business owners are about three times more likely to not apply for loans because of fear of
rejection than white business owners. This difference is highly statistically significant. Al-
though it is even more pronounced among below-median credit borrowers, even among
credit worthy borrowers we find that blacks are more than twice as likely than whites to
fear rejection. Black business owners whose credit scores are above the 75th percentile for
the entire sample are still more than twice as likely as white business owners of similar
creditworthiness to not apply for a loan for fear of having their loan application denied.
       Another measure of unmet financing needs is whether loans are always approved,
always denied, or sometimes approved and sometimes denied. Here, the results mirror
those from the discussion above. Black business owners are significantly less likely to
   5
   Although the question, did not apply for fear of rejection, is asked of all respondents, some owners
who applied for loans might have wanted to apply for additional loans. We do not include these owners
and focus on only those firms who did not apply for a new loan for clarity. The results are unchanged if we
examine all responses to this question.



                                                    21
report that they are always approved for loans. This holds throughout the distribution of
credit scores.
   A useful summary measure of whether a startup experiences unmet capital need com-
bines responses to being denied a loan application and not applying for a loan because of
fear of rejection. Affirmative answers to these two questions imply that the startup did
not obtain all of the capital it needed. Using this measure, black startups are much more
likely to face unmet need for capital than are white startups.
   Taken together, these results provide further evidence that the lower levels of borrow-
ing among black-owned businesses are a reflection of unmet need, stemming at least in
part from different attitudes and perceptions of the banking process, and not simply be-
cause black-owned startups need or want less capital. But they are still unconditional in
nature; to address this, Table VII examines these findings in a multivariate setting.
   Even controlling for a detailed set of firm and founder characteristics, we still observe
pronounced differences in the fear of denial and loan denial rates based on the race of
the firm founder. These findings are consistent with previous findings for larger, more
established and older businesses (i.e. SSBF data) that minority-owned firms experience
higher loan denial probabilities than white-owned businesses even after controlling for
differences in credit-worthiness and other factors (Bostic and Lampani 1999; Cole 1999;
Cavalluzzo, Cavaluzzo and Wolken 2002; Blanchflower, Levine and Zimmerman 2003;
Blanchard et al. 2008; Bates and Robb, 2014). Finally, these findings also provide evidence
that racial differences in financing patterns are not simply due to lower levels of financing
needs among black startups.
   Of course, one reason why a borrower might fear denial is because they had already
received a lot of debt in prior years, so that they were near their maximum debt capacity
for the business. Thus, one reason why black founders might be fearful of borrowing
is that they had already borrowed. To explore this possibility we split the sample into
black-owned businesses and all other businesses and regressed a dummy variable for
fear of denial or denied credit on the amount of prior accumulated debt as well as the



                                             22
same set of controls we have used throughout the preceding analysis.
    The results are presented in Table VIII. Columns (1) and (2) focus on the fear of denial.
Among white-owned businesses, high levels of past borrowing are a strong predictor of
failing to apply for a loan for fear of denial. The opposite is true for black borrowers;
those with more past borrowing are less likely to indicate that they are afraid to apply.
Similarly, in Columns (3) and (4) we find that among white-owned businesses, high past
borrowing is associated with a greater likelihood of being denied credit. Among black
borrowers, there is no statistically significant relationship, and the sign of the relation is
the opposite of what we find in the white-owned sample.
    These results suggest that not only are there pronounced racial differences in the fear
of loan denial, but the determinants of having this fear are a function of race. Among
white borrowers, fear of denial is correlated with remaining debt capacity: white bor-
rowers are more likely to fear denial when they have borrowed heavily in the past and
perhaps worry about perceived debt levels being too high. Among black borrowers, fear
of denial is correlated with past borrowing experience: those who have borrowed in the
past are less afraid of denial than those who have not perhaps because they perceive dis-
crimination to have declined.


6    Do Banks Treat Black Borrowers Differently

The previous sections demonstrate pronounced differences in capital access based on the
race of the business founder. This section attempts to discern whether discrimination is
the root cause of the differences we find. We do this in three steps. First, we make use of
the fact that small, local banks rely more on soft information, while larger, national banks
rely more heavily on credit scores and other types of quantifiable borrower characteristics
to examine whether differences in local banking conditions exacerbate or alleviate racial
differences. Next, we develop two measures of regional variation in the degree of racial
bias and ask how perceptions about access to capital by black borrowers vary according
to these measures. One is based on a historical measure of racial inequality, the other a



                                             23
contemporaneous measure. Both measures provide evidence that areas where racial bias
is stronger are areas where black business founders are more likely to anticipate being
denied credit.

6.1   Do Stronger Local Banks Help?

A large literature in banking draws a distinction between soft information and hard infor-
mation. Hard information--like that contained in credit scores--is quantitative and im-
personal, and can be easily transmitted, while soft information is qualitative, and while
it may be very precise, it is difficult to communicate credibly (see Petersen and Rajan,
2002). While large, national banks have been shown to have an advantage in obtaining
hard information, small banks tend to have a comparative advantage in lending to small
businesses, which are traditionally more informationally opaque, since small banks tend
to rely more on soft information than do large banks (Berger, Cerquiero and Penas, 2014;
Berger, Miller, Petersen, Rajan, and Stein, 2005; Brickley, Link, and Smith, 2003).
   In this section we ask whether racial differences in startup funding vary with the
strength of local banks. On the one hand, minority-owned businesses should face fewer
financing hurdles in areas with stronger local banks if the main source of their disadvan-
tage is that they have good ideas but little ability to signal their quality objectively. In
this case, the funding gap between black- and white-owned startups would be smaller
in areas with stronger local banks, because local banks, with their increased reliance on
soft information, would award capital to minority borrowers with good ideas but po-
tentially weaker verifiable credit history. On the other hand, a greater reliance on soft
information might create greater scope for lenders to cater to racial preferences or biases,
which could mean that black-owned businesses face greater funding challenges in en-
vironments where more objective creditworthiness criteria might receive less weight in
lending decisions.
   Table IX explores these issues. In Panel A, we estimate models for did not apply for
fear of denial. Column (1) verifies the previous finding that black startups have higher
rates of fear of denial than white startups. In column (2) we add the share of county bank

                                             24
deposits held by local banks and find that areas with higher local bank concentration are
areas in which new businesses are much less likely to report that they do not apply for
                  6
fear of denial.       This comports with a wide body of evidence suggesting that small, in-
formationally opaque businesses have an easier time securing bank loans in areas where
local bank concentrations are higher. Column (2) suggests that startups recognize that
they will face an easier time in markets where local banks are stronger.
      Column (3) introduces an interaction term to explore whether black and white-owned
businesses experience different outcomes in high local bank concentration areas. If black-
owned startups found it easier to borrow in these markets, presumably because they
expected lenders acting on soft information to be easier to work with, then we would
expect the interaction term to be negative­their reluctance to apply for loans for fear of
denial would be attenuated in these markets.
      Instead, we do not find evidence that black-owned startups receive more financing in
these markets. The interaction term is statistically significant, but has the wrong sign. Of
course, we cannot rule out the possibility that borrower perceptions of their own cred-
itworthiness differ according to bank market structure, nevertheless, the results do not
provide evidence that minority business owners expect it to be easier to obtain bank loans
in markets where local banks are stronger.
      To guard against the possibility that black borrowers fear rejection due to concerns
about underlying credit quality, in Columns (4)-(6) repeats the analysis of columns (1)-(3)
but includes the borrowers credit score and net worth as controls. This effectively holds
constant the hard information available to lenders. This has no qualitative impact on the
findings. Black founders continue to be more afraid of denial, not less afraid of denial, in
higher soft information environments when we condition on available hard information.
      To examine how these perceptions are correlated with financing, in Panel B of Table
IX, we report regressions of log business bank debt on race and interactions with the
local banking variables. In keeping with prior research, areas with higher local bank
  6
     We follow Cortes (2015) and Adelino, Ma and Robinson (2017) and define a local bank as one with
at least 75% of its deposits coming from that MSA. Deposit data are taken from the FDIC Summary of
Deposits. See https://www5.fdic.gov/sod/.


                                                25
concentration are areas with higher bank lending to startups. But while entrepreneurs in
areas with stronger local banks receive larger amounts of bank loans, this is an effect that
is confined almost entirely to white borrowers. Comparing the main effect of local bank
share with the interaction term between race and local bank share suggests that the effect
of stronger local banks is almost zero for black-owned businesses.
   As a further check, we also examine whether the competitiveness of the local banking
market affects our results. A more competitive local banking market could make it more
likely that black borrowers obtained loans in those markets by increasing a borrower's
ability to shop for a loan. These results are presented in the Appendix. Here, we also
find no impact on the black dummy variable after including a Herfindahl index of local
banking competition.
   In sum, areas with stronger local banks are areas where banks are perceived, and
indeed act, more favorably towards startups. But there is no evidence that areas with
stronger local banks are areas where black-owned businesses have an easier time raising
capital. Black founders are not less afraid of loan denial in these markets, nor do they
receive larger amounts of capital in these markets. The pro-startup effects of a strong
local banking community do not appear to accrue to minority business founders.

6.2   Historical Inequality and Racial Bias

Because contemporaneous measures of inequality are likely to be correlated with con-
temporaneous business conditions, we use a measure of historical inequality obtained
from Braggion, Dwarkasing, and Ongena (2015). They instrument current measures of
income inequality at the MSA level with data on the historical distribution of farm plot-
sizes in 1890. Braggion, Dwarkasing and Ongena (2015) show that this historical distri-
bution of plot sizes in 1890 is highly correlated with current measures of inequality and
use this measure to show that more historically unequal regions have lower rates of self-
employment. Based on the fact that areas with high degree of skewness in the historical
size distribution of landholdings are areas in which slavery was common, we build on
their insight and ask whether racial differences in borrowing attitudes and outcomes are

                                            26
more pronounced in these areas by exploring interactions of the Gini coefficient with the
business owner's race.
   The main idea is to ask whether perceptions of lending outcomes are different in areas
with high historical inequality. The first three columns of Table X indicate that they are.
In Panel A, we report regression results for the fear of denial on race, the historical Gini
coefficient, and the race/gini interaction, along with all the variables listed in Table IV.
Local areas with high levels of historical inequality have much higher levels of the fear
of denial among black entrepreneurs relative to white entrepreneurs than areas with low
levels of inequality. In columns (4) through (6), we repeat the analysis in the first three
columns but include the business credit score as an independent variable. The results are
qualitatively identical.
   In Panel B of Table X, we report a probit analysis for unmet capital need on race,
the historical Gini coefficient, and the race/gini interaction. Regions with high levels of
historical inequality have higher average levels of respondents reporting that they have
unmet capital need, and these effects are more pronounced among black borrowers in
areas with high inequality. As in Panel (A), this conclusion holds even when we include
the business credit score as a control variable in Columns (4) through (6).

6.3   Contemporary Inequality and Racial Bias

Next we turn to a contemporaneous measure of potential discrimination that varies re-
gionally and is likely to be correlated with racial bias, but not necessarily with contem-
poraneous business conditions. Views about interracial marriage and resulting actual
rates of interracial marriage are likely to be associated with racial prejudice. Racial preju-
dice measured along other dimensions and wage disparities are higher and when views
against interracial marriage are more negative (Charles and Guryan 2008). Thus, a find-
ing of lower levels of fear of denial and unmet capital needs in geographical areas with
high interracial marriage rates provides evidence that is at least consistent with black
entrepreneurs perceiving and facing racial bias in lending markets.
   To create regional interracial marriage rates we use Census 2000 5 Percent PUMS mi-

                                             27
crodata. We condition the sample on married couples that involve at least one black or
white partner.7 At the state level, we calculate the percentage of blacks who have white
marital partners. We then normalize the interracial marriage rate by the probability of
marriage to a white partner that would occur if this were random. For example, if 10 per-
cent of blacks are married to white partners and the population is 90 percent white then
                                                    0.10
the normalized interracial marriage rate is         0.90
                                                         =0.11,   whereas the normalized interracial
marriage rate for an area with 10 percent of blacks married to whites and a population
that is 70 percent white would have a higher normalized rate (0.14) because the underly-
ing probability of an interracial marriage for a black is lower.8
        Table XI reports the same set of specifications as Table X. In Panel A, we report regres-
sion results for the fear of denial on race, the interracial marriage rate coefficient, and the
race/marriage interaction, along with all the variables listed in Table IV.
        Local areas with high levels of interracial marriage have much lower levels of fear
of denial among black entrepreneurs relative to white entrepreneurs than areas with low
levels of interracial marriage. In Panel B of Table XI, we report a probit analysis for unmet
capital need on race, the interracial marriage coefficient, and the race/marriage interac-
tion. Regions with high levels of interracial marriage have lower average levels of unmet
capital need among black borrowers relative to white borrowers. Overall, fear of denial
and unmet capital are lower among black entrepreneurs relative to white entrepreneurs
in areas where interracial marriage is higher, and thus potentially racial bias is lower.


7        What if Black-owned Startups Looked Like White-Owned
         Ones?

The final part of our analysis asks how much of the racial gap in funding documented
above would disappear if black-owned startups had similar observable characteristics to
white-owned startups. To explore this, we use a technique pioneered by Blinder (1973)
    7
     We use the Census microdata to match heads of households to their spouses using household identifier
codes.
   8
     The normalization also results in similar rates when the focus is shifted to the percentage of whites
married to blacks. In these two examples, we would have 1.11 and 1.43 percent of whites married to blacks,
with the same normalized interracial marriage rates of 0.11 and 0.14.


                                                   28
and Oaxaca (1973) that decomposes the inter-group differences in a dependent variable
into those due to different observable characteristics across groups (sometime referred to
as the endowment effect) and those due to different "prices" of characteristics of groups.
Consider a regression Y = X +           with group means of the independent variables for
                                            ¯ B and X
the black and white subpopulations given by X       ¯ W . To implement the standard

Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition, we begin by writing the inter-group difference in the av-
erage value of a dependent variable, Y, as:

                         Y    ¯B = X
                         ¯W - Y    ¯W - X
                                        ¯B ^W + X¯B ^W - ^B                                  (1)

                ¯W - X
The first term, X    ¯B ^W , reflects the part of the inter-group difference that can be at-

tributed to differences in the group averages of the independent variables X --differences
in observables. The second term reflects the different "prices" or factor loadings of the
characteristics across the two groups.
      There are two issues associated with implementing Equation 1. The first concerns
how to deal with the second term of the equation, X¯B ^W - ^B . This "unexplained"

component of the decomposition partly captures contributions from group differences in
unobserved characteristics. This part is sensitive to the choice of omitted characteristics
making the results difficult to interpret. Another issue that arises is the "index" problem
is that the decomposition itself can either be written using coefficient weights  W or  B .9
      To deal with this issue, we use an alternative method developed by Oaxaca and Ran-
som (2004), which is to weight the first term of the decomposition expression using coef-
ficient estimates from a pooled sample of the two groups. Following this approach, we
calculate the decompositions by using coefficient estimates from regressions that includes
a sample of all racial groups. We thus calculate the first term in the decompositions as:

                                          ¯W - X
                                          X    ¯B ^                                          (2)

where X j are means of firm characteristics of race j, ^ is a vector of pooled coefficient

  9                                                         ¯W - Y
      Note that an alternative formulation of Equation 1 is Y         ¯W - X
                                                                 ¯B = X    ¯B ^B + X¯
                                                                                    W ^W - ^B .




                                               29
estimates, and j = W or B for white or black, respectively.
       We report estimates using pooled estimates from a regression that includes both white
and black observations (Oaxaca and Ransom 1994). It is becoming increasingly popular
when studying racial differences to use the full sample of all races to estimate the coeffi-
cients (Fairlie and Robb 2007). This version of the pooled sample is advantageous in that
it incorporates the full market response and does not exclude other racial groups. The
full set of racial and ethnic dummies in the regression specification are included to allow
us to remove any influence on the coefficients from racial differences that are correlated
with any of the explanatory variables.
       Table XII reports Blinder/Oaxaca decompositions of the difference in business size in
the seventh year after startup, which is the final year of the KFS.10 The top panel of Ta-
ble XII shows that the accumulated difference in business size by the end of the survey is
about $336,000. Around one-half of this difference can be explained with observable char-
acteristics. The lower panel shows how much can be attributable to each set of observable
characteristics.
       Roughly speaking, the explanatory components of this difference can be grouped into
three equally sized categories. About one-third of the difference is attributable to differ-
ences in business credit scores. Another one-third is attributable to differences in founder
net worth. And the final one-third is attributable to all other observable characteristics:
gender, founder education and work experience (collectively labeled human capital), as
well as business characteristics such as incorporation status, whether it generates a prod-
uct or service, whether it operates in or outside the home, and whether it owns intellectual
property.
       Given that the average black-owned business is around $200,000 in size in year 7,
assigning average white characteristics to an average black-owned business would result
in it being about seventy-five percent larger. Merely assigning white credit scores to a
black-owned business would result in a business about 25% larger. On the one hand, to
  10
    Similar decompositions for individual sources of capital and for individual years mirrors the results
presented here and are available from the authors upon request.



                                                   30
the extent that this score can be improved by better financial management, rather than
simply being a manifestation of circumstances that are difficult to control, these results
suggest that improving credit scores would have a non-trivial impact on the racial gap
in funding. These results also illustrate that about half the difference in size cannot be
explained by observables, which illustrates the importance of attitudes and perceptions
by and about black borrowers in credit markets.


8    Conclusion

This paper uses confidential, restricted-access microdata from the KFS and matched ad-
ministrative data on credit scores to explore racial inequality in access to capital among
startups. Our analysis of detailed financial data available in the KFS and panel data fol-
lowing startups through the first seven years of existence provides several novel find-
ings. Black entrepreneurs start businesses at a substantially smaller scale than white en-
trepreneurs, and while the disparity in later-stage capital injections narrows over time,
they continue to take on less capital in the early years of the firm's operation than white
entrepreneurs. Thus, initial funding differences persist. We also find that black en-
trepreneurs access less outside debt in the founding year and in the years that follow,
which is by the far the largest cause of disparities in total financial capital. Alternative
sources of capital such as loans from friends and family, personal equity and credit cards
also do little to attenuate these disparities. Black-owned startups have lower levels of all
sources of funding than do white-owned startups.
    These differences in financial capital use do not appear to be due to differences in the
need for capital between black and white entrepreneurs. Black startups report substan-
tially higher levels of loan denials and overall unmet need for capital than white startups,
even after controlling for differences in credit scores and founder wealth. Moreover, in-
dustry differences, which should represent first-order differences in need for capital do
not explain racial disparities. The inclusion of detailed, potentially endogenous business
characteristics such as goals for growth and type of business also has little effect on the



                                             31
racial differences we find providing further evidence against need differences.
       Focusing on supply-side channels, we find that racial differences in financial capital
cannot be attributed entirely to white lenders looking unfavorably upon black borrowers.
There are large differences in credit worthiness between black and white entrepreneurs.
Detailed administrative data on credit ratings linked to all KFS businesses provides the
first evidence in the literature of extensive differences in creditworthiness between black
and white startups and their effects on financing outcomes. Our analysis also reveals that
the relatively low credit scores for black business owners explain a substantial amount of
the gaps in both financing at startup and in the years after startup. These results imply
that a great deal of the capital investment differences between black- and white-owned
businesses is the result of persistent differences in the founder's financial health that are
present at the very inception of the firm. This connects our findings to an increasing
concern over inequality in household finance and financial literacy and suggests inter-
esting connections between household financial planning, behavioral finance, race and
entrepreneurship.
       At the same time, on the demand side our evidence clearly indicates an enduring be-
lief among even the most credit-worthy black borrowers that they will be turned away
by banks. The fact that many well-qualified black entrepreneurs do not apply for credit,
even when they feel they need it, because they anticipate being denied credit suggests
that overcoming differences between black and white borrowers is not simply a matter
of expanding the supply of credit available to lower income borrowers. Interestingly,
we also find that simply increasing the strength of local banks is unlikely to help ­ al-
though white-owned startups receive large amounts of bank debt on average in areas
                                                                      11
with stronger local banks black-owned startups do not.                     Getting to the root cause of
racial differences in the way that new businesses are financed likely requires changes in
perceptions and financial planning behaviors as much as it requires augmenting the sup-
ply of credit to traditionally underserved borrowers.

  11
     Further increases in credit card access might help reduce disparities (Chatterji and Seamans 2012), but
this source provides only high interest borrowing which might be prohibitive for larger borrowing needs.


                                                    32
References
 [1] Adelino, M. , Ma, S. and Robinson, D. (2017), Firm Age, Investment Opportunities,
     and Job Creation. The Journal of Finance, 72: 999-1038. doi:10.1111/jofi.12495

 [2] Altonji, J. G., and Pierret, C. R. (2001). Employer learning and statistical discrimina-
     tion. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(1), 313-350.

 [3] Ballou, J., Barton, T., DesRoches, D., Potter, F., Reedy, E.J., Robb, A., Shane, S. and
     Zhao, Z. (2008). Kauffman Firm Survey: Results from the Baseline and First Follow-
     Up Surveys. Kauffman Foundation.

 [4] Bates, Timothy. "The changing nature of minority business: A comparative analysis
     of Asian, Non-Minority and Black owned businesses." The Review of Black Political
     Economy (1989): 25-42.

 [5] Bates, Timothy. "Commercial bank financing of white and black owned small busi-
     ness start-ups." Quarterly Review of Economics and Business (1991): 64-80.

 [6] Bates, Timothy and Alicia Robb (2014). "Has the Community Reinvestment Act In-
     creased Loan Availability Among Small Businesses Operating in Minority Neigh-
     borhoods?" Urban Studies, May, pp. 1-20.

 [7] Berger, Allen, Geraldo Cerquiero, and Maria Fabiana Penas (2014). "Market size
     structure and small business lending: Are crisis times different from normal times?"
     Review of Finance 19(5): 1965-1995.

 [8] Berger, Allen, Nathan Miller, Mitchell Petersen, Raghuram Rajan, and Jeremy Stein.
     2005. "Does function follow organizational form? Evidence from the lending prac-
     tices of large and small banks." Journal of Financial Economics, 76(2): 237-269.

 [9] Blanchflower, David G., P. Levine and D. Zimmerman. 2003. "Discrimination in the
     small business credit market", Review of Economics and Statistics, November, 85(4),
     pp. 930-943.

[10] Blinder, Alan S. 1973. "Wage Discrimination: Reduced Form and Structural Vari-
     ables." Journal of Human Resources 8: 436-455.

[11] Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2007. "Report to the Congress on
     Credit Scoring and Its Effects on the Availability and Affordability of Credit."

[12] Bone, Sterling A., Glenn Christensen and Jerome Williams. 2014. "Rejected, Shack-
     led, and Alone: The Impact of Systemic Restricted Choice on Minority Consumers'
     Construction of Self" Journal of Consumer Research 41. 451­474.

[13] Borjas, George J. 1999. "The Wage Structure and Self-Selection into Self-
     Employment." Working paper. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University.

[14] Bostic, R. W. and K. P. Lampani. 1999. "Racial Differences in Patterns of Small Busi-
     ness Finance: The Importance of Local Geography," Proceedings of the Conference
     on Business Access to Capital and Credit, August, 149-179.

                                             33
[15] Boston, Thomas D. 1999. "Generating Jobs Through African American Business De-
     velopment", in J. Whitehead and C. Harris, eds. Readings in Black Political Economy
     (Dubuque: Kendall-Hunt)

[16] Boston, Thomas D. 2006. "Black Patronage of Black-owned startups and Black Em-
     ployment" in J. Whitehead, J. Stewart and C. Conrad (eds). African Americans in the
     United States (Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc).

[17] Bradford, William D., and Alfred E. Osborne. 1976. "The entrepreneurship decision
     and black economic development." The American Economic Review 66.2: 316-319.

[18] Bradford, William D. 2003. "The Wealth Dynamics of Entrepreneurship for Black and
     White Families in the U.S.," Review of Income and Wealth, 49(1): 89-116.

[19] Brickley, James, James Link, and Clifford Smith. 2003. "Boundaries of the Firm: Evi-
     dence from the Banking Industry." Journal of Financial Economics, 70(3): 351-383.

[20] Cavalluzzo, Ken, Linda Cavalluzzo, and John Wolken. 2002. "Competition, Small
     Business Financing, and Discrimination: Evidence from a New Survey," Journal of
     Business, Vol. 75(4): 641-679.

[21] Cavalluzzo, Ken and John Wolken. 2005. "Small Business Loan Turndowns, Personal
     Wealth and Discrimination." Journal of Business, 78(6): 2153-2177.

[22] Charles, Kerwin Kofi, and Jonathan Guryan. (2008). "Prejudice and wages: an em-
     pirical assessment of Becker?s The Economics of Discrimination." Journal of Political
     Economy, 116(5): 773-809.

[23] Charles, Kerwin Kofi, and Jonathan Guryan. (2011). "Studying discrimination: Fun-
     damental challenges and recent progress." Annual Review of Economics, 3(1), 479-
     511.

[24] Chatterji, Aaron K., and Robert C. Seamans. 2012. "Entrepreneurial finance, credit
     cards, and race." Journal of Financial Economics 106(1): 182-195.

[25] Cole, R. A. (1999). "Availability of credit to small and minority-owned businesses:
     Evidence from the 1993 National Survey of Small Business Finances."

[26] Cole, Rebel A., and Tatyana Sokolyk. 2013. "How do start-up firms finance their
     assets? Evidence from the Kauffman Firm Surveys."

[27] Cortes, Kristle R., 2015, "Rebuilding after disaster strikes: How local lenders aid in
     the recovery," Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Working Paper.

[28] Dougal, Casey, Pengjie Gao, Bill Mayhew and Chris Parsons, 2017. "What's in a
     (School) Name? Racial Discrimination in Higher Education Bond Markets." Working
     paper.

[29] Fairlie, Robert W.,Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman. 2015. "Behind the GATE Ex-
     periment: Evidence on Effects of and Rationales for Subsidized Entrepreneurship
     Training," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(2): 125-61.


                                            34
[30] Fairlie, Robert W., and Alicia M. Robb. 2007. "Why are Black-owned startups Less
     Successful than White-Owned Businesses: The Role of Families, Inheritances, and
     Business Human Capital," Journal of Labor Economics, 25(2): 289-323.

[31] Fairlie, Robert W., and Alicia M. Robb. 2008. "Race and Entrepreneurial Success:
     Black-, Asian-, and White-Owned Businesses in the United States," Cambridge: MIT
     Press.

[32] Farhat, Joseph B., and Alicia Robb. "Applied survey data analysis using Stata: The
     Kauffman firm survey data." (2014).

[33] Haltiwanger, John, Ron Jarmin and Javier Miranda. 2013. "Who Creates Jobs? Small
     vs. Large vs. Young." Review of Economics and Statistics, 347-361.

[34] Hurst, Erik and Benjamin Pugsley. 2011. "What do Small Businesses Do?" NBER
     Working Paper #17041.

[35] Kerr, William R., and Ramana Nanda. 2011. "Financing constraints and en-
     trepreneurship." Handbook of Research on Innovation and Entrepreneurship eds.
     David B. Audretsch, Oliver Falck, Stephan Heblich and Adam Leder: 88.

[36] Koellinger, Phillipp, and Maria Minniti. 2006. "Not for lack of trying: American en-
     trepreneurship in black and white," Small Business Economics 27(1): 59-79.

[37] Mitchell, Karlyn, and Douglas Pearce. 2011 "Lending technologies, lending special-
     ization, and minority access to small-business loans." Small Business Economics 37,
     no. 3: 277-304.

[38] Oaxaca, Ronald. 1973. "Male-Female Wage Differentials in Urban Labor Markets,"
     International Economic Review, 14 (October), 693-709.

[39] Oaxaca, Ronald, and Michael Ransom. 1994. "On Discrimination and the Decompo-
     sition of Wage Differentials," Journal of Econometrics, 61, 5-21.

[40] Parker, Simon C. (2009). The Economics of Entrepreneurship. Cambridge: Cam-
     bridge University Press.

[41] Petersen, Mitchell and Raghuram Rajan, 2002. "Does Distance Still Matter? The In-
     formation Revolution in Small Business Lending," Journal of Finance 57(6): 2533-
     2570.

[42] Robb, Alicia, et al. "An overview of the Kauffman Firm Survey: Results from the
     2004-2008." Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation Research Paper (2010).

[43] Robb, Alicia and David Robinson, "The Capital Structure Decisions of New Firms."
     Review of Financial Studies, Vol 27, No 1, 2014.

[44] Stangler, Dane, Inara Tareque, and Arnobio Morelix. "Trends in Venture Capital,
     Angel Investments, and Crowdfunding across the Fifty Largest US Metropolitan Ar-
     eas." Angel Investments, and Crowdfunding across the Fifty Largest US Metropoli-
     tan Areas (December 1, 2016) (2016).


                                           35
[45] Simoes, Nadia, Nuno Crespo, and Sandrina B. Moreira. "Individual determinants
     of self-employment entry: What do we really know?." Journal of economic surveys
     30.4 (2016): 783-806.

[46] U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2014. Table A-2. Employment status of the civilian
     population by race, sex, and age, http://www.bls.gov/news.release/empsit.t02.htm

[47] U.S. Census Bureau. 2012. Wealth and Asset Ownership: Table 1. Median Value of
     Assets for Households, by Type of Asset Owned and Selected Characteristics: 2011,
     http://www.census.gov/people/wealth/

[48] U.S. Census Bureau. 2015. 2012 Survey of Business Owners: Company Summary

[49] U.S. Census Bureau. 2016. Income and Poverty in the United States: 2015, In-
     come and Earnings Summary Measures by Selected Characteristics: 2014 and 2015,
     http://www.census.gov/library/publications/2016/demo/p60-256.html

[50] U.S. Census Bureau. 2017. Wealth, Asset Ownership, & Debt of Households Detailed
     Tables: 2013, https://www.census.gov/data/tables/2013/demo/wealth/wealth-
     asset-ownership.html.

[51] U.S. Census Bureau. 1997. 1992 Economic Census: Characteristics of Business Own-
     ers. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.

[52] van der Sluis, J., van Praag, M., and Vijverberg, W. (2005), "Education and En-
     trepreneurship in Industrialized Countries: A Meta-Analysis," World Bank Eco-
     nomic Review, 19(2): 225-261.

[53] Walstad, William B. and Marilyn L. Kourilsky. 1998. "Entrepreneurial Attitudes and
     Knowledge of Black Youth," Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 23(2): 5-18.




                                          36
          Figure 1: Racial Differences in Wealth in the Kauffman Firm Survey

                                           NetWorthDistribution byRace
                                    U.S.Population (SIPP)andStartupOwners(KFS)
0.7




0.6




0.5




0.4




0.3




0.2




0.1




 0
        1st+2ndQuartile(1-44%)                           3rdQuartile(45-70%)                             4thQuartile(71-99%)
               <$50,000                                    $50,000-249,999                                   $250,000+

      Total Population   Total StartupOwners   WhitePopulation    WhiteStartupOwners   BlackPopulation       BlackStartupOwners




                                                        37
Figure 2: Racial Differences in Sources of Initial Capital for Startups

 120000

 100000

  80000

  60000

  40000

  20000

     0
          Owner's   Informal   Formal     Owner    Informal   Formal Total
           Equity    Equity    Equity     Debt       Debt      Debt Financial
                                                                     Capital 

                               Overall   White    Black




                                         38
Figure 3: Racial Differences in Sources of New Capital for Startups, Years 1-3

     80000
     70000
     60000
     50000
     40000
     30000
     20000
     10000
         0
             Owner's   Formal   Informal   Owner    Informal   Formal  Total
             Equity    Equity    Equity    Debt       Debt      Debt Financial
                                                                      Capital 

                                 Overall   White   Black




                                           39
         Figure 4: Racial Differences in the Evolution of Total Assets over Time

400000


350000


300000


250000


200000


150000


100000


 50000


    0
           0         1         2           3             4     5       6           7

                                     ALL       White   Black




                                               40
                     Table I: Racial Differences in Sources of Funding

This table reports survey-weighted mean values by race for broad funding categories. The
components of the classifications (Owner, Insider, Outsider/Debt, Equity) are described
in detail in Appendix Table A.1. The final column reports p-values from the t-test of the
difference between black- and white-owned businesses.

                          Overall Mean     White Mean      Black Mean     p-value(diff)
KFS Initial Survey Year
Owner's Equity                    33,078          34,426         19,562       0.00
Inside Equity                      2,117           2,139            440       0.14
Outside Equity                    16,768          18,543            536       0.10
Owner Debt                         4,890           5,228          1,010       0.05
Inside Debt                        6,663           7,195          2,849       0.17
Outside Debt                      51,680          56,663         10,809       0.01
Total Financial Capital           99,344         106,720         35,205       0.00
Leverage Ratio                      0.19            0.19           0.12       0.00

KFS Survey Years 1-3
Owner's Equity                    13,047          13,308          8,555       0.13
Outside Equity                    14,864          16,499            551       0.07
Inside Equity                      1,206           1,284            664       0.48
Owner Debt                         4,200           4,336          2,297       0.15
Inside Debt                        5,385           5,713          2,491       0.49
Outside Debt                      51,147          54,813         14,883       0.19
Total Financial Capital           69,256          72,958         29,107       0.00
Leverage Ratio                      0.29            0.30           0.21       0.00

KFS Survey Years 4-7
Owner's Equity                     8,327           7,944          4,678       0.42
Outside Equity                     7,663           8,339          1,227       0.20
Inside Equity                      1,037           1,047            254       0.63
Owner Debt                         3,618           3,671          3,482       0.42
Inside Debt                        4,898           5,176            979       0.21
Outside Debt                      48,616          49,809         20,265       0.64
Total Financial Capital           58,684          59,825         27,348       0.54
Leverage Ratio                      0.29            0.29           0.20       0.00




                                            41
Table II: Initial Differences in Log Total Capital
This table models variation in the amount of total capital from all sources, include founder, insider and outside debt and
equity. All columns include 2-digit NAICS industry fixed effects and controls for gender and other racial categories (Asian, Hispanic,
and Other). Missing or negative net worth is the omitted category. Column (7) includes CBSA fixed effects, while Column (8) includes
zipcode-level fixed effects. Survey weights are used in Columns (1)-(7), but not in Column (8). One, two and three asterisks denote
statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1% level, respectively.

                                         (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)         (7)         (8)

 Black-owned Startup                  -0.731***   -0.599***   -0.485*** -0.512*** -0.496*** -0.501*** -0.502*** -0.857***
                                       (0.113)     (0.111)     (0.110)   (0.109)   (0.111)    (0.102)  (0.114)   (0.330)
 Credit Score                                     0.021***    0.020*** 0.020*** 0.020*** 0.012*** 0.012*** 0.010***
                                                   (0.002)     (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.002)  (0.002)   (0.004)
 Net Worth: Up to 50K                                         -0.517*** -0.498*** -0.504*** -0.313*** -0.288**   -0.465*
                                                               (0.119)   (0.121)   (0.120)    (0.109)  (0.127)   (0.278)
 Net Worth: 50-100K                                           -0.581*** -0.566*** -0.566*** -0.392*** -0.332**    -0.050
                                                               (0.130)   (0.130)   (0.129)    (0.116)  (0.131)   (0.283)
 Net Worth: 100-250K                                            -0.167    -0.151    -0.153    -0.061    -0.035    -0.167
                                                               (0.108)   (0.108)   (0.108)    (0.103)  (0.114)   (0.241)
 Net Worth: Over 250K                                         0.360*** 0.332*** 0.330*** 0.277***      0.232**    0.099
                                                               (0.100)   (0.102)   (0.101)    (0.095)  (0.104)   (0.186)
 Previous Industry Experience                                             -0.007    -0.006    -0.006   -0.008*    -0.005
                                                                         (0.004)   (0.004)    (0.004)  (0.004)   (0.008)
 Experience Outside Industry                                               0.001     0.002  0.011*** 0.011***     0.012
                                                                         (0.004)   (0.004)    (0.003)  (0.004)   (0.008)
 Some College                                                              0.051     0.048     0.001     0.041    0.217
                                                                         (0.109)   (0.108)    (0.101)  (0.115)   (0.258)
 College Deg.                                                              0.113     0.096     0.002     0.023    0.009
                                                                         (0.121)   (0.120)    (0.115)  (0.128)   (0.276)
 Grad. Deg.                                                              0.306**   0.310**     0.139     0.182    0.028
                                                                         (0.140)   (0.139)    (0.131)  (0.143)   (0.288)
 Prev. Startup Exp.                                                     0.289*** 0.264***      0.105     0.109    0.100
                                                                         (0.073)   (0.073)    (0.068)  (0.075)   (0.148)
 Makes Product                                                                    0.344*** 0.219***    0.211**   0.321**
                                                                                   (0.083)    (0.076)  (0.085)   (0.162)
 Intel. Property                                                                   0.216**     0.083     0.017   0.372**
                                                                                   (0.091)    (0.081)  (0.090)   (0.173)
 Home-based                                                                                 -0.728*** -0.699*** -0.825***
                                                                                              (0.075)  (0.082)   (0.167)
 Part time Bus.                                                                             -0.821*** -0.861*** -0.854***
                                                                                              (0.085)  (0.091)   (0.179)
 Incorporated                                                                                0.658*** 0.705*** 0.506***
                                                                                              (0.071)  (0.082)   (0.170)
 Employment                                                                                  0.060*** 0.061*** 0.045***
                                                                                              (0.012)  (0.012)   (0.009)

 Observations                          4,124        4,038       4,038       3,975       3,975       3,840       3,590        1,214
 R-squared                             0.055        0.097       0.117       0.131       0.139       0.281       0.394        0.624




                                                                 42
Table III: Initial Differences in Total Outside Debt
This table models variation in the log of the amount of total outside debt. All columns include 2-digit NAICS industry fixed
effects and controls for gender and other racial categories (Asian, Hispanic, and Other). Missing or negative net worth is the omitted
category. Column (7) includes CBSA fixed effects, while Column (8) includes zipcode-level fixed effects. Survey weights are used
in Columns (1)-(7), but not in Column (8). One, two and three asterisks denote statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1% level,
respectively.

                                         (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)         (7)         (8)

 Black-owned Startup                  -0.654***   -0.544***   -0.442*** -0.438*** -0.419*** -0.431*** -0.417*** -0.922***
                                       (0.111)     (0.109)      (0.111)  (0.112)   (0.112)    (0.110)  (0.121)   (0.355)
 Credit Score                                     0.019***    0.018*** 0.018*** 0.018*** 0.013*** 0.013*** 0.011***
                                                   (0.002)      (0.002)  (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.002)  (0.002)   (0.004)
 Net Worth: Up to 50K                                         -0.406*** -0.377*** -0.380*** -0.247**   -0.216*    -0.171
                                                                (0.121)  (0.122)   (0.122)    (0.119)  (0.129)   (0.299)
 Net Worth: 50-100K                                            -0.296** -0.273** -0.268**     -0.133    -0.100    0.120
                                                                (0.130)  (0.130)   (0.129)    (0.126)  (0.137)   (0.305)
 Net Worth: 100-250K                                            -0.044    -0.029    -0.032      0.032    0.099    -0.245
                                                                (0.125)  (0.125)   (0.126)    (0.124)  (0.137)   (0.260)
 Net Worth: Over 250K                                         0.328***   0.305**   0.306**   0.258**   0.207*     0.150
                                                                (0.117)  (0.121)   (0.120)    (0.119)  (0.125)   (0.201)
 Previous Industry Experience                                             -0.003    -0.003    -0.004    -0.003    -0.006
                                                                         (0.005)   (0.005)    (0.005)  (0.005)   (0.009)
 Experience Outside Industry                                               0.005     0.005   0.010**   0.011**    0.013
                                                                         (0.004)   (0.004)    (0.004)  (0.004)   (0.008)
 Some College                                                              0.069     0.072      0.032    0.101    -0.012
                                                                         (0.124)   (0.124)    (0.122)  (0.133)   (0.278)
 College Deg.                                                              0.048     0.045    -0.046     0.060    -0.124
                                                                         (0.136)   (0.136)    (0.136)  (0.147)   (0.297)
 Grad. Deg.                                                              0.318**   0.337**      0.208    0.263    -0.076
                                                                         (0.158)   (0.159)    (0.158)  (0.167)   (0.310)
 Prev. Startup Exp.                                                     0.229*** 0.214***       0.093    0.133    -0.238
                                                                         (0.082)   (0.082)    (0.082)  (0.087)   (0.159)
 Makes Product                                                                    0.337*** 0.258***    0.206**    0.198
                                                                                   (0.092)    (0.090)  (0.098)   (0.175)
 Intel. Property                                                                     0.003     -0.125   -0.141    -0.130
                                                                                   (0.101)    (0.097)  (0.103)   (0.187)
 Home-based                                                                                 -0.385*** -0.322*** -0.464**
                                                                                              (0.083)  (0.090)   (0.180)
 Part time Bus.                                                                             -0.326*** -0.368*** -0.659***
                                                                                              (0.089)  (0.092)   (0.193)
 Incorporated                                                                                0.460*** 0.479***    0.249
                                                                                              (0.083)  (0.093)   (0.183)
 Employment                                                                                  0.075*** 0.072*** 0.068***
                                                                                              (0.013)  (0.012)   (0.010)

 Observations                          4,124        4,038       4,038       3,975       3,975       3,840       3,590        1,214
 R-squared                             0.032        0.064       0.074       0.082       0.086       0.155       0.310        0.585




                                                                 43
Table IV: Initial Differences in Total Business Debt
This table models variation in the amount of total debt for the business. All columns include 2-digit NAICS industry fixed
effects and controls for gender and other racial categories (Asian, Hispanic, and Other). Missing or negative net worth is the omitted
category. Column (7) includes CBSA fixed effects, while Column (8) includes zipcode-level fixed effects. Survey weights are used
in Columns (1)-(7), but not in Column (8). One, two and three asterisks denote statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1% level,
respectively.

                                         (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)         (7)         (8)

 Black-owned Startup                  -0.339***   -0.302***   -0.251***   -0.239***   -0.222***   -0.212*** -0.200*** -0.423*
                                       (0.044)     (0.044)     (0.045)     (0.047)     (0.047)      (0.048)  (0.055)   (0.218)
 Credit Score                                     0.006***    0.006***    0.006***    0.006***     0.003**  0.004***   0.006**
                                                   (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)  (0.001)   (0.003)
 Net Worth: Up to 50K                                           -0.005       0.009       0.006       0.072    -0.018    0.146
                                                               (0.079)     (0.079)     (0.079)      (0.079)  (0.073)   (0.184)
 Net Worth: 50-100K                                             -0.074      -0.060      -0.055       0.005   -0.106*    -0.056
                                                               (0.070)     (0.071)     (0.071)      (0.072)  (0.060)   (0.187)
 Net Worth: 100-250K                                            -0.057      -0.045      -0.048      -0.005    -0.050    -0.179
                                                               (0.074)     (0.073)     (0.074)      (0.075)  (0.077)   (0.159)
 Net Worth: Over 250K                                         0.239***    0.235***    0.236***    0.210***   0.182**    0.141
                                                               (0.079)     (0.082)     (0.081)      (0.081)  (0.083)   (0.123)
 Previous Industry Experience                                               -0.002      -0.002      -0.003    -0.003    -0.003
                                                                           (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.003)  (0.003)   (0.006)
 Experience Outside Industry                                                -0.001      -0.001      -0.000    -0.001    -0.001
                                                                           (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.002)  (0.002)   (0.005)
 Some College                                                               -0.119      -0.115     -0.144*     0.009    -0.219
                                                                           (0.076)     (0.075)      (0.075)  (0.075)   (0.170)
 College Deg.                                                               -0.033      -0.032      -0.082     0.100    -0.071
                                                                           (0.087)     (0.087)      (0.086)  (0.086)   (0.182)
 Grad. Deg.                                                                  0.092       0.112       0.038     0.149    -0.059
                                                                           (0.105)     (0.105)      (0.105)  (0.096)   (0.190)
 Prev. Startup Exp.                                                        0.084*        0.074       0.012     0.024  -0.288***
                                                                           (0.051)     (0.050)      (0.050)  (0.051)   (0.097)
 Makes Product                                                                        0.279***    0.243*** 0.230***    0.217**
                                                                                       (0.059)      (0.060)  (0.060)   (0.107)
 Intel. Property                                                                        -0.050     -0.102*    -0.052   -0.190*
                                                                                       (0.066)      (0.062)  (0.058)   (0.114)
 Home-based                                                                                       -0.190*** -0.127**    -0.117
                                                                                                    (0.048)  (0.051)   (0.110)
 Part time Bus.                                                                                      0.039    -0.013    -0.127
                                                                                                    (0.056)  (0.054)   (0.118)
 Incorporated                                                                                      0.144***  0.095*     -0.003
                                                                                                    (0.050)  (0.054)   (0.112)
 Employment                                                                                        0.056*** 0.053*** 0.069***
                                                                                                    (0.011)  (0.010)   (0.006)

 Observations                          4,124        4,038       4,038       3,975       3,975       3,840       3,590        1,214
 R-squared                             0.022        0.032       0.039       0.044       0.052       0.110       0.346        0.590




                                                                 44
Table V: Later-Stage Differences in Debt
This table models variation in the amount of total debt, outside debt, and business debt for the later survey years. The re-
gression specifications mirror those in Column (6) of the previous three tables. All columns include industry fixed effects controls for
gender and other racial categories and dummy variables for the survey years. Human capital controls include education, previous
work experience and previous startup experience. Product characteristics control for whether the business sells a product or a service
(or both), and whether it has intellectual property. Firm characteristics control for whether the business is fulltime or parttime,
whether it is home-based, incorporated and has employees. Standard errors appear in parentheses below point estimates. One, two
and three asterisks denote significance at the ten, five and one per cent level, respectively.

                                              Business                             Total                             Total
                                             Bank Debt                        Outside Debt                    Financial Capital
                                        Years 1-3 Years 4-7                Years 1-3 Years 4-7               Years 1-3 Years 4-7
                                           (1)        (2)                     (3)        (4)                    (5)        (6)

 Black-owned Startup                     -0.163***        -0.084***        -0.260***          -0.122           -0.017            0.067
                                          (0.031)          (0.032)          (0.084)           (0.079)          (0.092)          (0.096)

 Controls:
 Credit Score                                Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes
 Net Worth                                   Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes
 Human Capital                               Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes
 Product Characteristics                     Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes
 Firm Characteristics                        Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes
 Industry Dummies                            Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes
 Survey-Year Dummies                         Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes

 Observations                              9,482             8,979            9,608            8,981            9,608             8,981
 R-squared                                 0.157             0.124            0.135            0.139            0.051             0.046




                                                                  45
                      Table VI: Racial Differences in Attitudes Towards Formal Debt

This table reports survey-weighted averages by racial group to questions in the KFS that capture attitudes and intentions with respect
to borrowing. "Applied for a loan" is a dummy equaling one if the respondent applied for a loan, regardless of whether the loan was
approved. "Did not apply for fear of rejection" is one for those borrowers who did not apply for a loan, but who did not only because
they anticipated the loan being denied. "Loan Always Approved" is only available for those who applied for a loan: it is a dummy for
whether the respondent received the full amount they were asking for, or whether sometimes their loans are denied or reduced in size.
"Unmet Need" is 1 if the respondent either did not apply for fear of rejection, or else applied but did not always get the full amount.
The column labeled Overall is for all respondents. The remaining columns split the sample on whether the respondent had below or
above median credit score, or whether credit scores were above the 75th percentile of observed scores across the whole sample.
                                                                                            Credit Score:
                                                    Overall          Below Median           Above Median               Above 75th
Applied for a Loan
                                        White        0.1200               0.0838                    0.1414                 0.1617
                                        Black        0.0785               0.0752                    0.0834                 0.1125

Loan Always Approved
                                        White        0.6826               0.6201                    0.7038                 0.7225
                                        Black        0.2240               0.1153                    0.3862                 0.2530

Did Not Apply For Fear of Rejection
                         White 0.1617                                     0.1666                    0.1590                 0.1497
                         Black    0.4181                                  0.4746                    0.3244                 0.3228

Unmet Need
                                        White        0.1633               0.1671                    0.1611                 0.1525
                                        Black        0.4295               0.4929                    0.3246                 0.3174




                                                                46
                                  Table VII: Race and the Demand for Capital

This table provides a multivariate analysis of the relation between founder race and the demand for capital. In Panel A, the dependent
variable is a dummy for whether the borrower did not apply for a loan for fear of denial. In Panel B, the dependent variable is a dummy
for whether they applied but were denied credit or else received less than they asked for. Human capital controls include education,
previous work experience and previous startup experience. Product characteristics control for whether the business sells a product
or a service (or both), and whether it has intellectual property. Firm characteristics control for whether the business is fulltime or
parttime, whether it is home-based, incorporated and has employees. Standard errors appear in parentheses below point estimates.
One, two and three asterisks denote significance at the ten, five and one per cent level, respectively.
                                   Panel A: Did Not Apply for Fear of Denial
                                       (1)       (2)      (3)        (4)                               (5)                 (6)

Black-owned Startup                   0.856***        0.798***       0.638***       0.621***       0.628***            0.617***
                                       (0.058)         (0.059)        (0.070)        (0.070)        (0.070)             (0.074)

Controls:
Credit Score                              No             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes                Yes
Net Worth                                 No             No             Yes             Yes            Yes                Yes
Human Capital                             No             No             No              Yes            Yes                Yes
Product Characteristics                   No             No             No              No             Yes                Yes
Firm Characteristics                      No             No             No              No             No                 Yes
Industry Dummies                          Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes                Yes
Survey-Year Dummies                       Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes                Yes

Observations                            11,380         11,337          8,982          8,878          8,878               8,620


                        Panel B: Denied Credit or Received Less than Requested
                                   (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)      (5)                                              (6)

Black-owned Startup                   0.450***        0.432***        0.275**        0.288**        0.307**            0.292**
                                       (0.101)         (0.102)        (0.124)        (0.122)        (0.122)            (0.128)

Controls:
Credit Score                              No             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes                Yes
Net Worth                                 No             No             Yes             Yes            Yes                Yes
Human Capital                             No             No             No              Yes            Yes                Yes
Product Characteristics                   No             No             No              No             Yes                Yes
Firm Characteristics                      No             No             No              No             No                 Yes
Industry Dummies                          Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes                Yes
Survey-Year Dummies                       Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes                Yes

Observations                            9,954           9,915          7,829          7,736          7,736               7,515




                                                                47
                    Table VIII: Past Borrowing and Credit Beliefs

This table explores the relation between prior loan balances and lack of access to capital by race. The
dependent variable in the first two columns is a dummy variable for whether the respondent was afraid
to apply for a loan for fear of denial. Column (1) includes all businesses that are not black-owned, while
Column (2) focuses only on black-owned startups. In columns (3) and (4), the dependent variable is a
dummy for whether the respondent reported that they were either denied credit or they received less
than they asked for: again, the columns split the samples according to the race of the founder. Prior
Accumulated Debt is the sum of all outside debt up through the previous survey round, in hundreds
of thousands of dollars. Human capital controls include education, previous work experience and
previous startup experience. Product characteristics control for whether the business sells a product or
a service (or both), and whether it has intellectual property. Firm characteristics control for whether the
business is fulltime or parttime, whether it is home-based, incorporated and has employees. Standard
errors appear in parentheses below point estimates. One, two and three asterisks denote significance at
the ten, five and one per cent level, respectively.
                                                    Fear of Denial                Denied Credit
                                                     (1)      (2)                  (3)     (4)

Prior Accumulated Debt                            0.007***       -0.011*       0.007***         -0.005
                                                   (0.002)       (0.007)        (0.002)         (0.004)

Controls:
Credit Score                                         Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
Net Worth                                            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
Human Capital                                        Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
Product Characteristics                              Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
Firm Characteristics                                 Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
Industry Dummies                                     Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
Survey-Year Dummies                                  Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes

Black-Owned Startup Sample                           No             Yes            No             Yes

Observations                                        8,209           639          7,265            405




                                                   48
           Table IX: Local Banking Conditions and Racial Differences in Access to Credit

Panel A reports Probit regressions in which the dependent variable is a dummy if the respondent answered yes to "Did Not Apply for
Fear of Rejection" or if they reported that they did not always get the full amount they asked for. Panel B reports regressions (Pooled
OLS with year dummies) in which the dependent variable is the natural log of total business debt. Local bank share is the share of
total county-level deposits held by local banks. Standard errors in parentheses, with one, two and three asterisks denoting significance
at the 10, 5 and 1percent level. Controls from Table IV included but not shown.


                  Panel A: Dependent variable is Did Not Apply for Fear of Denial
                                 (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)                                               (6)

Black-Owned Startup                    0.820***        0.815***         0.794***         0.621***        0.618***         0.591***
                                        (0.066)         (0.066)          (0.086)          (0.070)         (0.070)          (0.091)
Local Bank Share                                       -0.306***        -0.321***                        -0.241**         -0.262**
                                                        (0.116)          (0.121)                          (0.120)          (0.127)
Local Bank Share × Black                                                  0.146                                             0.192
                                                                         (0.407)                                           (0.414)

Credit Score                               No              No               No              Yes              Yes              Yes
Net Worth                                  No              No               No              Yes              Yes              Yes
Human Capital                              Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
Product Characteristics                    Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
Firm Characteristics                       Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
Industry Dummies                           Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
Survey-Year Dummies                        Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes

Observations                             8,433            8,424           8,424            8,412           8,403            8,403

                          Panel B: Dependent variable is log Business Bank Debt
                                     (1)       (2)         (3)       (4)       (5)                                            (6)

Black-Owned Startup                    -0.206***       -0.199***        -0.148*** -0.133***              -0.125***        -0.082***
                                        (0.019)         (0.019)          (0.024)   (0.020)                 (0.020)          (0.025)
Local Bank Share                                       0.327***         0.352***                          0.328***         0.350***
                                                        (0.059)          (0.063)                           (0.060)          (0.063)
Local Bank Share × Black                                                -0.360***                                          -0.309**
                                                                         (0.128)                                            (0.130)

Credit Score                               No              No               No              Yes              Yes              Yes
Net Worth                                  No              No               No              Yes              Yes              Yes
Human Capital                              Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
Product Characteristics                    Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
Firm Characteristics                       Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
Industry Dummies                           Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
Survey-Year Dummies                        Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes

Observations                            21,677           21,648           21,648          21,441           21,412           21,412
R-squared                                0.015            0.017            0.017           0.023            0.025            0.025


                                                                49
                                  Table X: Historical Inequality and Racial Bias

Panel A reports regressions (Pooled OLS with year dummies) in which the dependent variable is a dummy equaling one if the
respondent answered yes to "Did Not Apply for Fear of Rejection." The dependent variable in Panel B is a dummy equaling one if
they reported that they did not always get the full amount they asked for. Regional Historical Gini is the gini coefficient of the MSA in
1890; data from Braggion, Dwarkasing, and Ongena (2015). In each panel a constant is estimated but suppressed for brevity. Standard
errors in parentheses, with one, two and three asterisks denoting significance at the 10, 5 and 1percent level. Controls from Table IV
included but not shown.


           Panel A: Dependent Variable is Did Not Apply For Fear of Denial

Black                               0.8141***         0.7514***          0.2008            0.7605***         0.7022***
                                                                                                                  0.1819
                                     (0.058)           (0.061)           (0.276)            (0.059)           (0.061)
                                                                                                                  (0.274)
Historical Inequality                                 0.5565***         0.4507***                            0.6057***
                                                                                                                0.5056***
                                                       (0.159)           (0.166)                              (0.159)
                                                                                                                  (0.166)
Gini × Minority                                                         1.1465**                                 1.0848*
                                                                         (0.568)                                  (0.563)
Credit Score                                                                              -0.0035*** -0.0032*** -0.0032***
                                                                                            (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)
Constant                           -1.0867***        -1.3712***         -1.3198***        -0.9541*** -1.2731*** -1.2252***
                                     (0.097)           (0.133)            (0.135)           (0.099)    (0.135)    (0.137)

Observations                          11,247             9,436             9,436             11,204             9,396             9,396


                     Panel B: Dependent variable is Unmet Capital Need
                                 (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)                                            (5)               (6)

Black                               0.8323***         0.7622***          0.1579            0.7808***         0.7165***
                                                                                                                  0.1405
                                     (0.058)           (0.060)           (0.275)            (0.059)           (0.061)
                                                                                                                  (0.273)
Historical Inequality                                 0.5762***         0.4609***                            0.6239***
                                                                                                                0.5139***
                                                       (0.157)           (0.164)                              (0.157)
                                                                                                                  (0.165)
Gini × Minority                                                         1.2586**                                 1.2012**
                                                                         (0.566)                                  (0.560)
Credit Score                                                                              -0.0034*** -0.0030*** -0.0030***
                                                                                            (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)
Constant                           -1.0384***        -1.3343***         -1.2784***        -0.9091*** -1.2429*** -1.1903***
                                     (0.096)           (0.132)            (0.134)           (0.098)    (0.134)    (0.136)

Observations                          11,249             9,437             9,437             11,206             9,397             9,397




                                                                50
                Table XI: Attitudes towards Interracial Marriage and Access to Capital

Panel A reports regressions (Pooled OLS with year dummies) in which the dependent variable is a dummy equaling one if the
respondent answered yes to "Did Not Apply for Fear of Rejection." The dependent variable in Panel B is a dummy equaling one
if they reported that they did not always get the full amount they asked for. "Interracial Marriage" is the state level percentage of
black married persons who have white marital partners, scaled by the proportion of white married persons in the state. In each
panel a constant is estimated but suppressed for brevity. Standard errors in parentheses, with one, two and three asterisks denoting
significance at the 10, 5 and 1percent level. Controls from Table IV included but not shown.


          Panel A: Dependent Variable is Did Not Apply For Fear of Denial
                           (1)          (2)       (3)         (4)         (5)                                                  (6)

Black                             0.8141***        0.8105***         1.0072***         0.7605***         0.7559***
                                                                                                             0.9670***
                                   (0.058)          (0.059)           (0.101)           (0.059)           (0.060)
                                                                                                               (0.102)
Interracial Marriage                                0.2741            0.3860*                             0.2895
                                                                                                               0.4099*
                                                    (0.207)           (0.210)                             (0.210)
                                                                                                               (0.213)
Black× Interracial                                                   -2.3124**                                -2.4790**
                                                                      (0.982)                                  (0.983)
Credit Score                                                                           -0.0035*** -0.0036*** -0.0036***
                                                                                         (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)
Constant                         -1.0867***        -1.0932***        -1.1125***        -0.9541*** -0.9596*** -0.9802***
                                   (0.097)           (0.101)           (0.102)           (0.099)    (0.103)    (0.104)

Observations                        11,247           10,830            10,830            11,204            10,787            10,787


                    Panel B: Dependent variable is Unmet Capital Need
                               (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)                                         (5)              (6)

Black                             0.8323***        0.8370***         1.0509***         0.7808***         0.7848***
                                                                                                             1.0139***
                                   (0.058)          (0.059)           (0.101)           (0.059)           (0.060)
                                                                                                               (0.102)
Interracial Marriage                               0.4813**          0.6007***                           0.5034**
                                                                                                             0.6315***
                                                    (0.207)           (0.210)                             (0.210)
                                                                                                               (0.213)
Black× Interracial                                                   -2.5134**                               -2.6890***
                                                                      (0.981)                                  (0.982)
Credit Score                                                                           -0.0034*** -0.0035*** -0.0035***
                                                                                         (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)
Constant                         -1.0384***        -1.0696***        -1.0906***        -0.9091*** -0.9403*** -0.9627***
                                   (0.096)           (0.100)           (0.100)           (0.098)    (0.102)    (0.103)

Observations                        11,249           10,832            10,832            11,206            10,789            10,789




                                                               51
     Table XII: Oaxaca-Blinder Decompositions of Business Size

This table presents Oaxaca-Blinder decompositions of size differences in businesses in the
final survey year based on whether or not the founder is black. The upper panel reports
differences in the mean values of black-owned and white-owned size, expressed both in
dollars and in log size. The bottom panel decomposes the mean difference into amounts
explained by each set of independent variables. Human capital controls include education,
previous work experience and previous startup experience. Business characteristics control
for whether the business sells a product or a service (or both), whether it has intellectual
property, and whether the business is fulltime or parttime, whether it is home-based, incor-
porated and has employees.


                                                  (1)                       (2)
Average Business Size, 2011:                 Dollar Value                Log(Size)
White-Owned                                   $533,726.05                 11.693
Black-Owned                                   $197,634.84                 10.845
Difference                                    $336,091.21                  0.848

                                                  (1)                       (2)
Explanatory Components:                      Dollar Value                Log(Size)
Race and Gender                                 $5,459.03                  0.047
Human Capital                                  $40,695.11                  0.059
Business Characteristics                        $4,966.81                  0.119
Business Credit Score                          $51,105.07                  0.175
Founder Net Worth                              $59,158.65                  0.097

Total Explained                                  $161,384.67               0.5510




                                            52
A    Appendix
This appendix presents information on financing, and racial differences in owner and
business characteristics in the KFS.
    Table A.1 describes the detailed financing choices in the founding year for the firms
in our sample (2004). The detailed sources are grouped into six broad categories, based
on the source of the capital and the type of capital following Robb and Robinson (2014).
These are (owner, informal, formal)×(debt, equity). The first column, labelled "Full KFS",
includes all 4,928 firms in the Kauffman Firm Survey. For some of these firms, it cannot
be verified that they either went out of business or remain in operations, therefore in the
remaining columns we include 3,972 firms that either survived over the followup years
1-3 period or were verified as going out of business over the same period. This Column is
labelled "Analysis Sample." These two columns report means that include firms with $0
amounts of a particular source of capital. The third column, labelled "Mean if > 0" reports
the mean, in dollars, for only firms with positive amounts of that source of funding. The
number of respondents reporting a positive amount of each source of funding is reported
in the final column.
    Table A.2 provides summary statistics for key variables based on the race of the firm
owner.




                                            53
             Table A.1: Detailed Sources of Financing for All Startups in the KFS

                                                          Full   Analysis
Category                            Funding Source        KFS     Sample    Mean if > 0   Count
Owner Equity                                            33,640     31,734       40,536     3,093

Total Owner Debt:                                        4,952      5,037        15,765    1,241
            Personal Credit Card balance, owner          2,812      2,811         9,375    1,158
            Personal Credit Card balance, others         1,906        238         7,415      132
                    Personal loan, other owners            235      1,989       124,124       67

Total Insider Equity:                                    2,221      2,102        44,956     177
                                      Spouse equity        524        646        40,436      62
                                       Parent equity     1,697      1,456        42,509     126

Total Insider Debt:                                      7,257      6,362        47,873     480
                                      Family loan        2,760      2,749        29,232     327
                     Family loan to other owners         1,719        284        34,509      29
                   Personal loan to other owners           272        550        28,988      73
                            Other personal loans           649        924        81,452      45
                          Business loan by family        1,156      1,760        57,207     115
                          Business loan by owner           635         15         9,411       5
                Business loan by other employees            52         79        22,198       9

Total Outsider Equity:                                  19,257     15,935       354,540     205
                          Angels and other investors     5,148      6,350       244,707     110
                                    Business equity      6,621      3,645       321,351      56
                                       Govt. equity      5,242        798       146,624      27
                                         VC equity         701      4,804     1,162,898      26
                                       Other equity      1,546        337       187,046       8

Total Outsider Debt:                                    50,130     47,847       128,706    1,439
                               Personal bank loan       18,031     15,859        92,433      641
                      Owner business credit card        16,213      1,009         7,107      543
              Personal bank loan by other owners         5,017      1,859        80,650       92
                              Business credit card       4,227        812         6,976      452
                      Other Business credit cards        2,275        135         7,852       62
                             Business bank loans         1,591     17,075       261,358      243
                               Credit line balance       1,030      5,057        95,058      210
                          Nonbank business loan            133      3,627       214,920       72
                        Business loan from Govt.           857      1,331       154,743       34
                              Other business loan          241        231        78,281       19
                           Other individual loan           206        226        43,202       22
                                        Other debt         308        626       119,493       22

Total Financial Capital                                117,458    109,016       121,981    3,536




                                                54
                          Table A.2: Summary Statistics by Race



                              Overall Mean   White Mean    Black Mean     p-value(diff)
KFS Initial Survey Year
Female                                0.31          0.30           0.36       0.00
Yrs. Work Experience                 11.70         11.88           9.91       0.00
Yrs. Non-Work Experience             13.54         13.57          13.23       0.21
Previous Startup Experience           0.43          0.43           0.38       0.45
Attended Some College                 0.36          0.36           0.48       0.00
Graduated College                     0.30          0.31           0.24       0.05
Graduate Degree                       0.17          0.18           0.16       0.54
Credit Score                         35.99         36.50          30.47       0.00
KFS Survey Years 1-3
Female                                0.30          0.29           0.35       0.00
Yrs. Work Experience                 12.07         12.25          10.11       0.00
Yrs. Non-Work Experience             13.30         13.33          13.06       0.09
Previous Startup Experience           0.43          0.44           0.38       0.43
Attended Some College                 0.36          0.36           0.48       0.00
Graduated College                     0.31          0.32           0.26       0.00
Graduate Degree                       0.18          0.19           0.16       1.00
Credit Score                         41.39         42.27          32.28       0.00
KFS Survey Years 4-7
Female                                0.30          0.29           0.36       0.00
Yrs. Work Experience                 12.70         12.84          11.12       0.00
Yrs. Non-Work Experience             12.73         12.76          12.35       0.21
Previous Startup Experience           0.44          0.44           0.40       0.43
Attended Some College                 0.35          0.35           0.47       0.00
Graduated College                     0.33          0.34           0.26       0.00
Graduate Degree                       0.19          0.20           0.16       0.49
Credit Score                         52.88         54.51          35.80       0.00
Net Worth: Neg. or Zero               0.07          0.06           0.18       0.00
Net Worth: $1-50,000                  0.15          0.13           0.30       0.00
Net Worth: $51,000-100,000            0.14          0.14           0.16       0.01
Net Worth: $100,001-250,000           0.18          0.19           0.13       0.00
Net Worth: $250,000+                  0.39          0.42           0.16       0.00
Net Worth: Missing                    0.07          0.07           0.08       0.23




                                             55
                 Table A.3: Summary Statistics on Key Firm and Founder Characteristics
                                                                    Survey Wave:
Variable             Group      0          1          2              3        4           5          6          7

% Black                        9.1        8.8        9.0            8.4       8.1        7.9        8.4        8.4

% Survived           ALL       100        91         78             65        60         54         48         45
                              (0.0)      (0.5)      (0.8)          (0.9)     (0.9)      (0.9)      (0.9)      (0.9)
                     White     100        91         79             66        61         55         49         45
                              (0.0)      (0.6)      (0.8)          (1.0)     (1.0)      (1.0)      (1.0)      (0.9)
                     Black     100        88         73             56        50         45         42         40
                              (0.0)      (2.2)      (3.0)          (3.4)     (3.3)      (3.2)      (3.1)      (3.0)

Total Assets         ALL      152917     223911     274108      296380       306185     340459     340769     343096
                             ( 12797)   ( 17935)   ( 22636)    ( 26416)     ( 27481)   ( 30976)   ( 31799)   ( 31094)
                     White    166211     239464     277122      311040       318626     356439     348634     360265
                             ( 14269)   ( 19894)   ( 23123)    ( 28931)     ( 30178)   ( 33909)   ( 33568)   ( 34125)
                     Black     40942      74559     194978       93689       139103     141007     148748     177364
                             ( 10372)   ( 16548)   ( 82296)    ( 22010)     ( 40682)   ( 50197)   ( 43440)   ( 63926)

Outside Debt         ALL      51847      48261       55766      49380        46340      53783       48539     40157
                             ( 4779)    ( 6652)    ( 14600)    ( 7768)      ( 6008)    ( 7523)     ( 9049)   ( 5703)
                     White    56663      52368       59274      52669        45360      56523       48735     42657
                             ( 5336)    ( 7430)    ( 16317)    ( 8614)      ( 5392)    ( 8303)     ( 9877)   ( 6331)
                     Black    10809      14425       17053      12637        17301      17447       31149     15557
                             ( 2611)    ( 3648)     ( 4406)    ( 3300)      ( 4109)    ( 5366)    ( 16485)   ( 5992)

Outside Equity       ALL      16619      19978      12666       10523         4847      11263      6512       8196
                             ( 3369)    ( 5369)    ( 5174)     ( 5360)      ( 1399)    ( 6378)    ( 2638)    ( 3581)
                     White    18543      22116      14159       11660         5330      12419       6880       8858
                             ( 3772)    ( 6007)    ( 5796)     ( 5981)      ( 1557)    ( 7084)    ( 2942)    ( 3994)
                     Black      536        604        206         912          164        678       1628       2672
                              ( 300)     ( 275)     ( 106)      ( 752)       ( 164)     ( 666)    ( 1601)    ( 2589)

Total Financing      ALL     115233       96546      90549       79693       70293       84940     69914      64108
                             ( 7102)    ( 10098)   ( 16471)    ( 10893)     ( 7002)    ( 11458)   ( 10752)   ( 8745)
                     White   124195      103653      96096       85164       69169       89334     70518      67081
                             ( 7898)    ( 11273)   ( 18394)    ( 12104)     ( 6602)    ( 12644)   ( 11724)   ( 9707)
                     Black    35205       34462      29033       22647       32194       26015     39460      25566
                             ( 6002)     ( 5245)    ( 5187)     ( 3950)     ( 7344)     ( 6026)   ( 16755)   ( 6751)

% Have Out. Debt     ALL       37.5       42.4       43.8           42.6      42.2       40.3       35.5       34.0
                              ( 0.9)     ( 1.0)     ( 1.1)         ( 1.2)    ( 1.2)     ( 1.2)     ( 1.3)     ( 1.3)
                     White     38.5       42.9       44.6           43.4      43.0       40.6       36.2       34.7
                              ( 0.9)     ( 1.0)     ( 1.1)         ( 1.2)    ( 1.3)     ( 1.3)     ( 1.3)     ( 1.3)
                     Black     29.4       37.7       37.7           36.9      35.1       35.4       28.3       28.2
                              ( 2.7)     ( 3.4)     ( 3.7)         ( 4.3)    ( 4.3)     ( 4.7)     ( 4.2)     ( 4.4)

% Out. Debt Ratio    ALL       49.4       63.1       69.5           71.2      72.7       73.6       77.5       75.8
(Out. Debt0)                  ( 0.9)     ( 1.0)     ( 1.0)         ( 1.2)    ( 1.2)     ( 1.3)     ( 1.3)     ( 1.5)
                     White     50.1       64.2       70.1           72.5      73.6       73.7       78.3       77.3
                              ( 1.0)     ( 1.1)     ( 1.1)         ( 1.2)    ( 1.2)     ( 1.3)     ( 1.4)     ( 1.5)
                     Black     41.8       52.4       61.5           55.2      62.6       66.6       66.0       58.7
                              ( 3.1)     ( 4.0)     ( 3.4)         ( 5.1)    ( 4.8)     ( 5.5)     ( 6.5)     ( 6.3)




                                                              56
                                                                    (1)         (2)       (3)          (4
                                                   VARIABLES      survive     survive   survive   netpro

                                                   black          -0.199***    -0.014   0.038**    -53,72
                                                                   (0.035)     (0.037)  (0.018)   (48,306
                                                   score                      0.011*** 0.002***
                                                                               (0.000)  (0.000)
Racial Differences in Profitability and Survival
                                                   Constant       -0.109***   -0.643***            2,399
                                                                   (0.023)     (0.030)            (5,367

                                                   Observations    28,527      28,309    30,608      23,1
                                                   R-squared                              0.609       0.0
                                                                                Standard errors in paren
                                                                                 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *




                                             57
                         Table A.4: A Closer Look at Sources of Debt

This table reports survey-weighted mean values by race for dummy variables that track the use of
particular types of credit, as well as for mean values of these sources of credit. The final column
reports p-values from the t-test of the difference between black- and white-owned businesses.
The first block of numbers for each year range ("Uses") reports the proportion of the sample that
indicates they use that form of debt. The lower block of numbers for each year range (indicated
with $) reports the average dollar amounts for that funding category.

                                     Overall    White Mean     Black Mean        p-value(diff)
KFS Initial Survey Year
Uses Personal Credit Cards               0.48           0.49          0.34            0.00
Uses Personal Bank Loan                  0.18           0.18          0.14            0.01
Uses Business Credit Cards               0.28           0.30          0.15            0.00
Uses Loans from Family Members           0.10           0.09          0.14            0.00
Uses Business Bank Loans                 0.06           0.07          0.01            0.00

Personal Bank Loan ($)                13,660         14,497          6,971            0.04
Personal Loans from Fam. ($)           2,465          2,571          1,801            0.36
Personal Loans, Other Sources ($)      4,360          4,659          2,161            0.24
Business Bank Loan ($)                 9,540         10,551          1,106            0.03
Business Non-bank Loans ($)            5,510          6,035            866            0.06

KFS Survey Years 1-3
Uses Personal Credit Cards               0.38           0.38          0.35            0.84
Uses Personal Bank Loan                  0.13           0.13          0.08            0.01
Uses Business Credit Cards               0.42           0.43          0.32            0.00
Uses Loans from Family Members           0.07           0.07          0.12            0.00
Uses Business Bank Loans                 0.06           0.06          0.03            0.02

Personal Bank Loan ($)                 7,992          8,228          4,171            0.05
Personal Loans from Fam. ($)           1,454          1,491          1,323            0.17
Personal Loans, Other Sources ($)      1,999          2,070          1,451            0.60
Business Bank Loan ($)                 5,039          5,589            625            0.01
Business Non-bank Loans ($)            2,933          3,085            742            0.08

KFS Survey Years 4-7
Uses Personal Credit Cards               0.33           0.33          0.30            0.23
Uses Personal Bank Loan                  0.08           0.09          0.05            0.08
Uses Business Credit Cards               0.41           0.43          0.27            0.00
Uses Loans from Family Members           0.06           0.06          0.08            0.00
Uses Business Bank Loans                 0.05           0.05          0.02            0.08

Personal Bank Loan ($)                 2,523          2,719            635            0.04
Personal Loans from Fam. ($)             677            702            298            0.34
Personal Loans, Other Sources ($)        944            973            343            0.58
Business Bank Loan ($)                 2,589          2,624          1,392            0.25
Business Non-bank Loans ($)            1,484          1,507            521            0.43




                                                58
        Table A.5: Later Stage Differences in Access to Capital with Zipcode Fixed Effects

                                  (1)         (2)         (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)
VARIABLES                      2005-2007   2008-2011   2005-2007     2008-2011   2005-2007   2008-2011

Black                           -0.317**     -0.265*     -0.462**     -0.511**      0.120      -0.473*
                                 (0.133)     (0.151)      (0.211)      (0.225)     (0.226)     (0.244)
Asian                             -0.121      0.075        -0.302    -0.810***      0.154       -0.068
                                 (0.160)     (0.174)      (0.255)      (0.260)     (0.269)     (0.279)
Hispanic                        -0.296**      0.116      -0.439**       0.291       0.097       0.417
                                 (0.140)     (0.167)      (0.223)      (0.249)     (0.238)     (0.267)
Other                             0.064       -0.376    -1.276***     -0.773**    -0.707**      -0.084
                                 (0.198)     (0.263)      (0.316)      (0.392)     (0.337)     (0.431)
Female                         -0.207***      -0.107       -0.139       -0.127      -0.178    -0.265**
                                 (0.073)     (0.084)      (0.117)      (0.125)     (0.124)     (0.135)
Previous Industry Experience     -0.001       0.004        0.002       -0.009      0.011*       -0.003
                                 (0.003)     (0.004)      (0.006)      (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.006)
Experience Outside Industry      -0.000       -0.003     0.015***       0.004     0.019***    0.013**
                                 (0.003)     (0.004)      (0.005)      (0.006)     (0.005)     (0.006)
Some College                      0.113       0.182        0.156        0.109       0.229       -0.046
                                 (0.111)     (0.137)      (0.176)      (0.205)     (0.187)     (0.220)
College Deg.                      0.025       0.020        0.061        -0.303      0.209       -0.325
                                 (0.118)     (0.146)      (0.188)      (0.217)     (0.200)     (0.233)
Grad. Deg.                        -0.042      -0.029       -0.027       -0.239      0.146       -0.305
                                 (0.123)     (0.148)      (0.195)      (0.222)     (0.208)     (0.238)
Prev. Startup Exp.                -0.088      0.035       0.178*      0.262**      0.188*       0.174
                                 (0.060)     (0.068)      (0.096)      (0.102)     (0.102)     (0.110)
Makes Product                    0.080*       -0.009     0.204***       -0.002    0.364***      0.109
                                 (0.044)     (0.046)      (0.070)      (0.068)     (0.074)     (0.073)
Intel. Property                   0.028       -0.028     0.156**      0.145**     0.481***    0.203***
                                 (0.045)     (0.049)      (0.072)      (0.073)     (0.076)     (0.078)
Home-based                        -0.086    -0.167**    -0.421***    -0.575***   -0.832***   -0.885***
                                 (0.059)     (0.066)      (0.094)      (0.099)     (0.100)     (0.106)
Part time Bus.                    -0.121      0.084     -0.743***       0.088    -0.614***      -0.208
                                 (0.074)     (0.083)      (0.118)      (0.124)     (0.125)     (0.133)
Incorporated                      -0.029      0.037      0.340***     0.367***    0.390***    0.247**
                                 (0.063)     (0.073)      (0.100)      (0.109)     (0.106)     (0.117)
Employment                      0.008***    0.013***     0.009***     0.008**     0.008***    0.009**
                                 (0.001)     (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.003)     (0.002)     (0.004)
Credit Score                    0.002**       0.002*     0.003**      0.006***      0.001       0.003*
                                 (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.002)

Observations                     7,903        7,819        7,903       7,819       7,736       7,790
R-squared                        0.531        0.501        0.640       0.659       0.650       0.661
                                   Standard errors in parentheses
                                    *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                59
                            Table A.6: Local Banking Conditions and Racial Bias

Panel A reports regressions (Pooled OLS with year dummies) in which the dependent variable is the natural log of total business debt.
Panel B reports Probit regressions in which the dependent variable is a dummy if the respondent had unmet capital needs, which
is true if the respondent answered yes to "Did Not Apply for Fear of Rejection" or if they reported that they did not always get the
full amount they asked for. Local bank share is the share of total county-level deposits held by local banks. Local bank herfindahl is
the herfindahl of local banks at the county level computed using deposits. Standard errors in parentheses, with one, two and three
asterisks denoting significance at the 10, 5 and 1percent level. Controls from Table IV included but not shown.


                 Panel A: Dependent variable is Did Not Apply for Fear of Denial

Black-owned Startup                            0.7605***         0.7571***         0.7238***         0.7117***          0.5778***
                                                (0.059)           (0.059)            (0.077)           (0.078)           (0.128)
Local Bank Share                                                 -0.2623**         -0.2881***         -0.2594**         -0.2557**
                                                                  (0.105)            (0.111)           (0.115)           (0.116)
Local Bank Share × Minority                                                          0.2358            0.3086            0.1578
                                                                                     (0.366)           (0.381)           (0.387)
Local Bank Herfindahl                                                                                -0.5995***        -0.6727***
                                                                                                       (0.191)           (0.203)
Bank Conc. × Minority                                                                                                    0.9212
                                                                                                                         (0.706)
Credit Score                                   -0.0035***        -0.0035***        -0.0035***        -0.0035***        -0.0035***
                                                 (0.001)           (0.001)           (0.001)           (0.001)           (0.001)

Observations                             11,204     11,193      11,193      11,193                                       11,193
                            Panel B: Dependent variable is Log(Business Debt)
                                           (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)                                           (5)

Black-owned Startup                            -0.1604***        -0.1527***        -0.1071***        -0.1044***          -0.0241
                                                 (0.020)           (0.020)           (0.025)            (0.025)          (0.037)
Local Bank Share                                                 0.3285***         0.3508***         0.3354***         0.3333***
                                                                   (0.060)           (0.063)            (0.064)          (0.064)
Local Bank Share × Minority                                                         -0.3260**         -0.3357**         -0.2801**
                                                                                     (0.131)            (0.132)          (0.132)
Local Bank Herfindahl                                                                                  0.2481**        0.2798***
                                                                                                        (0.101)          (0.107)
Bank Conc. × Minority                                                                                                  -0.5215***
                                                                                                                         (0.159)
Credit Score                                   0.0038***         0.0038***         0.0038***         0.0037***         0.0038***
                                                (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)            (0.000)

Observations                                     21,441             21,412           21,412            21,412            21,412
R-squared                                         0.020              0.022            0.022             0.023             0.023




                                                               60
