CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY AND IMPERFECT REGULATORY OVERSIGHT:
  THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS DISCLOSURES
                        Jean-Etienne de Bettignies
                              Hua Fang Liu
                           David T. Robinson
                        WORKING PAPER 28159
                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY AND IMPERFECT REGULATORY OVERSIGHT:
  THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS DISCLOSURES

                                   Jean-Etienne de Bettignies
                                         Hua Fang Liu
                                      David T. Robinson

                                      Working Paper 28159
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28159


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                         December 2020, Revised December 2020




We are particularly thankful to David P. Baron, John de Figueiredo, Rebecca Henderson, Witold
Henisz, Tom Lyon, John Maxwell, Adam Meirowitz, Nicola Persico, and Michael Waldman, for
their suggestions; and to seminar participants at Harvard Business School and at the Strategy and
Business Environment Conference (Stanford, 2019) for their comments. All remaining errors are
ours. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Jean-Etienne de Bettignies, Hua Fang Liu, and David T. Robinson. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Corporate Social Responsibility and Imperfect Regulatory Oversight: Theory and Evidence
from Greenhouse Gas Emissions Disclosures
Jean-Etienne de Bettignies, Hua Fang Liu, and David T. Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 28159
December 2020
JEL No. D62,J31,M14,M52,Q58

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper develops and tests a model in which 1) purpose-driven firms emerge as an optimal
organizational form even for profit-maximizing entrepreneurs; and 2) CSR arises endogenously
as a response to imperfect regulatory oversight. Purpose-driven organizations allow entrepreneurs
to create rents for socially responsible (e.g. environmentally concerned) workers by allowing
them to reduce the negative externalities (e.g. pollution) that would be generated without them,
and to extract these rents through lower wages. Through this rent extraction entrepreneurs
internalize the pro-social preferences of their responsible workers, and in turn engage in CSR
through self-regulation, provided that regulatory oversight is poor enough - and hence regulation
is loose enough - to make self-regulation worthwhile. The key prediction of the model is a
negative impact of regulatory oversight on CSR activity. To test this, we exploit the UK's 2012
decision to mandate greenhouse gas emissions disclosure in all public firms. Consistent with our
theory, we find that firms in the UK receive lower CSR ratings after increased regulatory
oversight compared to firms from the other 15 European countries which did not experience
mandatory disclosure requirements. We also perform a number of robustness checks and explore
the interaction between oversight, wages and CSR. These empirical findings provide further
support for the model.

Jean-Etienne de Bettignies                      David T. Robinson
Smith School of Business                        Fuqua School of Business
Queen's University                              Duke University
143 Union Street                                100 Fuqua Drive
Kingston, ON, K7L 3N6                           Durham, NC 27708
jdebettignies@business.queensu.ca               and NBER
                                                davidr@duke.edu
Hua Fang Liu
Brandon University
270-18th Street
Brandon, Manitoba R7A 6A9
Canada
liuh@brandonu.ca
1    Introduction

September 2020 marked the 50th anniversary of Milton Friedman's (1970) famous New York Times
Magazine article, which summarized and expanded on his earlier argument that "there is one and only
one social responsibility of business - to use its resources and engage in activities designed to increase
its profits so long as it stays within the rules of the game"(Friedman 1963, p.133); a controversial
argument that is still the subject of much debate today.1 In his view, it is the regulator's job to ensure
the appropriate behavior of profit-maximizing firms by setting proper rules and regulations, rather
than firms' responsibility to determine and implement their notion of socially responsible behavior.
Implicit in this argument is the assumption that the government or regulatory body is able to ensure
appropriate behavior by firms. But what happens if the regulator is unable to monitor firm behavior
effectively? Would a self-interested, profit-maximizing entrepreneur ever find it optimal to engage
in corporate social responsibility (CSR) when oversight were imperfect? More generally, how is the
quality of oversight connected to the presence of CSR? These questions are the central focus of this
paper.
    To study these questions, we develop and test a simple model in which a self-interested en-
trepreneur, a socially responsible worker and a regulator interact. The entrepreneur operates a tech-
nology that unavoidably imposes negative externalities--for example, pollution--on the rest of society,
but can select an action that affects the degree of pollution that occurs. The regulator may choose to
monitor the firm and set a regulatory ceiling that balances the firm's profits against the social costs
of these negative externalities; or may forfeit oversight altogether if the benefits from regulation are
more than offset by the monitoring costs.
    The entrepreneur has two main decisions to make. First, she decides whether to ignore the en-
vironmental consequences of her actions and manage her firm herself as a pure profit-maximizing
organization or instead to hire the responsible worker to manage her firm as a purpose-driven organi-
zation.2 The second decision is what action to take, whether she implements the action herself or elicits
it from the responsible worker, depending on the organizational form she chooses. This action choice
may involve complying with the regulation and selecting an action at or below the regulatory ceiling;
or it may involve "cheating" by selecting an action above the ceiling, anticipating that non-compliance
will only be caught with some probability that reflects the quality of regulatory oversight.
    Two key results emerge from our model. First, hiring the responsible worker to manage the firm
as a purpose-driven organization is always strictly optimal for the entrepreneur. The key is that in
   1
     Most recently, for example, Hart and Zingales (2017) argued that firms should maximize shareholder welfare rather
than profits.
   2
     For expositional convenience, we refer to the entrepreneur and the regulator as "she", and to the worker as "he".


                                                          1
equilibrium the entrepreneur can invariably commit to select a high(er) action if she manages the firm
herself. Anticipating this, it becomes optimal to hire the responsible worker and to let him enjoy
extra utility by selecting an action that produces fewer externalities than the action that would be
selected in a pure profit-maximizing organization; capturing the worker's rents thus created through
lower wages.
   Of course, in our model workers are simply a convenient embodiment of the social preferences
toward environmental action that affect the entrepreneur's optimal action. The same basic message
would apply if the entrepreneur were interacting with other stakeholders (e.g. investors, suppliers),
taking into consideration social preferences for the negative externalities associated with production.
The key insight is that the profit motive combined with the bargaining power to extract rents causes
the self-interested, agnostic entrepreneur to internalize pro-social preferences, effectively becoming
pro-social herself, creating the purpose-driven organization in the process. In a way, the entrepreneur
"grows the pie" (Edmans, 2020) by hiring workers who derive "extra" private benefits from responsible
behavior; in doing so the entrepreneur maximizes profits by creating a purpose-driven organization.
   The second key result concerns the relation between regulatory oversight and CSR. When the
regulator possesses the ability to monitor firm compliance with sufficient effectiveness, she can ensure
that the firm complies with regulatory standards that approach the socially optimal level. In an envi-
ronment with strict and enforceable standards, the optimal choice for the purpose-driven organization
is to exactly comply with the regulatory ceiling. Thus in this case the firm precisely follows Friedman's
dictum: it acts within the law but at the limit of what the law allows - it does not engage in CSR.
   In contrast, when the regulator's monitoring technology is insufficiently effective, she must adopt
- in order to ensure firm compliance - a regulatory threshold that is so lax that the benefits from
oversight are outweighed by the costs of monitoring. In these instances the effective regulatory ceiling
vanishes, and the entrepreneur has the option to elicit the pure profit-maximizing action from the
worker in the purpose-driven organization. Instead the entrepreneur elicits an action strictly lower
than the pure profit maximizing action, in order to extract rents from the responsible worker through
lower wages, as discussed above. Indeed in those cases the purpose-driven organization does engage
in CSR through self-regulation, producing strictly fewer externalities than pure profit-maximization
would require. Thus, CSR emerges when the firm's profit motive causes it to have a comparative
advantage over the regulator in reducing negative externalities.
   Several empirical implications emerge from our model. The key prediction is that all else equal,
the effectiveness of oversight should be negatively related to the level of CSR that firms adopt. Testing
this prediction is challenging, however, because the correlation between the degree of oversight and



                                                   2
CSR is also presumably affected by other factors that might make them appear to be complementary,
even if on the margin they are substitutes as our model predicts. Indeed, recent work by Liang and
Renneboog (2016) finds that the average level of CSR in a country is highly correlated with its legal
origin: civil-law countries, where state intervention is more common, outscore common-law countries,
where a markets-based approach is more common. This is consistent with the view that, at least cross-
sectionally, demand for environmental stewardship simultaneously drives higher levels of regulation
and higher levels of CSR. But our model makes predictions about ceteris paribus effects: clearly,
exogenous shocks to regulatory oversight are required to test our model's empirical implications.
   To that end, we develop two sets of empirical tests based on plausibly exogenous variation in
regulatory oversight. Our first set of tests follows Kr¨
                                                       uger (2015) and exploits a shock in UK reporting
standards surrounding greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. In 2012, the UK government imposed a
mandatory GHG emissions disclosure policy on all public firms operating in the UK. This corresponds
to an increase in oversight in our environment. Using a difference-in-difference strategy in which we
compare UK with similar non-UK firms before and after the policy ruling, we find that after the
mandatory disclosure policy, UK firms on average had lower corporate social responsibility ratings
compared to firms from the other 15 European countries, which did not have a mandatory disclosure
policy in place. The negative and significant effect of mandatory disclosure on CSR is consistent with
the main prediction of our model, and robust to a large number of robustness checks.
   Our second set of tests uses US data and relies on the fact that changes in the degree of outsourcing
across industries have differentially changed regulators' monitoring ability. The central argument is
that it may be more difficult for a regulator to monitor firms that offshore a large fraction of their
activities; and that because these firms face less oversight they may choose higher levels of CSR. Here
again we find evidence consistent with the model: our results show a positive relationship between
industry-level foreign outsourcing and firms' CSR activities.
   Finally, we also explore empirically how - i.e. through which channels - regulatory oversight may
affect CSR. Consistent with the predictions of our model, we present evidence (from prior work and
of our own) of a positive association between CSR and employee perception/retention, of a negative
relationship between CSR and wages, and of a positive interaction between oversight and wages.
   Our model is related to the literature exploring motivations for firms to engage in CSR. In the labor
market, CSR may serve as a signalling (Greening and Turban, 2000) or screening (Brekke and Nyborg,
2004) mechanism to attract desirable employees; as entrenchment by inefficient managers protecting
their jobs (Cespa and Cestone, 2007); as an employee governance device (Flammer and Luo, 2017); or
as a strategy to extract rents from socially responsible worker (Bettignies and Robinson, 2018). The



                                                   3
related work of Henderson and Van den Steen (2015) suggests that "purpose" in an organization may
help foster employees' pro-social identity and reputation. Alternatively, CSR may emerge through a
product market channel as a result of optimal managerial incentive design (Baron, 2008), of competi-
tion in these markets (Arora and Gangopadhay, 1995; Bagnoli and Watts, 2003; Besley and Ghatak,
2007; Galasso and Tombak, 2014; Flammer, 2015a, 2018), or of reputation insurance (Minor 2015;
Minor and Morgan 2013). Finally, CSR may stem from political motivations, as a hedging response to
a threat posed by the "politician" who could be an activist or a nongovernmental organization (NGO)
(Baron, 2001; Baron, 2009; Baron and Diermeier, 2007; Lyon and Maxwell, 2011; Bonardi et al., 2020)
or a lobbyist influencing government policy (Maxwell et al., 2000; Lyon and Maxwell, 2004).3
       Our empirical analysis is related to the recent literature on the disclosure of information on en-
vironmental, social, and/or governance (ESG) activities, and its effects on the performance of firms
and the reactions of markets. For example, Doshi et al. (2013) examine the impact of mandatory
disclosure of toxic chemical emissions on firms' environmental performance, and the organizational
factors moderating this relationship. Christensen et al. (2017) document that mandatory disclosure
of mine-safety records in financial reports leads to decreases in mining-related citations and injuries.
Grewal (2017) considers the impact of mandatory GHG emissions disclosure regulation (using the
2012 UK policy described above) on the performance of firms that were already disclosing their GHG
voluntarily prior to regulatory change; and highlights a negative effect on these firms' emissions levels.
Chen et al. (2018) find that mandatory CSR activities disclosure leads to lower profits, but to a
reduction in wastewater pollution and sulfur dioxide (SO2 ) emissions levels in cities most affected by
the mandate. And Grewal et al. (2019) show evidence of a negative equity market reaction to the
mandatory disclosure of information on ESG performance.
       Perhaps, most closely related to our paper are the works of Bettignies and Robinson (2018) and
Kr¨
  uger (2015). Our CSR model of rent-extraction from socially responsible workers through lower
wages under inefficient regulatory ceilings builds on Bettignies and Robinson's (2018) model;4 but
examines a very different type of regulatory inefficiency. While in Bettignies and Robinson (2018) the
inefficient ceilings emerge from ex ante lobbying to a government caring not only about social welfare
but also about influence payments, here in contrast the inefficiently high ceilings result from imperfect
oversight. Our empirical analysis builds on Kr¨
                                              uger (2015) in its use of the UK's mandatory disclosure
policy as a quasi-natural experiment; but remains distinct from his work in two main ways. Most
   3
     Interactions between firms and "politicians" need not always be adversarial. Recent work by Chatain and Plaksenkova
(2019), for example, models collaborations between firms and NGOs which mitigate market failures by enabling the
inclusion of new suppliers in the supply chain.
   4
     Also related is Henderson and Van den Steen's (2015) cooperative hiring game in which socially-minded worker
are sorted into purpose-driven firms where they enjoy extra utility from a purposeful identity and reputation, and thus
receive lower wages in equilibrium.


                                                           4
notably, he examines how mandatory GHG emissions disclosure affects firm value, while our interest
is in how it affects CSR. In addition, while Kr¨
                                               uger (2015) interprets the mandatory disclosure policy
as an indirect reduction in GHG emissions, we focus on its more direct role as a change in oversight.
    Overall, our work contributes to the literature by bringing together 1) a novel theory of purpose-
driven organizations and of the effects of inefficient oversight on CSR; and 2) an empirical analysis
providing support for the main predictions of our model, using a variety of datasets and methods.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the basic elements of the model. Section
3 derives the regulator's monitoring and ceiling decisions, the optimal organizational form for the
entrepreneur, and compliance and action choices, in equilibrium. Section 4 examines the endogenous
emergence of CSR in the firm, and the role of regulatory oversight. Section 5 presents the main
empirical analysis and explores the impact of oversight on CSR, while Section 6 focuses on the channels
through which oversight may affect CSR, and in particular on the role of wages in these channels.
Section 7 concludes.


2    Model Setup

The basic elements of the model can described as follows.

    Entrepreneur and Firm. A risk-neutral and self-interested entrepreneur owns a firm that
requires a managerial action a  R+ to be selected to generate expected profits  (a). The main
characteristic of action a is that it imposes a negative externality on citizens. The amount of pollution
that a firm emits, for example, is a natural interpretation of a.
    The entrepreneur can select action a and manage the firm herself as a pure profit-maximizing
organization. Or she can hire a responsible worker (described below) to choose a and manage the firm
as a purpose-driven organization. Action a involves no personal cost to either the entrepreneur or the
responsible worker.
    The firm's expected profits  (a) are positive, continuously differentiable over R+ and strictly
                      d                  d
concave in a, with    da   (0) > 0 and   da   (x) < 0 for some x  R++ . Hence there exists a unique action
level a = arg max  (a) > 0 that maximizes expected profits. These expected profits are gross of
possible compensation for the responsible worker.

    Citizens. As mentioned above, action a creates a negative externality, in that it negatively affects
the citizenry's utility V (a): dV /da < 0 for all a  R+ . Clearly, then, the level of a that maximizes
V (a) is ac = 0. Citizens do not take actions in this model, but their preferences are important for
understanding social welfare.

                                                         5
       Responsible Worker. A risk-neutral, wealth-unconstrained responsible worker, "worker r", is
available for hire in the labor market. We assume that the entrepreneur can verify the action a selected
by the hired worker; and makes a take-it-or-leave-it, action-contingent contractual offer W (a) to the
worker if it wishes to hire him.5 The worker has reservation wage W 0 , which we normalize to zero. We
are agnostic about whether the entrepreneur is hiring one or many workers, and use the term worker
to refer to the firm's labor force generally.
       Unlike the entrepreneur who cares only about her payoff, the responsible worker cares not only
about his compensation, but also about what Bettignies and Robinson (2018) call the core social
surplus associated with action a, S (a), defined as the sum of 1) the citizenry's utility, 2) the firm's
profits net of compensation cost, 3) the hired worker's compensation: S (a) = V (a) + [ (a) - W (a)] +
W (a), or simply
                                                 S (a) = V (a) +  (a) .                                                (1)

       We use this notion of core surplus for expositional convenience, but shall become clear below, total
social surplus (social welfare) is in fact a simple function of the core surplus in this model. We assume
that V (.) and  (.) are such that S (.) is "well-behaved," i.e. positive, continuously differentiable over
                                           dS                 dS
R+ and strictly concave in a, with         da   (0) > 0 and   da   (x) < 0 for some x  R++ .
       If he is hired with compensation Wr (a) and chooses action a, worker r's utility is Ur (a) = Wr (a)+
S (a), with   (0, 1), where S (a) is the "responsible" component of his preferences. If he turns down
the entrepreneur's contractual offer, worker r's reservation utility is (the sum of his zero reservation
wage and) a function of the core social surplus associated with action a0 selected in that case (e.g. by
                    0 = W 0 + S a0 = S a0 . Thus, the responsible worker experiences utility
the entrepreneur): Ur
that is increasing in the core social surplus regardless of whether or not he is engaged in the alleviation
of negative externalities.
       Of course, because the worker's action is costless and there are no agency or information frictions
associated with their behavior, the worker in our model can be viewed as simply a representation of
a more general input to production that could either adhere or not adhere to standards of socially
responsibility. All the intuition and results of our model would translate exactly under this broader,
more general formulation, provided that the entrepreneur had the ability to extract a portion of the
rents that accrue to others through their socially responsible choice.
   5
    As in Bettignies and Robinson (2018), we assume risk-neutral, wealth-unconstrained workers and verifiable action.
This simplification has the significant advantage of allowing us to abstract away from issues related to hidden information
or hidden action between firm and worker, and to focus instead on the agency problems plaguing the firm/monitor
relationship, as shall become clear below. For recent work on agency problems when agents have special preferences such
as intrinsic motivation or prosocial preferences, see for example Benabou and Tirole (2003, 2006), Besley and Ghatak
(2005, 2007), Prendergast (2007, 2008), Ellingsen and Johanesson (2008), or Delfgaauw and Dur (2008).



                                                              6
   Social Responsibility. The parameter   (0, 1) captures worker r's degree of social responsi-
bility. If  = 0, Ur = Wr , and worker r is purely self-interested. As  increases, however, he applies
more weight on the core social surplus relative to his personal compensation.

   Regulator. The regulator can monitor the firm and set a policy to regulate action a, with the
aim of maximizing social welfare. We assume (in our opinion not unrealistically) that the regulator is
too far removed from the activities of the worker to be able to observe the exact value of a; but that
she can (imperfectly) verify whether or not the action implemented in the firm is above or below a
certain threshold, and can therefore impose a regulatory ceiling a on the firm.
   The entrepreneur then chooses whether to comply or to cheat. She can comply either by selecting
action a  a herself, or by eliciting this action from the responsible manager, depending on the
organizational form she has chosen. Likewise, she can choose to "cheat" and select action a > a, again
either herself or through worker r's contractual incentives.
   The regulator makes two decisions: a monitoring decision m  {0, 1} and a regulatory ceiling
decision a  [0, +). Monitoring the firm (m = 1) imposes cost K on the regulator, but allows
her to observe the firm's compliance (or lack thereof) with probability   (0, 1), where  represents
both the degree of monitoring efficiency, and more generally the amount of oversight of the firm by
the regulator: a more efficient regulator observes compliance with higher probability, leading to more
oversight in general. Non-compliance, if caught, is sanctioned with a penalty or fine T . For simplicity,
we assume that T is a pure transfer from the firm to the citizenry, and hence has no direct impact on
social welfare.
   Alternatively, the regulator may decide to save cost K and not to monitor the firm (m = 0). In
that case the regulator may still arbitrarily impose an "official" ceiling af  [0, +), but without
monitoring this ceiling is irrelevant, and the effective ceiling in fact is a = amax  .

   Timing of the Game. At date 0, the regulator sets regulatory ceiling a
                                                                        ¯g . At date 1, the
entrepreneur decides whether to manage the firm herself as a pure profit-maximizing organization,
or to hire the responsible worker to manage the firm as a purpose-driven organization. At date 2,
the entrepreneur selects action a  a or a > a - either directly herself or by incentivizing worker r
(depending on the organizational form chosen at date 1) - and decides whether or not to comply with
regulation. At date 3, profits and utilities are realized and contracts are honored.

   Social Welfare and the First Best. Social welfare is the grand total surplus generated, which
includes 1) the citizenry's utility; 2) the firm's profits net of possible worker compensation cost; 3)
worker r's compensation, if hired; 4) the responsible component of worker r's preferences (S (a)); and

                                                   7
5) the regulator's monitoring cost, if oversight does take place: T S (a) = V (a) + [ (a) - W (a)] +
W (a) + S (a) - K 1m=1 (m), where      1m=1 (m) is an indicator function equal to 1 when m = 1 (i.e.
monitoring occurs) and to 0 otherwise. More simply:


                                 T S (a) = (1 + ) S (a) - K 1m=1 (m) .                                        (2)


    In the first-best benchmark - i.e. when there are no agency conflicts and social welfare is maximized
- clearly the regulator does not need to monitor the firm and hence          1m=1 (m) = 0. Furthermore, the
                                           dS                  dS
strict concavity of S (.), together with   da   (0) > 0 and    da   (x) < 0 for some x  R++ , ensure the
existence and uniqueness of a first-best action a which maximizes both core surplus S (a) and social
welfare T S (a) and generates first-best social welfare T S  (a ) = (1 + ) S (a ). Note that a depends
neither on whether worker r is hired nor on social responsibility parameter ; and that a  (0, a ).
                                                dS                 dS            dV
This latter result follows directly from a)     da   (0) > 0; b)   da   (a ) =   da   (a ) < 0; and c) the strict
concavity of S (a).


3     Oversight, Organization, and Action Choices in Equilibrium

In this section, we derive the subgame-perfect Nash equilibrium of the game. We proceed by backward
induction to determine what happens from date 2 onward - action and compliance decisions - if the
entrepreneur previously decided to manage the firm herself as a pure profit-maximizing organization;
and if she decided to hire responsible worker r to manage the firm as a purpose-driven organization.
We then move further backward to analyze the entrepreneur's optimal organizational strategy, i.e. her
hiring decision at date 1. Finally, we examine the regulator's optimal regulatory ceiling selection at
date 0.


3.1   Actions and Compliance Decisions

We begin by considering - in turn - equilibrium actions and associated compliance decisions in pure
profit-maximizing organizations and purpose-driven organizations.

    Pure Profit-Maximizing Organization. Suppose that at date 1 the entrepreneur has decided
to manage the firm herself as a pure profit-maximizing organization. Then at date 2 she selects her
preferred action. Clearly the action that maximizes the entrepreneur's unconstrained program  (a) is
the profit-maximizing action a > a . The difference between a and the first-best action a captures
the externality at play here: The entrepreneur fails to internalize the negative impact of a on citizens,



                                                        8
and accordingly hence chooses an action that is too high from a welfare point of view. Here, however,
the equilibrium action may be constrained by the regulatory ceiling a
                                                                    ¯ determined at date 0.
                   ¯  [a , +). Evidently, the entrepreneur complies, since selecting her unconstrained-
   First, consider a
optimal action a is consistent with compliance; and her expected payoff in this case is  (a ).
                ¯  [0, a ). If the entrepreneur decides to comply, then the optimal strategy is
   Now consider a
to select action a, i.e. exactly equal to the ceiling, yielding payoff  (a). This optimal strategy
                                                         d
comes from the strict concavity of  (.), which implies   da   (a) > 0 for all a < a . If the entrepreneur
decides not to comply, then the optimal strategy is to select unconstrained profit-maximizing action
a , generating expected payoff  (a ) - T . Hence, if a
                                                     ¯  [0, a ), the entrepreneur complies if and
only if  (a)   (a ) - T , or more intuitively if and only if the marginal expected benefit from
non-compliance is more than offset by its marginal expected cost:


                                            (a ) -  (a)  T.                                           (3)

                                  d
   Since (as mentioned above)     da   (a) > 0 for all a < a , there must exist, for all   (0, 1), a
unique threshold value as ()  [0, a ) of regulatory ceiling a, such that condition (3) holds and the
entrepreneur chooses to comply if and only if a  as (). Intuitively, if regulation is loose enough (i.e.
a is close enough to a ), the entrepreneur has little to gain from not complying and runs the risk of
having to pay penalty T , and thus prefers to comply. However, as a decreases and regulation becomes
stricter, the gain from "cheating" increases, and becomes greater than the expected penalty cost as a
drops below as (), prompting the entrepreneur to stop complying.
   One can readily verify, using the Implicit Function Theorem, that threshold ceiling as () is strictly
                  das
decreasing in :   d     () < 0 for all   (0, 1). Indeed, the greater the amount of oversight, the
greater the probability of getting caught and fined in the event of non-compliance. This increases the
entrepreneur's incentive to comply with a given regulatory ceiling, and in turn lowers the minimum level
of regulatory ceiling as () that remains compliance-compatible. Vice versa, a decrease in  increases
as (), and indeed it is clear from (3) that lim as () = a . Thus, the entrepreneur's equilibrium action
                                            0
as (a) in a pure profit-maximizing organization can be expressed as:

                                                                      
                                            a    if a  [0, as ())
                                            
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                as (a) =    a    if a  [as () , a )      .                            (4)
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                            a
                                                 if a  [a , +)        


   This results in the following equilibrium expected payoff Ps (a) for the entrepreneur:


                                                    9
                                                                                     
                                       
                                         (a ) - T             if a  [0, as ())       
                                                                                     
                              Ps (a) =   (a)                  if   a  [as () , a )      .                        (5)
                                                                                     
                                                                                     
                                         (a )
                                                              if a  [a , +)          


       Purpose-Driven Organization. Now suppose that at date 1 the entrepreneur decided to hire
responsible worker to manage the firm as a purposed-driven organization. Then at date 2 she makes
contractual offer Wr (a) to worker r. As discussed above, if he accepts the offer and chooses action a,
his utility is Ur (a) = Wr (a) + S (a). If he is not hired, worker r's reservation utility depends on the
action a0 chosen in that case: Ur
                                0 = S a0 . For simplicity we assume that if worker r turns down


the offer, the manages the firm herself as discuss above and selects action a0 = as , generating utility
 0 = S (a ) for worker r .6
Ur       s

       Consider first the unconstrained scenario in which no regulatory ceiling is constraining the action
requested by the entrepreneur from worker r. Suppose the entrepreneur wishes to elicit an action a.
In this case, the optimal contract Wr (a) offered to worker r includes 1) a base salary wr ; and 2) an
action-contingent bonus br (a) such that br (a) = br if a = a and br (a) = 0 if a = a.
       The action a, the base salary wr , and the bonus br are chosen to maximize the entrepreneur's
program  (a) - (wr + br ), subject to the incentive compatibility (IC) constraint,7


                                              br + S (a)  S (a ) ,                                               (6)


and to the individual rationality (IR) constraint,


                                          wr + br + S (a)  S (as ) .                                             (7)


       In equilibrium br and wr are chosen as solutions to binding IC and IR constraints, respectively;
and accordingly the equilibrium unconstrained action au
                                                      r maximizes the following simplified program:



                                        max     (a) +  [S (a) - S (as )] .                                       (8)
                                          a


       The intuition is simple and well-known: the entrepreneur chooses the action au
                                                                                    r that maximizes the

joint entrepreneur-worker surplus; ensures that worker r has an incentive to select this action through
   6
    The results of the model would continue to hold under a much weaker assumption, as long as, should worker r turn
down the entrepreneur's offer, she would manage the firm herself with non-zero probability.
  7
    Conditional on not choosing a, the worker anticipates he will receive a payoff of wr + S (a). And the action that
maximizes this payoff is a .




                                                         10
the appropriate choice of br satisfying (6); and extracts all rents from him by choosing the base salary
wr such that (7) is binding.
       The entrepreneur's payoff, for a given requested action au
                                                                r , thus includes two components: gross

profit  (au                                              u
          r ), and the social responsibility wedge  [S (ar ) - S (as )] extracted from the responsible

worker (Bettignies and Robinson, 2018). This wedge is the difference between the responsible compo-
nents of worker r's utility a) if he is hired to take action au
                                                              r and b) if instead the entrepreneur manages

the firm herself and takes action as . In other words, by allowing worker r to "save the world" by
choosing relatively low action au
                                r , the entrepreneur artificially creates rents for the worker (the social

responsibility wedge), which she can then extract from him through lower wages.
       Given the strict concavity of  (.) and S (.) and hence of  (.) + S (.),8 the unique unconstrained
action au
        r maximizing program (8) can be expressed as the solution to:


                                              d u         dS u
                                                 (ar ) +    (a ) = 0.                                                 (9)
                                              da          da r

       One can easily verify that au    
                                   r  (a , a ). Intuitively, on the one hand, because the entrepreneur

extracts all of the rents from worker r, as mentioned above she is maximizing the joint entrepreneur-
worker surplus, and is therefore internalizing the social responsibility component of worker r's pref-
erence, leading her to select a lower action than she would choose in a pure profit-maximizing firm:
au
 r < a . On the other hand, even after internalizing worker r 's preferences, the entrepreneur does not

care only about social welfare and retains expected profits as a separate component of her preferences,
hence choosing a higher action than she would if she only cared about welfare maximization: au    9
                                                                                             r >a .

       As in the case of the pure profit-maximizing firm, here again the equilibrium action may be con-
strained by the regulatory ceiling a                                       ¯  [au
                                   ¯ determined at date 0. First, consider a    r , +). Unsurprisingly,

the entrepreneur complies, since selecting her unconstrained-optimal action au
                                                                             r is consistent with com-

pliance. The entrepreneur's expected payoff in this case is  (au           u
                                                               r ) +  [S (ar ) - S (as )].

                    ¯  [0, au
       Now consider a       r ). If the entrepreneur decides to comply, then the optimal strategy is

to select action a, i.e. exactly equal to the ceiling, yielding payoff  (a) +  [S (a) - S (as )]. This
optimal strategy comes from the strict concavity of  (.) + S (.) discussed above, which implies
d( +S )
  da       (a) > 0 for all a < au
                                r . If the entrepreneur decides not to comply, then the optimal strategy is

to select unconstrained optimal action au                                 u           u
                                        r , generating expected payoff  (ar ) +  [S (ar ) - S (as )] - T .
   8
     To be precise, our assumptions that d da
                                              (0) > 0 and dS
                                                          da
                                                             (0) > 0, and that dda
                                                                                   (x) < 0 and dS
                                                                                                da
                                                                                                   (x) < 0 for some values
of x  R++ , together with the strict concavity of  (.) + S (.), ensure that a unique au r maximizing program (8) exists.
   9
     More formally, unconstrained action au r maximizes a linear combination of two strictly concave functions, S (.) and
 (.), thus the solution to this linear combination should be between their solutions, a and a . Indeed, this follows
directly from the strict concavity of  (.) + S (.), along with the fact that dS
                                                                             da
                                                                                (a ) = 0 and d
                                                                                             da
                                                                                                 (a ) > 0, d
                                                                                                           da
                                                                                                              (a ) = 0 and
dS                   
da
   ( a  ) < 0, and a  < a  as shown  previously.



                                                           11
         ¯  [0, au
Thus, if a                                                                                   u
                 r ), the entrepreneur complies if and only if  (a) +  [S (a) - S (as )]   (ar ) +

 [S (au
      r ) - S (as )] - T , or more intuitively if and only if the marginal expected benefit from non-

compliance is more than offset by its marginal expected cost:


                                  [ (au         u
                                      r ) + S (ar )] - [ (a) + S (a)]  T.                                        (10)

                                      d( +S )
       Since (as mentioned above)       da      (a) > 0 for all a < au
                                                                     r ., there must exist, for all   (0, 1),

a unique threshold value ar ()  [0, au
                                     r ) of regulatory ceiling a, such that condition (10) holds and

the entrepreneur chooses to comply if and only if a  ar (). The intuition is the same as in the
pure profit-maximizing organization, albeit with different payoffs: if regulation is loose enough (i.e.
a is close enough to au
                      r ), the entrepreneur has little to gain from not complying and runs the risk of

having to pay penalty T , and thus prefers to comply. However, as a decreases and regulation becomes
stricter, the gain from "cheating" increases, and becomes greater than the expected penalty cost as a
drops below ar (), prompting the entrepreneur to stop complying.
       Two points are worth highlighting about threshold ceiling ar (). First, using the Implicit Function
Theorem, one can verify that, just like as (), threshold ceiling ar () is strictly decreasing in :
dar
 d     () < 0 for all   (0, 1). More oversight increases the marginal expected cost of non-compliance
and the entrepreneur's incentive to comply, and hence decreases the minimum level of regulatory
ceiling ar () that remains compliance-compatible. Conversely, a decrease in  increases ar (), and
indeed it is clear from (10) that lim ar () = au
                                               r.
                                     0
       Second, note from expressions (3) and (10) that while the expected cost of non-compliance, T ,
is the same in the pure profit-maximizing firm and in the purpose-driven firm, the gain from non-
compliance is always greater in the former than in the latter:


                             (a ) -  (a) > [ (au         u
                                               r ) + S (ar )] - [ (a) + S (a)] ,                                 (11)


        ¯  [0, au
for all a       r ).
                    10 It must be the case, then, that a ( ) < a ( ). Intuitively, in the purpose-
                                                        r       s

driven organization the entrepreneur internalizes worker r's pro-social preferences, and as a result her
objective function becomes more "aligned" with social welfare. This reduces her incentives to select a
high action a and her gains from non-compliance; and in turn leads to a lower threshold ceiling ar ().
       From the foregoing analysis we conclude that, in a purpose-driven organization, the entrepreneur
elicits the following equilibrium action from responsible worker r:
  10
    Simplifying expression (11) yields  (a ) + S (a) >  (au         u                                              u
                                                          r ) + S (ar ), which is always the case since  (a ) >  (ar )
                  u                  u
                            ¯  [0, ar ).
and S (a) > S (ar ) for all a




                                                         12
                                                                        
                                         au        if a  [0, ar ())     
                                         r
                                                                        
                               ar (a) =  a         if a  [ar () , au
                                                                   r)
                                                                           .                      (12)
                                                                        
                                         au
                                        
                                                   if a  [au
                                                                        
                                                           r , +)
                                                                        
                                               r



   This results in the following equilibrium expected payoff Pr (a) for the entrepreneur:

                                                                                      
                         
                           (au           u
                             r ) +  [S (ar ) - S (as )] - T      if a  [0, ar ())     
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                Pr (a) =   (a) +  [S (a) - S (as )]              if a  [ar () , au
                                                                                 r)
                                                                                         .        (13)
                                                                                      
                           (au ) +  [S (au ) - S (a )]
                         
                                                                 if a  [au
                                                                                      
                                                                         r , +)
                                                                                      
                                r          r             s


3.2   Organizational Choice

At date 1, the entrepreneur decides whether to manage the firm herself as a pure-profit-maximizing
organization, or to hire responsible worker r to manage the firm as a purpose-driven organization. To
make this decision, she compares her expected payoffs Ps (a) and Pr (a) using expressions (5) and (13),
respectively, taking regulatory ceiling a as given. We consider 3 parametric regions in turn.
   First, consider a  [0, ar ()). Note that since, as discussed previously, ar () < as (), the en-
trepreneur would choose not to comply regardless of the organizational form selected. Thus in this
region she prefers the purpose-driven organization if and only if  (au           u
                                                                     r ) +  [S (ar ) - S (a )] - T 

 (a ) - T , which simplifies to  (au         u
                                   r ) + S (ar )   (a ) + S (a ). This always holds with strict

inequality, since as shown above  (.) + S (.) is strictly concave and maximized at a = au
                                                                                        r . Hence,

in this region the entrepreneur strictly prefers to hire responsible worker r to manage the firm as a
purpose-driven organization.
   Next, consider a  [ar () , au
                               r ). There are two sub-cases to examine in this region. If a <

as (), compliance would take place in a purpose-driven organization, but not in a pure profit-
maximizing firm, and hence the entrepreneur prefers the purpose-driven organization if and only
if  (a) +  [S (a) - S (a )]   (a ) - T . In the previous paragraph we already established that
 (au           u
   r ) +  [S (ar ) - S (a )] - T >  (a ) - T , and the compliance condition in a purpose-driven orga-

nization implies  (a) +  [S (a) - S (a )]   (au           u
                                              r ) +  [S (ar ) - S (a )] - T . By transitivity, then, we

must have  (a)+  [S (a) - S (a )] >  (a ) - T : The entrepreneur strictly prefers the purpose-driven
organization in this sub-region. In contrast, If a  as (), compliance would take place under both or-
ganizational forms, generating the same equilibrium action a and the same expected payoff  (a); and
making the entrepreneur indifferent between the pure profit-maximizing firm and the purpose-driven
firm in that sub-region.


                                                    13
       Finally, consider a  [au
                              r , +). In this region, the entrepreneur prefers the purpose-driven orga-

                           r ) +  [S (ar ) - S (as )]   (as ) - T 1as >a (as ), where as  {a, a } and
nization if and only if  (au           u


1as >a (as ) is an indicator function equal to 1 if the pure profit-maximizing firm fails to comply with
the regulatory ceiling and to 0 otherwise. Thus expression can be re-written as  (au         u
                                                                                   r ) + S (ar ) 

 (as ) + S (as ) - T 1as >a (as ) with as > au
                                             r , which always holds with strict inequality, since as dis-

cussed above  (.) + S (.) is strictly concave and maximized at a = au
                                                                    r . Hence, in this region the

entrepreneur strictly prefers to hire responsible worker r to manage the firm as a purpose-driven
organization.
       We depict these results graphically in Figures 1 and 2, which capture equilibrium actions and
payoffs, respectively, as functions of regulatory ceiling a, in pure profit-maximizing firms and purpose-
driven firms.

                                               [Insert Figures 1 and 2 here.]

       Strikingly, these figures illustrate the result that the entrepreneur strictly prefers the purpose-driven
organization over the pure profit-maximizing organization for all regulatory ceiling levels a  [0, +);
except when as ()  ar                   r
                    u and a  [as ( ) , au ], in which case she is indifferent between the two organi-

zational choices. The intuition follows naturally from the above analysis. When monitoring efficiency
 is such that as ()  ar                    r
                      u , if a  [as ( ) , au ], it is optimal for the entrepreneur to comply exactly

with regulation under both organizational forms: as = ar = a. Hence worker r derives no additional
utility from working at the firm and selecting a more responsible action, the social responsibility
wedge  [S (ar ) - S (as )] collapses to zero, and there are no additional rents to be extracted by the en-
trepreneur in the purpose-driven organization. In all other scenarios, the entrepreneur can effectively
commit to selecting action as > ar if worker r turns down the offer. This creates a strictly positive
social responsibility wedge that can be extracted by the entrepreneur, making the purpose-driven
organization her strictly preferred organizational choice.


3.3       Monitoring and Regulatory Ceiling Decisions

At date 0, the regulator sets the regulatory ceiling a anticipating the entrepreneur's preference for
a purpose-driven organization at date 1, and her compliance and action choices at date 2.11 More
formally, the regulator chooses a to maximize social welfare:


                                        max       (1 + ) S (ar ) - K 1m=1 (m) .                                        (14)
                                         a,t
  11
    The regulator anticipates that the entrepreneur will either strictly prefer the purpose-driven organization; or will be
indifferent between the two organizational choices, in which case the equilibrium action chosen will be identical regardless.


                                                             14
subject to the entrepreneur's equilibrium action choice ar in the purpose-driven organization, as sum-
marized in (12).

   Without Monitoring. The regulator may choose not to monitor the firm (m = 0). As discussed
in the model setup, in that case the regulator may still arbitrarily impose an "official" ceiling af 
[0, +), but without monitoring this ceiling is irrelevant, and the effective ceiling in fact is a =
amax  . Thus, this would save the regulator the monitoring cost K , and we know from (12) that
this would yield firm compliance and an equilibrium action ar = au
                                                                 r < amax ; generating social welfare

(1 + ) S (au
           r ).


   With Monitoring. Alternatively, the regulator may choose to monitor the firm (m = 1) and set a
non-trivial regulatory ceiling a. The regulator's objective function described in (14) with 1m=1 (m) = 1
is maximized at ar = a , and hence that is the action that she would ideally like to see implemented.
   However the regulator is constrained by the fact that - if the regulatory ceiling is "too low"
- the entrepreneur may "cheat" and elicit high action a from worker r, generating low welfare
(1 + ) S (a ) - K . Hence, for any given level of monitoring efficiency , the lowest compliance-
compatible regulatory threshold that the regulator can set is ar () where, as shown above in Section
       dar
3.1,    d    () < 0 for all   (0, 1). For simplicity, we impose the following regularity condition on T,

                                                                    
                                  [ (au         u
                                      r ) + S (ar )] - [ (a ) + S (a )] > T,                          (15)


which ensures - from compliance condition (10) - that lim ar () > a . Note that since, as discussed
                                                            1
above, ar () < as (), we must also have lim as () > a . This condition simplifies the analysis by
                                               1
eliminating trivial cases where, when  is sufficiently close to 1, first-best action a can be implemented.
   Since the regulator cannot induce compliance at a level as low as the first-best level a , her
optimal strategy in that case is to select the lowest possible compliance-compatible regulatory ceiling,
a () = ar (); generating social welfare (1 + ) S (ar ()) - K . As monitoring efficiency decreases, the
regulator is forced to increase the regulatory ceiling a () = ar () to maintain compliance-compatibility
and, as discussed in Section 3.1, lim ar () = au
                                               r.
                                     0


   Optimal Monitoring and Ceiling Choices, and Equilibrium of the Game.
   It follows immediately from the foregoing analysis that at date 0 the regulator chooses to monitor
the firm and imposes regulatory ceiling ar () if and only if:


                                    (1 + ) S (ar ()) - K  (1 + ) S (au
                                                                     r),                              (16)


                                                      15
where ar ()  (a , au
                   r ) and
                                   dar
                                    d    () < 0 for all   (0, 1).
       To avoid trivial solutions, we impose the following regularity condition on K,


                                         K  lim (1 + ) [S (ar ()) - S (au
                                                                        r )] ,                                        (17)
                                              1


which ensures that for some high levels of monitoring efficiency , at least, condition (16) holds, and
monitoring the firm is optimal for the regulator.12
       At the other end of the spectrum, when monitoring efficiency is extremely low and   0, the
optimal regulatory ceiling under monitoring is ar ()  au
                                                       r , and in that case monitoring is clearly

inferior to no monitoring, since it leads to effectively the same action au
                                                                          r being implemented in the

organization in equilibrium, but imposes the additional monitoring cost K .
       Importantly, the regulator's expected payoff from monitoring is a continuous and strictly increasing
function of  over (0, 1). Intuitively, as monitoring efficiency rises, compliance incentives increase, and
the regulator responds by reducing the compliance-compatible regulatory ceiling ar (), leading to a
lower action being implemented in equilibrium, to greater social welfare.
       Since the regulator's payoff from no monitoring is independent of , the foregoing discussion implies
that there must exist a threshold level of monitoring efficiency g  (0, 1], such that the regulator
chooses to monitor the firm and impose equilibrium ceiling ag () = ar () if   [g , 1); and chooses
not to monitor the firm and sets arbitrary equilibrium ceiling ag () = amax if   (0, g ).13 In
words, when monitoring efficiency is sufficiently low, monitoring does not allow the regulator to have a
significant effect on the action implemented in equilibrium, and prefers to "cut her losses" by foregoing
monitoring altogether. Combining these results with the results of Sections 3.1 and 3.2, we can express
the equilibrium as follows:

Proposition 1 For a given degree of monitoring efficiency, or oversight   (0, 1), we can express
the equilibrium regulatory ceiling, organizational choice, worker action, and payoffs, as follows:

       · High monitoring efficiency:   [g , 1). At date 0 the regulator decides to monitor the firm
         (m = 1) and sets regulatory ceiling ag () = ar () < as (). At date 1, the entrepreneur strictly
         prefers to hire responsible worker r to manage the firm as a purpose-driven organization. At date
         2, the entrepreneur complies with regulation and elicits action ar = ar () < au
                                                                                       r from worker r ,
  12
       If regulatory condition (17) does not hold, the regulator never monitors, regardless of   (0, 1).
  13
       This follows directly from the facts that 1) lim (1 + ) S (ar ()) - K = (1 + ) S (au                         u
                                                                                               r ) - K < (1 + ) S (ar ); 2)
                                                     0
                                                                                             
lim (1 + ) S (ar ()) - K > (1 + ) S (au
                                      r ); 3) S (.) is strictly decreasing in a for all a > a ; and 4) ar ( ) is strictly
 1
decreasing in .




                                                             16
     who understands that the alternative action is as = a . At date 3, worker r receives compensation
     W (ar ()); and the firm obtains payoff Pr (ar ()) =  (ar ()) +  [S (ar ()) - S (a )].

   · Low monitoring efficiency:   (0, g ). At date 0 the regulator decides not to monitor the firm
     (m = 0) and the effective regulatory ceiling is ag () = amax . At date 1, the entrepreneur strictly
     prefers to hire responsible worker r to manage the firm as a purpose-driven organization. At date
     2, the entrepreneur elicits action ar = au
                                              r from worker r , who understands that the alternative

     action is as = a . At date 3, worker r receives compensation W (au
                                                                      r ); and the firm obtains payoff

     Pr (amax ()) =  (au           u
                       r ) +  [S (ar ) - S (a )].




   An important implication of Proposition 1 concerns the optimality of the purpose-driven orga-
nization. In Section 3.2 we showed that the entrepreneur may be indifferent between pure profit-
maximizing firms and purpose-driven organizations, or strictly prefer the latter, depending on the
level of the regulatory ceiling. However, in equilibrium we can "pin down" more accurately the effec-
tive regulatory ceiling imposed by the regulator, and in turn make a more precise prediction about
the optimal organizational form in our model:

Proposition 2 In equilibrium the purpose-driven organization always strictly dominates the pure
profit-maximizing organization from the entrepreneur's viewpoint.

   This is because in equilibrium it is optimal for the regulator to either set the regulatory ceiling
at ag () = ar () < as (), which implies equilibrium actions ar = ar () and as = a > ar ; or not
to monitor the firm at all, in which case the effective regulatory ceiling is ag () = amax , leading to
equilibrium actions ar = au
                          r and as = a > ar . In either case this allows the entrepreneur to credibly

commit to selecting to selecting action as > ar if worker r turns down the employment offer. As
mentioned above, this creates a strictly positive social responsibility wedge that can be extracted by
the entrepreneur through lower wages for the worker, making the purpose-driven organization her
strictly preferred organizational choice.
   One way to interpret Proposition 2 is in terms of shareholder value: the purpose-driven organization
in our model delivers more shareholder value than the pure profit-maximizing organization. This is
consistent with the recent evidence, which suggests that purpose - measured by employee satisfaction
(Edmans, 2011) and employees' beliefs about the meaning of their work (Gartenberg et al., 2019) -
has a positive impact on firms' accounting and financial performance. Interestingly, Gartenberg et al.
(2019) find that this effect is strongest 1) for mid-level employees and 2) in firms where the leadership
makes expectations clear to employees. This is particularly in line with our model where a) worker r

                                                    17
represents the "average" employee across all levels of the organization, and b) frictionless contracting
between the entrepreneur and worker r means that the entrepreneur is able to clearly specify the
action that she expects from the worker.14


4         CSR in the Purpose-Driven Organization

Proposition 1 also highlights key implications of our model regarding CSR, which we discuss in more
detail in this section. There are many ways to define CSR,15 but perhaps most commonly associated
with this concept is the notion of "over-compliance". The idea is that firms engage in CSR when
they voluntarily take socially beneficial actions, over and above what they are required to do by law
(McWilliams and Siegel, 2001; Calveras et al., 2007).
         As our model suggests, however, the law is only useful as a benchmark if there is enough regulatory
oversight to discipline firms into at the very least complying with the law. In contrast, absent regulatory
oversight, firms are no longer bound by the law - they can simply flout it with impunity. The legal
limit itself then becomes arbitrary and irrelevant in these environments, and can no longer serve as a
benchmark against which to measure CSR activities. When unconstrained by law, firms always have
the option of behaving as pure profit-maximizers, and indeed we argue that - in these unconstrained
environments - they engage in CSR when they "self-regulate" by voluntarily taking socially beneficial
actions, over and above what they would do as pure profit-maximizers.
         Correspondingly, within the context of our model, a firm engages in CSR when either 1) there
is regulatory oversight and the action ar chosen by worker r in equilibrium is lower than regulatory
ceiling ag (); or 2) there is no oversight and the action ar chosen by worker r in equilibrium is lower
than the action a that would be selected in a pure profit-maximizing firm. More formally, we can
write CSR = min{ag () , a } - ar . The key result of our model then follows from Proposition 1:

Proposition 3 Even in purpose-driven organizations, there is no CSR at high levels of monitoring
efficiency, i.e. for all   [g , 1). At low levels of monitoring efficiency, i.e. for all   (0, g ), CSR
endogenously emerges in the purpose-driven organization, which deliberately self-regulates by taking
actions strictly lower than the actions that would be chosen under pure profit-maximization.

         Figure 3, which depicts the regulatory ceiling, the equilibrium action, and the level of CSR, as
functions of , illustrates these points:
    14
     Also related is the work of Eccles et al. (2014), where "high sustainability" companies are shown to outperform "low
sustainability" companies in both accounting and stock market performance; and that of Flammer (2015b), which shows
that close-call adoptions of CSR initiatives are associated with superior accounting performance.
  15
     See, e.g. Baron (2001), Baron (2013, Ch. 20), and Kitzmueller and Shimshack (2012) for discussions of the CSR
concept.


                                                           18
                                         [Insert Figure 3 here.]

   When monitoring efficiency is high (  (g ) , 1), the purpose-driven organization does select a low
action ar < au
             r , but does not technically engage in CSR, because the high monitoring efficiency and

associated oversight imply a strict (i.e. low) regulatory ceiling, and it is optimal for the firm to just
comply with regulation and select action ar = ar (). In other words, because the regulation is already
strict, the firm does what they are told to do, but does not go above and beyond.
   In contrast, when monitoring efficiency is low (  (0, g )), the purpose-driven organization selects
a higher action ar = au
                      r , but does engage in CSR. This is because low monitoring efficiency means no

regulatory oversight in equilibrium. Hence the firm could choose the pure profit-maximizing action a ,
but instead engages in CSR by self-regulating and selecting action ar = au
                                                                         r < a , in order to extract

rents from responsible workers through lower wages, as discussed above.
   Overall, Figure 3 also illustrates a key implication of Proposition 3, and the main empirical pre-
diction of our model, which we express in the following Proposition:

Proposition 4 Regulatory oversight has a negative impact on CSR.

   We end the theoretical part of this paper with three final points on our modeling of CSR. First,
one argument sometimes made in the literature is that for pro-social corporate activities like over-
compliance to receive the CSR label, these activities must be the result of a "responsible" or "moral"
motivation; otherwise they merely capture the firm's corporate social performance (CSP) rather than
CSR (Baron, 2001; Baron, 2013, Ch. 20). Since in our model the entrepreneur is a purely self-
interested profit-maximizer, it may seem at first blush that when choosing self-regulation in a purpose-
driven organization, she is in fact engaging in CSP. However, because she extracts all rents from
responsible worker r, the self-interested entrepreneur internalizes the pro-social preferences of worker
r and effectively "becomes" socially responsible herself. Indeed, in our model profit-maximization is
precisely what leads the entrepreneur to behave as if she were motivated by "responsible" preferences,
blurring the distinction between CSR and CSP.
   The second point concerns the stark nature of the relationship between regulatory oversight and
CSR: If there is oversight then there is no CSR, and vice versa if there is no oversight then CSR
does arise in equilibrium. This result comes from our implicit assumption that responsible worker r is
always available. The regulator anticipates that the entrepreneur will hire worker r to manage the firm
as a purpose-driven organization, and (if monitoring is worthwhile) that she will be able to impose a
fairly stringent ceiling on the firm, too stringent for the firm to be willing to over-comply and for CSR
to occur. But consider a more realistic scenario perhaps, in which the probability of being able to hire

                                                   19
a responsible worker is actually quite small. In that case the regulator anticipates a high probability
of facing a pure profit-maximizing organization, and accordingly that she may have to set a very high
regulatory ceiling to ensure compliance. This high ceiling, in turn, would allow the purpose-driven
organization - when worker r is available - to over-comply with regulation and engage in CSR in some
cases, even when some monitoring does occur. We feel that the extra tediousness and expositional
complications that such a generalization would require dominate the minor additional insights that it
would bring, hence our decision to opt for the more stylized version of the model.
    Last but not least, our model suggests that while regulation has an important role to play in
constraining corporate behavior and nudging firms toward socially superior actions, it is in fact highly
endogenous and meaningful only to the extent that the regulator possesses the resources and/or ability
to monitor the regulated firms. Indeed as shown above, whatever the official ceiling level observed
in practice, without regulatory oversight the effective regulatory level may in fact be much higher
and tend to infinity, with no actual constraining power on firms. Our model thus suggests that it
may be judicious to focus our empirical work on the effects of oversight rather than on the impact of
regulation, and indeed this is the path we choose to follow in our empirical analysis below.
    In the remainder of this paper, we take our model's main results to the data. Specifically, in Section
5 we examine Proposition 4 empirically and test whether regulatory oversight does reduce CSR; and
in Section 6 we investigate empirically the channels through which regulatory oversight might affect
CSR and in particular, following the predictions of our model, the interactions between regulatory
oversight, wages, and CSR.


5     Testing the Model: Does Regulatory Oversight Reduce CSR?

In this section, we explore a series of empirical tests of Proposition 4. We begin with two difference-in-
difference strategies built around the introduction of the UK's so-called Companies Act (2013). The
strategies differ in terms of how we identify the control group: in the first one, we use the fact that
non-UK firms were not affected by the Act; while in the second one we use the fact that some firms
already engaged in voluntary compliance prior to the act--presumably these firms were less affected
than those who chose not to report before the Act was passed. Then we discuss a third test based on
variation in the degree of outsourcing among US firms.


5.1    The UK Companies Act of 2013

In July 2013, the UK government passed The Companies Act 2006 (Strategic Report and Director's
Report) Regulation 2013     (the The Companies Act (2013) ), which required all listed UK firms to

                                                   20
report their GHG emissions in their annual reports. The bill was made publicly available on July 25,
2012, was approved by the UK House of Commons on July 16, 2013, and came into effect on October
1, 2013 (Kr¨
           uger, 2015).
      The bill (Part 7, pp. 5-6) specifies that, for all quoted companies, the director's report for a financial
year must state "the annual quantity of emissions in tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent from activities
for which the company is responsible including (a) the combustion of fuel; and (b) the operation of any
facility." Moreover, the report must also state "the annual quantity of emissions in tonnes of carbon
dioxide equivalent resulting from the purchase of electricity, heat, steam or cooling by the company
for its own use." The law further stipulated that the report must also state "the methodologies used
to calculate the information disclosed"; and "at least one ratio which expresses the quoted company's
annual emissions in relation to a quantifiable factor associated with the company's activities."
      In the context of our model, the introduction of this bill can be viewed as a shock to the oversight of
UK firms' GHG emissions. This gives rise to two difference-in-difference strategies to identify the effect
of changing t on the equilibrium level of CSR; which are discussed in this and the next subsection,
respectively.
      Our first difference-in-difference approach draws from Kr¨
                                                               uger (2015) and turns on the fact that The
Companies Act (2013) was implemented in the UK, but not in the 15 other European countries with
companies listed on local stock exchanges. Our control group is thus size-, industry-, profitability-,
and asset tangibility-matched firms from other European stock exchanges, including Ireland, Belgium,
Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, Austria,
Portugal, Spain, and Finland. Following Kr¨
                                          uger (2015), we use 2011 as our intervention year, to
account for the fact that even though The Companies Act (2013) was made publicly available in July
2012, firms in the UK were likely anticipating it as early as 2011 and taking actions accordingly.16 We
specify regressions of the following form:


                       CSRi,t = 0 + 1 · T reati + 2 · Af tert + 3 · T reati × Af tert

                                      + · Controli,t + t + j + i,t ,                                                 (18)


where CSRi,t denotes the CSR score for firm i in year t and captures firms' engagement in socially
responsible activities; T reati is a dummy variable equal to one if firms are UK quoted firms, and to
zero otherwise; Af tert is a dummy variable which equals one for years in the post-intervention period
(including and after 2011), and zero for years in the pre-intervention period (before 2011); Controli,t
represents a set of control variables which may affect firms' CSR; t is a dummy for year t; j is a
 16
      As a robustness check (unreported), we also used 2012 as an intervention year, and obtained similar results.


                                                            21
dummy for industry j ; and i,t is the error term. Our coefficient of interest is 3 , which captures the
before-after difference in CSR between the treatment group (UK firms) and the control group (other
European firms).
       To construct our measure of CSR for firms from the UK and from the other European countries,
we use data from the Thomas Reuters ASSETS4 database. Thomas Reuters provides ratings on
environmental, social and governance (ESG) performance for over 7,000 public firms across the globe,
with panel data going back to 2002. Specifically, Thomas Reuters first selected and grouped 178 ESG
measures into 10 categories, such as emissions, environmental product innovation, human rights, etc.,
and then aggregated them into three pillar scores - Environmental, Social, and Corporate Governance.
The ESG score provided by Thomas Reuters is based on a firm's relative performance in environmental,
social, and corporate governance activities and ranges from 1 to 100. Unlike other CSR databases
which tend to use equal-weighted ratings, Thomson Reuters adopts data-driven category weights and
applies percentile rank scoring methodology to ensure that the ESG scores are comparable across
companies and industries. The Thomas Reuters ASSETS4 database provides total ESG scores as well
as separate scores for each of the three pillars, for all of the firms in its sample. In our baseline model,
we use firms' total ESG scores - over a 2005-2015 sample period - to measure firms' engagement in
CSR activities,17
       Using Compustat Global Annual Files for both UK firms and firms from the other 15 European
countries listed above, we construct control variables to capture firm- and industry-level characteristics
which may affect firms' decision to engage in CSR. These include Firm Size measured by firms' total
assets; Profitability measured by return on assets (ROA); Leverage measured by total debt to total
assets ratio; Capital Expenditure measured by firms' capital expenditure scaled by total assets; R&D
Intensity measured by firms' R&D expenditure scaled by total assets; Asset Tangibility measured by
firms' net property, plants and equipments scaled by total assets; Financial Constraint measured by
firms' free cash flow scaled by total assets; and Industry Competition based on a Herfindahl index
computed from annual sales. We provide definitions for all variables in Table 1.
       We then merge these data with the data on CSR from the ASSETS4 database. We present
summary statistics for these and other variables in Panel A of Table 2; and summary statistics about
the distributions of ASSETS4 CSR scores18 in the UK and the other European countries listed above
in Panel B of Table 2. These distributions are quite similar across countries and in particular UK
firms are akin to other European firms in that regard.
  17
      As a robustness check (see discussion below) we also take advantage of the separate ESG scores for environment,
society, and governance, to consider the impact of The Companies Act (2013) on firms' environmental score separately
from its impact on their social and governance scores.
   18
      For convenience, throughout the paper we use "ESG scores" and "CSR scores" interchangeably.


                                                         22
                                         [Insert Table 1 here.]

                                         [Insert Table 2 here.]



   Basic Results. We begin by pooling all UK and EU firms and considering the difference-in-
difference specification discussed above, and report our results in Table 3, where in all specifications
standard errors are adjusted for within-firm clustering.

                                         [Insert Table 3 here.]

   Column (1) reports the baseline specification of the difference-in-difference with no additional con-
trols. The coefficient estimate on T reat × Af ter is -1.70 and significant at the 5% significance level.
In column (2), we introduce firm and industry level controls: Firm Size, ROA, Leverage, Capital
Expenditure, R&D Intensity, Asset Tangibility, Financial Constraint, and Industry Competition as
control variables. The coefficient estimate on T reat × Af ter is -2.35 and significant at the 1% sig-
nificance level. Furthermore, the coefficient estimate on Af ter in both of these columns is positive
and significant at the 1% level; and the sum of the coefficient estimates on Af ter and T reat × Af ter
is positive and can be verified to be significantly different from zero (unreported). Taken together,
these results suggest that while firms in both the UK and other European countries increased their
CSR activities over time, the UK firms increased their CSR activities by significantly less than their
European counterparts due to The Companies Act (2013) and associated increase in oversight.
   Columns (3) - (4) control for year and industry fixed effects, respectively. The coefficient estimates
on T reat × Af ter remain negative and significant at the 1% and 5% levels, respectively. Columns (5)
and (6) further include country fixed effects and firm fixed effects, respectively. The magnitude of the
coefficient estimate on T reat × Af ter drops but the coefficient remains negative and significant, at
the 5% and 10% levels, respectively.
   Overall, the results in Table 3 identify a negative treatment effect of mandatory GHG emissions
disclosure policy in the UK on CSR, leading UK firms to reduce their CSR activities. This evidence
is consistent with Proposition 4 in our model, which stipulates that greater oversight ought to reduce
firms' engagement in CSR.

   Parallel Trends. Next, we consider the identifying assumption - i.e. the "parallel trends" assump-
tion - behind the difference-in-difference framework; and examine whether there are similar trends in
CSR during the pre-intervention period (2005-2010) for both treatment and control groups (Lemmon
and Roberts, 2010). Graphically, the UK firms (treatment group) appear to have CSR trends that are


                                                   23
similar to those of the European firms (control group). Average CSR ratings for the treatment and
control groups over the 2005-2015 sample period are depicted in Figure 4.

                                               [Insert Figure 4 here.]

       Consistent with the "parallel trends" assumption, the two lines representing the CSR scores for the
treatment and control groups trend closely in parallel during the pre-intervention period (2005-2010),
but start to diverge during the post-intervention period (2011-2015).
       To show these results analytically, we re-run our baseline regression, but include year dummies as
well as their interactions with the treatment group dummy; the idea being that the coefficient estimates
on the interactions should be insignificant for years in the pre-intervention period but significant for
years in the post-intervention period. We report the regression results in Table 4.

                                                [Insert Table 4 here.]

       Again, consistent with the "parallel trends" assumption, we observe statistically insignificant co-
efficient estimates on the interactions of treatment group and year dummies for the pre-intervention
years, but negative and significant coefficient estimates on the interactions of treatment group and
year dummies for the post-intervention years.

       Matched Sample. Finally, we construct a matched sample of the treatment and control groups by
using propensity score matching. Specifically, we use single nearest-neighbor propensity score without
replacement within a specified caliper width.19 We rely on both the descriptive statistics and prior
literature to determine the matching covariates used in the matching procedures. First, the Pearson
correlations presented in Table 5 shows large and significant correlations between firms' CSR, Firm
Size, ROA, and Asset Tangibility for firms in our sample. Second, existing literature suggests that
firm size, firm profitability, asset tangibility, and industry characteristics play a key role in determining
firms' engagement in CSR (e.g. Ioannou, Li, and Serafeim, 2016; Kr¨
                                                                  uger, 2015; Konar and Cohen,
2001). Accordingly, we use Firm Size, ROA, four digit SIC industry, and Asset Tangibility to match
each UK-quoted firm with another firm from the other 15 European countries listed above. Panel A in
Table 6 shows that there are 192 matched treatment-control pairs after the propensity score matching.
Panel B suggests a good country representation across the matched sample, with no more than 19%
of the sample coming from any one of the 15 European countries.

                                                [Insert Table 6 here.]
  19
    The specific caliper we use is 0.1 times the pooled standard deviation of the logit of the propensity score, which is
argued to be the optimal caliper for matching (Rosenbaum and Robin, 1985).


                                                           24
   We then apply a difference-in-difference approach again with the matched sample we constructed.
We report our results in Table 7, where in all specifications standard errors are adjusted for within-firm
clustering.

                                          [Insert Table 7 here.]

   The results from this matched sample are broadly consistent with the results from the pooled
sample discussed above. In column (1), the coefficient estimate on T reat × Af ter of -1.81 remains
negative and significant at the 10% significance level. Similarly, in column (2) where we include Firm
Size, ROA, Leverage, Capital Expenditure, R&D Intensity, Asset Tangibility, Financial Constraint,
and Industry Competition as control variables, the coefficient estimate on T reat × Af ter is -1.67
and significant at the 10% significance level. Columns (3) - (6) further control for year, industry,
country, and firm fixed effects, respectively. Across all four of these columns, the coefficient estimate
on T reat × Af ter remains negative and significant - at the 5% significance level in columns (4) and
(5) and at the 10% significance level in columns (3) and (6). Overall, the results in Table 7 provide
further support for a negative effect of oversight on CSR activities in organizations.


5.2   The Carbon Disclosure Project

Our second difference-in-difference strategy exploits the fact that some firms in the UK had already
publicly disclosed their carbon emissions prior to the passage of the Act. For these firms, the change
in the reporting standards presumably had little effect. Our second approach uses these firms as a
control group.
   In order to examine UK-based firm variation in more detail, we obtained data from the Carbon
Disclosure Project (CDP). CDP is a UK-registered charity which operates a global carbon disclosure
system in which companies and cities voluntarily report data on environmental performance. These
data are then analyzed and transformed into metrics that investors can use to make investment
decisions. According to the project's website (http://www.cdp.net) the project has enrolled over
7,000 firms globally.
   CDP uses a questionnaire to collect information on disclosure of GHG emissions from firms in
both emerging and developed markets. Firms can choose to respond to CDP's request by marking
their response status as either "Public" or "Private"; or they can choose not to respond, which yields
a status of "NA". Public responses from firms indicate that these firms will disclose their GHG
emissions to the general public; whereas private responses allow CDP to include that firm's data in
broader regional and industry indices, but do not make the firm's identity known.


                                                   25
       We merged data from the CDP and ASSETS4 data sets, and report summary statistics about ESG
scores of CDP firms in Table 8 (Panel A). The distributions of ESG scores of the CDP firms ("Public"
or "Private") are similar to those of UK and other European firms in the ASSETS4 more generally,
albeit with smaller standard deviations. Unsurprisingly, "Public" firms have higher ESG scores on
average than "Private"firms: firms with higher ESG scores may be more likely to be willing to make
those scores public.

                                              [Insert Table 8 here.]

       We follow Kr¨
                   uger (2015) and construct treatment and control groups within the UK based on
the information on firms' response status from CDP.20 The control group consists of UK firms with
response status as "Public" before The Companies Act (2013), while UK firms with response status as
"Private" or "NA" are included in the treatment group. The idea is that The Companies Act (2013)
would have a very limited impact on those UK firms which have already signed up for the voluntary
disclosure before 2011. The most affected UK firms would be the firms which chose not to disclose
their GHG emissions before The Companies Act (2013), but had to disclose their emissions thereafter.
The findings from this alternative difference-in-difference strategy are presented in Table 8 (Panel B),
in which we look strictly within the UK, comparing firms that were affected by The Companies Act
(2013) to those that voluntarily disclosed prior to the passage of the act.
       The coefficient estimate on the interaction term T reat × Af ter is negative and statistically sig-
nificant in all specifications, indicating a negative impact of The Companies Act (2013) on the CSR
activities of firms that were not voluntarily disclosing their GHG emissions previously, and hence were
forced to do so as a result of the new policy. In Columns (1) and (2), the coefficient estimates on
T reat × Af ter are negative and significant at the 1% significance level. The inclusion of year fixed
effects in Columns (3) has no perceptible impact on the coefficient estimate, which remains negative
and significant at the 1% significance level. In columns (4) and (5), the inclusions of industry fixed
effects and firm fixed effects, respectively, cause the effect to decrease modestly, and the significance
level of the estimate to increase to 10%.
       Overall, the results in Table 8 identify a negative treatment effect of the mandatory GHG emissions
disclosure policy within the UK on CSR, leading firms that were forced to disclose their GHG emissions
as a result of The Companies Act (2013) to reduce their CSR activities. Thus, these results provide
further evidence consistent with the key prediction of our model, namely that greater oversight ought
to reduce firms' engagement in CSR.
  20
   Grewal (2017) also use CDP to obtain emissions information for firms that disclosed voluntarily, and considers the
impact of the 2012 mandatory GHG emissions policy in the UK on these firms' subsequent GHG emissions.


                                                         26
5.3     Robustness Checks

5.3.1    Oversight and Sub-components of CSR

As mentioned above, the total CSR scores are the sum of firms' performance in three different cate-
gories: environment, society, and governance. Since the variation in oversight in this empirical analysis
has to do GHG emissions, we would expect this variation to affect CSR along the environmental di-
mension disproportionately more than along the social and governance dimensions. To check this
prediction, we separated the CSR scores in the environment category from the CSR scores in the so-
cial and governance categories, and explored the differential impacts of oversight on these scores. More
specifically, we repeated the regressions from Tables 3, 7, and 8, but instead of using the total ESG
score as dependent variable, we used environmental CSR (the ESG score in the environment category
alone), and non-environmental CSR (the sum of ESG scores for both social and governance categories)
separately as dependent variables. We report the results in Table 9, where in all specifications standard
errors are adjusted for within-firm clustering.

                                          [Insert Table 9 here.]

   Across all columns we control for firm and industry level characteristics as well as year and firm
fixed effects. Specifically, columns (1) and (2) present the results based on the UK-EU pooled sample,
in which the dependent variables are the CSR scores for the environment category alone, and the CSR
scores for both social and governance categories, respectively. In column (1), the coefficient estimate
on T reat × Af ter is -1.78 and is significant at the 10% significance level. In contrast, the coefficient
estimate on the same interaction term T reat × Af ter is insignificant in column (2). These results
suggest that the implementation of the mandatory GHG emissions disclosure policy in the UK had
a negative and statistically significant impact on UK firms' engagement in CSR activities connected
to the environment; but we cannot say that this policy had an impact on these firms' CSR activities
along social and/or governance dimensions. Columns (3) and (4) report the results based on the
UK-EU matched sample. Again we find that when the dependent variable is the CSR score for the
environment category alone, the coefficient of T reat × Af ter is negative and significant, while it is
insignificant when the dependent variable is the CSR score for both social and governance categories.
We find similar results in columns (5) and (6) based on the within-UK sample as well.
   All in all, the results in Table 9 suggest that - consistent with our model - environmental oversight
has a negative impact on firms' CSR activities related to environmental issues, but less so on firms'
CSR activities related to social and governance issues.



                                                   27
5.3.2      Confounding Policies

One possible concern with the baseline analysis may be that the existence of confounding regulations
in the other 15 European countries in our control group could preclude a proper identification of
the impact of The Companies Act (2013) in UK on CSR. To address this issue, we first searched
environmental regulations and policies in the other 15 European countries included in our control
group,21 and found four potentially relevant cases:
       1) France: The Grenelle II Act was passed in 2012, which requires large firms to disclose their CSR
information in their annual report. 2) Ireland: The carbon tax in Ireland started to cover almost all
the polluting firms instead of only large emitters since 2012. 3) Norway: Legislation was passed on
requiring large firms to disclose general CSR as well as GHG emissions around 2012. 4) Switzerland.
The Swiss government implemented a regulation scheme in 2013 which provided explicit incentives for
firms to reduce GHG emissions.
       Having identified these potentially confounding regulations, we took out from our sample the firms
from France, Ireland, Norway, and Switzerland. We then repeated our baseline regressions from Tables
3 and 7, and we report the results in Table 10.

                                            [Insert Table 10 here.]

       The first three columns present the results based on the UK-EU pooled sample, having taken out
firms from the four countries mentioned above. In column (1), the coefficient estimate on T reat×Af ter
is -2.48 and significant at the 1% significance level. Columns (2) and (3) further control for year and
industry fixed effects, country fixed effects, and firm fixed effects, respectively. The coefficient estimates
on T reat × Af ter remain negative and significant. Columns (4) - (6) report the results from the same
exercise as columns (1) - (3), but using the UK-EU matched sample. The coefficient estimates on
T reat × Af ter remain negative and significant in all three columns.
       Thus, the results presented in Table 10 suggest that the negative impact of the oversight (through
mandatory GHG emission disclosure) on firms' engagement in CSR activities is robust to removing
European firms with confounding policies from our sample.


5.3.3      Oversight and CSR: Sample with Non-EU ETS Firms

Another possible concern comes from the fact that firms in our sample may be covered by European
Union Emissions Trading Scheme (EU ETS) and hence may be required to report their emissions to
  21
   We mainly obtained information on environmental regulations from the CSR disclosure efforts by national govern-
ments and stock exchanges from Harvard Kennedy School. http://iri.hks.harvard.edu/



                                                       28
the EU ETS registry as well as financially incentivized to reduce their emissions through the cap-and-
trade system under EU ETS. To exclude the potential impact of these firms' membership with EU
ETS on their engagement in CSR, we re-ran the baseline model regressions, focusing on non-EU ETS
firms only. To construct the non-EU ETS sample, we used firms' registration information provided
by EU ETS registry and manually matched the names of the account holders under EU ETS registry
with those of the firms in the UK-EU matched sample. We report the results in Table 11.

                                         [Insert Table 11 here.]

   As is shown in this table, the coefficient estimate on T reat × Af ter is negative and significant at
the 5% significance level in most specifications - columns (1) to (5) - and still negative and significant
at the 10% level in column (6). These results suggest that a negative effect of oversight on CSR
activities continues to hold when we take firms registered with the EU ETS out of our sample and
focus on non-EU ETS firms only; and mitigates concerns that our baseline results might be driven by
policy changes in the EU ETS.


5.3.4   CSR Data from Sustainalytics

One may also worry that our main empirical result in the baseline analysis - the negative effect of
oversight on CSR - may be driven by the specifics of the ASSETS4 database used in our analysis so
far. We addressed this point by repeating the regressions from Tables 3, 7, and 8 with a different
database - Sustainalytics - and checking whether our main results continue to hold.
   Sustainalytics is a company that rates the sustainability of listed companies based on their CSR
performance, and provides CSR and Corporate Governance research and ratings globally, from 76
countries over the 2009 - 2016 time period. Sustainalytics measures CSR along the usual environ-
mental, social, and governance categories, and we aggregated the scores from these three dimensions
to get overall ESG scores - our measure of CSR - for firms in the UK and in the 15 other European
countries we consider, during the period 2009 - 2015.
   We re-ran the regressions based on the three types of samples we used in the baseline analysis -
UK-EU pooled sample, UK-EU matched sample, and UK sample - and report the results in Table 12,
where in all specifications standard errors are adjusted for within-firm clustering.

                                         [Insert Table 12 here.]

   The results obtained using the Sustainalytics database are very similar to our baseline results
obtained using the ASSETS4 database. In all three samples, the coefficient estimates on T reat × Af ter


                                                   29
are negative and significant at the 1% or the 5% significance level in all specifications; except when
we introduce both year and firm fixed effects, in which case the estimate is significant at the 10%
significance level. Indeed, these results from are consistent with a negative effect of oversight on CSR
activities in organizations; and mitigate the concern that our baseline results might be specific to the
ASSETS4 database.


5.3.5      CSR Data from Truvalue Labs

One final concern may come from the fact that CSR data is usually self-reported and hence may
not accurately capture firms' engagement in CSR activities. To address this issue, we re-ran our
baseline regression again, but this time using data from Truvalue Labs. Unlike the ASSETS4 and
Sustainalytics databases mentioned above, Truvalue Labs provides CSR scores based on analyzing
thousands of news articles from a variety of sources.22 Specifically, Truvalue Labs uses artificial
intelligence, machine learning and natural language processing in eleven languages to analyze news
articles - from industry experts and publications, think tanks, media sources, and professional blogs -
related to firms' environmental, social, and governance impacts.
       Truvalue Labs determines firms' ESG scores based on 26 categories as defined by Sustainability
Accounting Standards Board (SASB) and provides a continuously-updated "insight scores"based on
all 26 categories, as well as a "materiality scores"based on the most relevant categories as defined by
SASB. We primarily use the more general insight score as our measure of firms' ESG performance,
but similar results can be obtained using the materiality score instead. We report our results in Table
13, where in all specifications standard errors are adjusted for within-firm clustering.

                                              [Insert Table 13 here.]

       These results are similar to our baseline results obtained with the ASSETS4 database: the coeffi-
cient estimates on T reat × Af ter are negative and significant at the 1% or the 5% significance level in
almost all specifications in Table 13. These results suggest that a negative impact of oversight on CSR
activities continues to hold when we use news-based CSR data instead of self-reported CSR data.


5.4      Evidence from Variation in Outsourcing

In this section, we provide a further evidence of the negative relationship between oversight and CSR
predicted by the model, based on a different source of variation in oversight. The key to our identifi-
cation strategy here is that companies and industries that have experienced more pronounced foreign
  22
    According to Truvalue Labs, in 2018 there were more than 250,000 unique articles focusing on firms' sustainability
issues across 8,000 companies globally.


                                                         30
outsourcing of intermediate goods production will be inherently more difficult to oversee/monitor from
a regulatory standpoint; because domestic regulators usually have no jurisdiction abroad, and may
find it difficult if not impossible to observe, let alone verify, actions taken and decisions made in a
foreign country. Thus, by identifying changes in the degree of outsourcing, we can trace out the rela-
tion between the regulators' ability to monitor firms' regulatory compliance and examine its impact
on CSR activities.
   This part of our empirical analysis is based on US data. To construct our measure of CSR, we use
the Kinder, Lydenberg and Domini (KLD) ratings of corporate responsibility. KLD's coverage begins
in 1991 and our analysis uses information from 2005 to 2016. KLD ratings have seven dimensions:
community activities, diversity, employee relations, environmental policies, human rights, corporate
governance, and products' social benefits. However, most of the human rights scores are missing in
the database, and the dimension of corporate governance does not usually reflect CSR (Servaes and
Tamayo, 2013). Hence, we focus on the following five dimensions: community activities, diversity,
employee relations, environmental policies, and products' social benefits. For each firm, KLD reports
the number of strengths and concerns across these five dimensions. We obtain a CSR score for each
firm by adding the total number of CSR strengths and subtracting the total number of CSR concerns
across these five dimensions.
   To proxy for monitoring efficiency, we use industry-level variation in foreign outsourcing by US
firms. We collect data from both the US Input-Output (I-O) tables and the Census of Manufactures
to construct the measure for industry-level foreign outsourcing. In particular, the Bureau of Economic
Analysis (BEA) constructs I-O "make" and "use" tables based on the economic censuses conducted
every five years by the Bureau of the Census. In the make table, each row corresponds to an industry,
and the columns display the commodities that this industry produces. In the use table, each row
corresponds to a commodity, and the columns displays the industries that use this commodity. The
BEA also provides import matrices that impute the value of imports for each industry. .
   We construct our sample using data from years 2007 and 2012, and based on 405 industry cate-
gories, as follows. First, we utilize the I-O use table to obtain, for each industry i, the dollar amount
(in millions of dollars) of intermediate input purchases from each supplier industry j . Second, we use
the BEA's import matrices to obtain the dollar amount of imported commodities within each supplier
industry j . Finally, we calculate our measure of foreign outsourcing for industry i in year t as the
ratio of the sum of imports across supplier industries j over the sum of input purchases - by industry




                                                   31
i - across supplier industries j (Feenstra and Hanson, 1996):

                                             j   Imported Input P urchases of Goodi,j,t
              F oreign Outsourcingi,t =                                                      ,
                                                  j   T otal Input P urchases of Goodi,j,t

where Imported Input P urchases of Goodi,j,t denotes the imputed imported value of intermediate in-
puts from industry j supplying industry i in year t; and T otal Input P urchases of Goodi,j,t represents
the total purchases of intermediate inputs from supplier industry j by industry i in year t.
   Note that the data based on these 405 industries is census data and therefore only available every
five years. In the aforementioned sample - US Sample I - we mainly rely on census data in years 2007
and 2012 to construct our sample and compute the measure for industry-level foreign outsourcing.
   The BEA also provides data on the use of imported commodities by 71 industries during the period
1997 - 2017; while the Census of Manufactures provides the total materials costs for industries from
2005 - 2016. Hence, combining these two databases, we can construct a second sample - US sample II
- based on 71 industries during the period 2005 - 2016. To construct the foreign outsourcing ratio for
industry i in year t in this sample, we take the ratio of the sum of imports across supplier industries j
(as in US Sample I), over industry i's total purchases (in millions of dollars) of non-energy materials:

                                             j   Imported Input P urchases of Goodi,j,t
              F oreign Outsourcingi,t =                                                      ,
                                             T otal N on - Energy M aterial Costi,t

where as before Imported Input P urchases of Goodi,j,t denotes the imputed imported value of inter-
mediate inputs from industry j supplying industry i in year t; and Total Non-Energy Material Costi,t
represents the total purchases (in millions of dollars) of non-energy materials by industry i in year t.
   Note that in both US samples I and II, we use F oreign Outsourcingi,t to measure to what extent
an industry relies on intermediate inputs from its supplier industries which are imported from outside
the US. As argued at the beginning of this section, the higher the degree of foreign outsourcing for
an industry, the more difficult for domestic regulators to monitor this industry; and hence we can use
changes in industry-level foreign outsourcing to capture changes in regulators' ability to monitor firms.
   We specify the following empirical relationship:


            CSRi,j,t = 0 + 1 · F oreign Outsourcingj,t +  · Controli,j,t + t + j + i,t ,            (19)


where CSRi,t denotes the CSR rating for firm i in industry j and year t, which captures firms' en-
gagement in social responsibility activities; F oreign Outsourcingj,t represents the foreign outsourcing
level for industry j in year t; Controli,j,t denotes a set of firm and industry level control variables



                                                       32
which may affect firms' CSR; t is year dummies; j is industry dummies; and i,t is the error term.
Our coefficient of interest is 1 , which captures the impact of industry-level foreign outsourcing on
firms' corporate social responsibility, and which we expect should be positive and significant.

                                          [Insert Table 14 here.]

    Panel A of Table 14 provides summary statistics of firm's net CSR scores in the KLD database for
both US Sample I and US Sample II. Panel B of Table 14 presents the regression results. Columns (1)
- (3) refer to the results based on US Sample I. Column (1) investigates the impact of industry-level
foreign outsourcing on CSR with no additional controls. The coefficient estimate on Foreign Outsourc-
ing is 0.641 and is significant at the 5% significance level. Column (2) includes firm and industry level
characteristics as controls into the model specification: Firm Size, ROA, Leverage, Capital Expendi-
ture, Market-to-Book ratio, Asset Tangibility, and Industry Competition. The coefficient estimate on
Foreign Outsourcing is 0.97 and is significant at the 1% significance level. Column (3) further controls
for year and industry fixed effects, with a coefficient estimate on F oreign Outsourcing of 1.17, which
is significant at the 10% significance level.
    Columns (4) - (6) repeat the same specifications, respectively, as columns (1) - (3), but with US
Sample II. The results are once again very similar: in all three columns, the coefficient estimate on
Foreign Outsourcing is positive and significant at the 5% significance level.
    Overall, the results of Table 14 provide support for a positive relationship between industry-level
foreign outsourcing and CSR. To the extent that industries with more foreign outsourcing are less likely
to be efficiently monitored by regulators, these results are consistent with our model's prediction that
less oversight leads to more CSR.


6    How Does Oversight Reduce CSR?

In Section 5 we have provided, in a myriad of empirical tests and robustness checks, evidence of
negative impact of oversight on CSR. But how, and why, does regulatory monitoring reduce firms'
engagement in CSR activities? The model presented at the beginning of this paper provides an
answer to this question. It suggests that lower oversight, by loosening regulation and raising the
level of socially harmful actions (say pollution) that firms could choose, reduces socially responsible
workers' reservation utility, and hence increases the appeal of working for the firm and engaging in
CSR activities (through over-compliance) relative to the their outside option. This in turn creates an
opportunity for firms to extract from them the rents thus created, through lower wages.



                                                    33
   In this section, we investigate this channel empirically, and present evidence of interactions between
oversight, employment appeal, wages, and CSR that are consistent with the mechanisms predicted by
our model. We then briefly discuss two other channels through which oversight could affect CSR.


6.1   Oversight, Employment appeal, CSR and Wages

As mentioned above, in our model lower oversight, by giving firms the option to increase the level of
socially harmful actions, increases the appeal of working for responsible firms that choose instead not
to take advantage of this option and to engage in CSR through over-compliance. Three key empirical
implications thus emerge from this: 1) We should expect a positive relationship between CSR and
employee perception and retention. 2) The extra appeal of socially responsible firms to responsible
employees should make them willing to accept lower wages in order to be able to work in these firms,
and hence we should observe a negative association between CSR and wages. And 3), because this
extra appeal is the result of lower oversight to begin with, we should expect less oversight to lead to
lower wages. We consider each of these implications in turn.

   CSR and employee perception/retention. A positive association between CSR on the one
hand, and employee perception and retention on the other, has been documented in prior work.
Turban and Greening (1996), for example, find that CSR ratings are positively associated with firms'
reputations and appeal as employers. Similarly Albinger and Freeman (2000) document that employer
attractiveness is higher for firms with higher CSR ratings. Greening and Turban (2000) provide
experimental evidence that prospective employees are more likely to seek employment from firms
engaging in CSR activities.
   Regarding retention, Carnahan et al. (2017) use data from large law firms to show that higher
levels of CSR are associated with lower turnover to startup law firms; and Flammer and Kacperczyk
(2017) find that CSR helps reduce employee departures to rival firms. Last but not least, Bode et
al. (2015) use data from a global management consulting company, and find that participation in
corporate social initiatives within the company - which interestingly require participating employees
to accept a significant reduction in pay (see next paragraph) - is positively associated with employee
retention.

   CSR and Wages. The relationship between CSR and wages has also been documented in earlier
research. In their discussion on the subject, for example, Bettignies and Robinson (2018) point to
Frank's (2004) survey evidence from Cornell graduates documenting a compensating wage differential
for CSR; to a 24% to 38% pay differential between firms with a strong reputation for CSR and firms


                                                  34
with weak reputation (Nyborg and Zhang, 2013); and to recent experimental work by Burbano (2016)
identifying a negative causal effect of receiving information about an employer's CSR on prospective
workers' wage requirements for a job. In this latter work, Burbano (2016) finds a 44% decrease in
wage bids submitted by workers after learning about the employer's CSR activities.
    We complement these results with a simple analysis of our own, in which we use firm-level wage
data from Compustat Global and the CSR data from ASSETS4 to examine the relationship between
employee wages and CSR. We report the results in Table 15.

                                              [Insert Table 15 here.]

    The dependent variable in Table 15 is the natural logarithm of one plus the average employee
wage in firm i in year t, while the main independent variable is the CSR ratings in firm i in year t.
Columns (1) and (2) present the results based on the UK-EU pooled sample, while columns (3) and
(4) and columns (5) and (6) show the results based on the UK-EU matched sample and UK sample
respectively. To take into account the other determinants of employee wages in addition to firms'
engagement in CSR activities, we include a battery of control variables in the model specifications
across columns (1) - (6). First, we include Firm Size, ROA, Leverage, and Financial Constraint to
control for the effects of firm size, firm performance, operational complexity, and firms' cash position,
respectively, on employee wages (Faleye, Reis, and Venkateswaran, 2013). Second, recognizing the
challenges associated with wage regressions using firm-level data, we include Capital Expenditure, R&D
Intensity, and Asset Tangibility as controls in the regression, in an attempt to account - admittedly
imperfectly - for the impact of employees' knowledge and skills on their wages. Finally, we also control
for industry competition as an additional proxy for employees' bargaining power in wage negotiations;
the idea being that in less competitive (i.e. more concentrated) industries worker have fewer outside
options and hence lower bargaining power in negotiations.
    The results from columns (1) - (4), based on both UK-EU pooled sample and UK-EU matched
sample show coefficient estimates on CSR that are negative and significant at either the 1% or the
5% significance level. While the results from columns (5) and (6), based on the within-UK sample are
not significant,23 overall the results from Table 15 do provide some support for a negative relationship
between CSR and employee wages, which is consistent with the prior empirical literature discussed
above, and with our model prediction.

    Oversight and Wages. To investigate the relationship between oversight and wages, we first
  23
     We also re-ran the same regressions using the within-UK sample but a different CSR database - Sustainalytics; and
found a negative but insignificant impact of firms' CSR on wages. We conjecture that these insignificant results based
on the within-UK sample may come from the relatively small size of the sample used in these regressions.


                                                         35
consider the same difference-in-difference approach we used in the baseline regressions in Section 5,
based on The Companies Act (2013) in the UK, but with wages as a dependent variable instead of
CSR. We present the results in Table 16.

                                          [Insert Table 16 here.]

   The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of one plus the average employee wage in firm
i in year t. As mentioned above these firm-level wage data come from Compustat Global. The key
coefficient of interest is the T reat × Af ter coefficient, which captures the treatment effect of oversight
on average employee wages. Columns (1) - (2), (3) - (4), and (5) - (6) present the results based on the
EU-UK pooled sample, on the EU-UK matched sample, and on the within-UK sample, respectively.
The coefficient estimate on T reat × Af ter is positive and significant at the 1% significance level in
columns (1) - (2), and at the 10% significance level in columns (3) - (6), providing overall support for
a positive impact of oversight on wages, as predicted by our model.
   Importantly, in our model CSR and wages are jointly determined - in equilibrium - as a result of
oversight. In order to specifically take into account the joint impact of oversight on CSR and wages,
we also use the seemingly-unrelated-regression (SUR) estimation method; which involves specifying a
system of two equations with wages and CSR as dependent variables, and estimating these equations
simultaneously. This allows us to take into account the potential impact of cross-equation error
covariance and hence to generate more efficient coefficient estimates than the single equation estimation
discussed above. We report the results in Table 17.

                                          [Insert Table 17 here.]

   Panels A, B and C present the results based on the EU-UK pooled sample, the EU-UK matched
sample, and the within-UK sample, respectively. In each panel, columns (1) and (2) presents the
results with CSR and with the natural logarithm of one plus average employee wage as dependent
variables, respectively, controlling for the impacts of firm and industry level characteristics. Columns
(3) and (4) report the results when year and industry fixed effects are included in the regressions. And
columns (5) and (6) show the results when further controlling for year and firm fixed effects.
   In Panel A, as expected coefficient estimates on T reat × Af ter are negative in the "CSR" columns
(1), (3), and (5); and positive in the "employee wage" columns (2), (4), and (6). All of these estimates
are significant at the 1% significance level. We observe the same patterns in both Panel B and Panel
C. Thus, consistent with our model these empirical results suggest a positive impact of oversight on
employee wages, a relationship which in fact seems even stronger when cross-equation error correlations
are taken into account using SUR estimation.

                                                    36
6.2        Other Channels

In the preceding section, we presented evidence of interactions between oversight, employee percep-
tion/retention, wages and CSR that are consistent with the "rent extraction" prediction of our model.
But oversight could affect CSR through other channels.
         Social pressure for firms to behave responsibly, for example, has increased dramatically over the
last 15-20 years (Flammer, 2013), and could be claimed to have had a positive impact on CSR. Indeed
our empirical results from Section 5 suggest that all firms - in both control and treatment groups -
have increased their engagement in CSR over the sample period.24 One could then argue that the
increased oversight associated with The Companies Act (2013) may lead to an additional increase in
social pressure for firms to behave responsibly, and in turn to a further rise in CSR activities.
         Alternatively, one could argue that the mandatory GHG emissions disclosure policy in the UK,
by making it easier to access information about firms' emissions, may reduce activists' marginal cost
of campaigning for more responsible corporate behavior and lead to more active campaigning,25 with
firms engaging in more CSR as a result.
         Both of these possible channels imply a positive relationship between oversight and CSR, which
at first sight may appear inconsistent with the empirical evidence we presented in Section 5. We do
not necessarily view these alternative channels as substitutes for the "rent extraction" mechanism we
examined in this paper, and in fact they may well be complementary to it and indeed co-exist with
it. Empirically, their positive impact on CSR may simply be more than offset by the stronger "first-
order" negative effect of the "rent extraction" mechanism brought to light by our model, generating
the evidence we observed.


7         Conclusion

This paper develops a model in which 1) purpose-driven firms emerge as an optimal organizational
form even for self-interested, profit-maximizing entrepreneurs; and 2) CSR arises endogenously as a
response to imperfect oversight. In a nutshell, purpose-driven organizations allow the entrepreneur to
create rents for responsible workers by allowing these employees to reduce the negative externalities
that would be generated without them, and to extract these rents through lower wages.
    24
     In Tables 3, 7, and 8 the coefficient estimates on Af ter are positive and significant; and the sum of the coefficient
estimates on Af ter and T reat × Af ter is positive and significant (unreported) in the EU-UK pooled sample and the
EU-UK matched sample (though not in the within-UK sample).
  25
     For example, see Baron (2001), Baron and Diermeier (2007), or Bonardi et al. (2020) for models of strategic activism
in which the activist exerts some kind of campaign effort which would rise if the marginal cost of providing this effort
decreased.




                                                            37
       But through this rent extraction the entrepreneur internalizes the pro-social preferences of her re-
sponsible workers, and in turn this is precisely what leads this "vicariously responsible" entrepreneur to
engage in CSR activities, provided that regulatory oversight is poor enough and accordingly regulation
loose enough to make these endeavors worthwhile.
       The main empirical test of our model comes from The Companies Act (2013), which required all
quoted UK firms to report their GHG emissions in their annual reports. Because this Act did not
affect firms in other European countries, it provides a unique setting for our empirical analysis. After
the introduction of the mandatory disclosure policy, UK firms on average have lower CSR ratings
compared to firms from other European countries. We argue that the mandatory disclosure policy
increased oversight in the UK, which in turn lead to lower CSR activities in equilibrium among UK
firms.
       We find additional support for our model using a sample of US data. In that part of our analysis, we
use increases in industry-level foreign outsourcing to capture reductions in regulators' ability to monitor
firms. We identify a positive relationship between industry-level foreign outsourcing and firms' CSR;
again consistent with the prediction of our model. We also explore empirically the channels through
which regulatory oversight may affect CSR; and in particular the interactions between oversight,
employee wages and CSR; and present evidence consistent with the empirical implications of our
theoretical framework.
       Taken together, these findings offer two fresh perspectives on Milton Friedman's admonitions
against the social responsibility of business. First, when (some) workers are socially responsible, it is
precisely the profit-maximization by a self-interested entrepreneur advocated by Friedman, and the rent
extraction that it involves, that effectively transfers pro-social preferences onto the entrepreneur and
in turn leads to social improvements.26 Second, our results suggest that CSR emerges when demand
for good corporate behavior cannot be efficiently provided by government because the technology
it possesses for monitoring corporate behavior is weak. In such a world, CSR emerges precisely
as Benabou and Tirole (2010) envision, "...as an alternative response to market and distributive
failures. . . " As the world becomes increasingly globalized and technology continues to stay in front of
regulation, it is easy imagine that the relative efficiency of CSR will continue to make it an important
part of corporate strategy going forward. Our paper suggests that the emergence of CSR as a central
element of corporate strategy is not a rebuke to Friedman's admonition. Instead, when the rules of the
game are poorly enforced, it can arise when firms behave exactly as Friedman suggested they should.
  26
    Holmstr¨
           om (2020) also made this point when he argued that profit maximization in an agency framework involves
joint-maximization and hence de facto takes into account the preferences of both principal and agent.




                                                       38
References

 [1] Albinger, Heather S., and Sarah J. Freeman. 2000. "Corporate Social Performance and Attrac-
    tiveness as an Employer to Different Job Seeking Populations." Journal of Business Ethics 28
    (3): 243-253.

 [2] Arora, Seema and Shubhashis Gangopadhyay. 1995. "Toward a Theoretical Model of Voluntary
    Overcompliance." Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 28 (3): 289-309.

 [3] Bagnoli, Mark and Susan G. Watts. 2003. "Selling to Socially Responsible Consumers: Competi-
    tion and the Private Provision of Public Goods." Journal of Economic and Management Strategy
    12 (30): 419-45.

 [4] Baron, David P. 2001. "Private Politics, Corporate Social Responsibility, and Integrated Strat-
    egy." Journal of Economic and Management Strategy 10 (1): 7-45

 [5] Baron, David P. 2007. "Corporate Social Responsibility and Social Entrepreneurship." Journal
    of Economics and Management Strategy 16 (3): 683-717.

 [6] Baron, David P. 2008. "Managerial Contracting and Corporate and Social Responsibility." Journal
    of Public Economics 92 (1-2): 268-88.

 [7] Baron, David P. 2010. "Morally Motivated Self Regulation." American Economic Review 100
    (4): 1299-1329.

 [8] Baron, David P. 2013. Business and its Environment. Pearson, 7th Edition, Chapter 20.

 [9] Baron, David P. and Daniel Diermeier. 2007. "Strategic Activism and Nonmarket Strategy."
    Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 16 (3): 599-634.

[10] Benabou, Roland and Jean Tirole. 2003. "Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation." Review of Economic
    Studies 70 (3): 489-520.

[11] Benabou, Roland and Jean Tirole. 2006. "Incentives and Prosocial Behavior." American Economic
    Review 96 (5): 1652-1678.

[12] Benabou, Roland and Jean Tirole. 2010. "Individual and Corporate Social Responsibility." Eco-
    nomica 77. 1-19.

[13] Bettignies (de), Jean-Etienne and David T. Robinson. 2018. "When is Social Responsibility So-
    cially Desirable?" Journal of Labor Economics 36 (4): 1023-1072.

                                                39
[14] Besley, Timothy, and Maitreesh Ghatak. 2005. "Competition and Incentives with Motivated
    Agents." American Economic Review 95 (3): 616-636.

[15] Besley, Timothy, and Maitreesh Ghatak. 2007. "Retailing Public Goods: The Economics of Cor-
    porate Social Responsibility." Journal of Public Economics 91 (9): 1645-1663.

[16] Bode, Christiane, Jasjit Singh and Michelle Rogan. 2015. "Corporate Social Initiatives and Em-
    ployee Retention." Organization Science 26 (6): 1702-1720.

[17] Bonardi, Jean-Philippe, Guy Holburn and John Maxwell. 2020. "Activist Campaigns as Contest
    Models" Working Paper, HEC Lausanne, Indiana University and Western University.

[18] Brekke, Kjell Aren and Karine Nyborg. 2004. "Moral Hazard and Moral Motivation: Corporate
    Social Responsibility as Labor Market Screening." University of Oslo Department of Economics
    Memorandum 35/2004.

[19] Burbano, Vanessa. 2016. "Social Responsibility Messages and Worker Wage Requirements: Field
    Experimental Evidence from Online Labor Marketplaces." Organization Science 27(4): 1010-
    1028.

[20] Calveras, Aleix, Juan-Jose Ganuza and Gerard Llobet. 2007. "Regulation, Corporate Social Re-
    sponsibility and Activism." Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 16 (3): 719-740.

[21] Carlin, Bruce I. and Simon Gervais. 2009. "Work Ethic, Employment Contracts, and Firm Value."
    Journal of Finance 64: 785-821.

[22] Carnahan, Seth, David Kryscynski and Daniel Olson. 2017. "When Does Corporate Social Re-
    sponsibility Reduce Employee Turnover? Evidence from Attorneys Before and After 9/11."
    Academy of Management Journal 60 (5): 1932-1962.

[23] Cespa, Giovanni and Glacinta Cestone. 2007. "Corporate Social Responsibility and Managerial
    Entrenchment." Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 16 (3): 741-771.

[24] Chatain, Olivier and Elena Plaksenkova. 2019. "NGOs and the Creation of Value in Supply
    Chains." Strategic Management Journal 40: 604-630.

[25] Chen, Yi-Chun, Mingyi Hung and Yongxiang Wang. 2018. "The Effect of Mandatory CSR Disclo-
    sure on Firm Profitability and Social Externalities: Evidence from China." Journal of Accounting
    and Economics 65: 169-190.



                                                40
[26] Cheng, Ing-Haw, Harrison Hong and Kelly Shue. 2012. "Do Managers Do Good With Other
    People's Money?" Working Paper, University of Chicago and Princeton University.

[27] Christensen, Hans B., Eric Floyd, Lisa Yao Liu and Mark Maffett. 2017. "The Real Effects of
    Mandated Information on Social Responsibility in Financial Reports: Evidence from Mine-Safety
    Records." Journal of Accounting and Economics 64: 284-304.

[28] The Companies Act 2006 (Strategic Report and Directors' Report) Regulations 2013.
    https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukdsi/2013/9780111540169/pdfs/ukdsi 9780111540169 en.pdf

[29] Delfgaauw, Josse and Robert Dur. 2008. "Incentives and Workers' Motivation in the Public Sec-
    tor." Economic Journal 118: 171-191.

[30] Doshi, Anil R., Glen W. S. Dowell and Michael W. Toffel. 2013. "How Firms Respond to Manda-
    tory Disclosure." Strategic Management Journal 34: 1209-1231.

[31] Eccles, Robert G., Ioannis Ioannou and George Serafeim. 2014. "The Impact of Corporate Sustain-
    ability on Organizational Processes and Performance." Management Science 60 (11): 2835-2857.

[32] Edmans, Alex. 2011. "Does the Stock Market Fully Value Intangibles? Employee Satisfaction and
    Equity Prices." Journal of Financial Economics 101: 621-640.

[33] Edmans, Alex. 2020. Grow the Pie. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

[34] Ellingsen, Tore and Magnus Johanesson. 2008. "Pride and Prejudice: The Human Side of Incentive
    Theory." American Economic Review 98 (3): 990-1008.

[35] Faleye,Olubunmi, Ebru Reis, and Anand Venkateswaran. 2013. "The determinants and effects of
    CEOemployee pay ratios." Journal of Banking and Finance 37: 3258-3272.

[36] Feenstra, Robert C. and Hanson, Gordan H. 1996. "Globalization, Outsourcing, and Wage In-
    equality." American Economic Review 86 (2): 240-245.

[37] Flammer, Caroline. 2013. "Corporate Social Responsibility and Shareholder Reaction: The En-
    vironmental Awareness of Investors." Academy of Management Journal 56 (3): 758-781.

[38] Flammer, Caroline. 2015a. "Does Product Market Competition Foster Corporate Social Respon-
    sibility? Evidence from Trade Liberalization." Strategic Management Journal 36: 1469-1485.

[39] Flammer, Caroline. 2015b. "Does Corporate Social Responsibility Lead to Superior Financial
    Performance? A Regression Discontinuity Approach." Management Science 61 (11): 2549-2568.

                                                41
[40] Flammer, Caroline. 2018. "Competing for Government Procurement Contracts: The Role of
    Corporate Social Responsibility." Strategic Management Journal 39: 1299-1324.

[41] Flammer, Caroline and Jiao Luo. 2017. "Corporate Social Responsibility as an Employee Gover-
    nance Tool: Evidence from a Quasi-Experiment." Strategic Management Journal 38: 163-183.

[42] Flammer, Caroline and Aleksandra Kacpercyk. 2019. "Corporate Social Responsibility as a De-
    fense Against Knowledge Spillovers: Evidence from the Inevitable Disclosure Doctrine." Strategic
    Management Journal 40: 1243-1267.

[43] Frank, Robert H. 2004. What Price the Moral High Ground? Princeton University Press.

[44] Friedman, Milton. 1963. Capitalism and Freedom. University of Chicago Press.

[45] Friedman, Milton. 1970. "The Social Responsibility of Business is to Increase its Profits." The
    New York Times Magazine, September 13th.

[46] Galasso, Alberto and Mihkel Tombak. 2014. "Switching to Green: The Timing of Socially Re-
    sponsible Innovation." Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 23 (3): 669-691.

[47] Gartenberg, Claudine, Andrea Prat and George Serafeim. 2019. "Corporate Purpose and Financial
    Performance." Organization Science 30 (1): 1-18.

[48] Greening, Daniel W. and Daniel B. Turban. 2000. "Corporate Social Performance as a Competitive
    Advantage in Attracting a Quality Workforce." Business and Society 39 (3): 254-80.

[49] Grewal, Jody. 2017. "The Effects of Transparency Regulation on Voluntary Disclosers: Evidence
    from Mandatory Carbon Reporting." Working Paper, University of Toronto.

[50] Grewal, Jody, Edward J. Riedl and George Serafeim. 2019. "Market Reaction to Mandatory
    Nonfinancial Disclosure." Management Science 65 (7): 3061-3084.

[51] Hart, Oliver, and Luigi Zingales. 2017. "Companies Should Maximize Shareholder Welfare Not
    Market Value."Journal of Law, Finance, and Accounting 2 (2): 247-274.

[52] Heckman James C., Lochner Lance J. and Petra Todd P. 2006. "Earnings functions, rates of
    return and treatment effects: the Mincer equation and beyond." In: Hanushek E, Welch F (eds)
    Handbook of the economics of education, vol 1. Ch 7. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 307-458.

[53] Henderson, Rebecca, and Eric Van den Steen. 2015. "Why do Firms Have "Purpose" The Firm's
    Role as a Carrier of Identity and Reputation." American Economic Review: Papers and Proceed-
    ings 105 (5): 326-330.

                                                42
[54] Holmstr¨
            om, Bengt. 2020. Panel Discussion on "Corporate Purpose and the Theory of the Firm."
    IESE-ECGI Conference: Can Purpose Deliver Better Corporate Governance? October 28-30,
    2020. https://www.iese.edu/faculty-research/2020-iese-ecgi-corporate-governance-conference/

[55] Ioannou, Ioannis, Shelley Xin Li and George Serafeim. 2016. "The Effect of Target Difficulty on
    Target Completion: The Case of Reducing Carbon Emissions." The Accounting Review 91(5):
    14671492.

[56] Kitzmueller, Markus and Jay Shimshack. 2012. "Economic Perspectives on Corporate Social Re-
    sponsibility." Journal of Economic Literature 50(1): 51-84.

[57] Konar, Shameek and Mark A. Cohen. 2001. "Does the Market Value Environmental Perfor-
    mance?" Journal of Economic Literature 83(2): 281-289.

[58] Kr¨
       uger, Philipp, 2015. "Climate Change and Firm Valuation: Evidence from a Quasi-Natural
    Experiment." Working Paper, Swiss Finance Institute.

[59] Lemmon, Michael, and Michael Roberts. 2010. "The response of corporate financing and invest-
    ment to changes in the supply of credit." Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 45:
    555-587.

[60] Liang, Hao and Luc Renneboog, 2017. "On the foundations of corporate social responsibility."
    Journal of Finance 72(2): 853-910.

[61] Lyon, Thomas P. and John W. Maxwell. 2004. Corporate Environmentalism and Public Policy.
    Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press.

[62] Lyon, Thomas P. and John W. Maxwell. Forthcoming. "Greenwash: Corporate Environmental
    Disclosure under Threat of Audit." Journal of Economics and Management Strategy.

[63] Maxwell, John W., Thomas P. Lyon, and Steven C. Hackett. 2000. "Self-Regulation and Social
    Welfare: The Political Economy of Corporate Environmentalism." Journal of Law and Economics
    43 (2): 583-617.

[64] McWilliams, Abagail and Donald Siegel. 2001. "Corporate Social Responsibility: A Theory of
    the Firm Perspective." Academy of Management Review 26 (1): 117-127.

[65] Minor, Dylan. 2015. "The Value of Corporate Citizenship: Protection." Harvard Business School
    Working Paper # 16-021.



                                                43
[66] Minor, Dylan and John Morgan. 2013. "CSR as Reputation Insurance." California Management
    Review 53(3): 40-59.

[67] Nyborg, Karine and Tao Zhang, 2013. "Is Corporate Social Responsibility Associated with Lower
    Wages?" Environmental Resource Economics 55: 107-117.

[68] Prendergast, Canice. 2007. "The Motivation and Bias of Bureaucrats." American Economic Re-
    view 97 (1): 180-196.

[69] Prendergast, Canice. 2008. "Motivation and Incentives." American Economic Review 98 (2):
    201-205.

[70] Rosenbaum, Paul R. and Donald B. Rubin, 1985. "Constructing a Control Group Using Mul-
    tivariate Matched Sampling Methods That Incorporate the Propensity Score. " The American
    Statistician 39 (1): 33-38.

[71] Servaes, Henri, and Tamayo, Ane, 2013. "The Impact of Corporate Social Responsibility on Firm
    Value: The Role of Customer Awareness. " Management Science 59 (5): 1045-1061.

[72] Shimshak, Jay P. and Michael B. Ward. 2008. "Enforcement and Over-Compliance." Journal of
    Environmental Economics and Management 55: 90-105.

[73] Turban, Daniel B., and Daniel W. Greening. 1996. "Corporate Social Performance and Orga-
    nizational Attractiveness to Prospective Employees." Academy of Management Journal 40 (3):
    658-672.

[74] Uchida, Toshihiro and Paul J. Ferraro. "Voluntary Development of Environmental Management
    Systems: Motivations and Regulatory Implications," Journal of Regulatory Economics 32: 37-65.

[75] Vogel, David J. 2005. The Market for Virtue: The Potential and Limits of Corporate Social
    Responsibility. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.




                                               44
                                      Table 1: Variable Definitions
This table presents the definitions for the variables used in our empirical analysis. All variables are measured
annually at the firm level, except for foreign outsourcing and industry competition which are measured at the
industry level.

Variables          Definitions                                                       Sources
                   The sum of a firm's total ESG score from three dimensions:
CSR                                                                                  ASSETS4; Sustainalytics
                   environment, society, and governance.

CSR-Env            A firm's pillar score in environmental performance.               ASSETS4

                   The sum of a firm's pillar scores in social and governance per-
CSR-Nonenv                                                                           ASSETS4
                   formance.

                   The total number of CSR strengths subtracting the total num-
                   ber of CSR concerns across the following five dimensions: com-
CSR (US)                                                                             KLD database
                   munity activities, diversity, employee relations, environmental
                   policies, and products' social benefit.

                   The share of the total imported inputs purchases by industry i    Bureau of Economic Analysis In-
Foreign     Out-
                   of the total intermediate input purchases by industry i in year   put/Output Tables; Census of
sourcing
                   t.                                                                Manufactures

                   Natural logarithm of one plus a firm's total assets, measured     Compustat Global (UK/EU);
Firm Size
                   at the end of fiscal year.                                        Compustat (for US firms)

                   Operating income before depreciation divided by book value        Compustat Global (UK/EU);
ROA
                   of total assets, measured at the end of fiscal year.              Compustat (for US firms)

                   Book value of debt divided by book value of total assets mea-     Compustat Global (UK/EU);
Leverage
                   sured at the end of fiscal year.                                  Compustat (for US firms)

Capital Expen-     A firm's capital expenditure scaled by its total assets, mea-     Compustat Global (UK/EU);
diture             sured at the end of fiscal year.                                  Compustat (for US firms)

R&D Expendi-       A firm's R&D expenditure scaled by its total assets, measured     Compustat Global (UK/EU);
ture               at the end of fiscal year.                                        Compustat (for US firms)

Asset Tangibil-    A firm's net property, plants and equipment scaled by its total   Compustat Global (UK/EU);
ity                assets, measured at the end of fiscal year                        Compustat (for US firms)

                   A firm's earnings before depreciation and amortization less the
Financial Con-                                                                       Compustat Global (UK/EU);
                   change in working capital less capital expenditure, scaled by
straint                                                                              Compustat (for US firms)
                   its toal assets, measured at the end of fiscal year.

                   Market value of equity plus book value of assets minus book
                                                                                     Compustat Global (UK/EU);
Market-to-Book     value of equity minus balance sheet deferred taxes divided by
                                                                                     Compustat (for US firms)
                   book value of assets, measured at the end of fiscal year.

Industry Com-                                                                        Compustat Global (UK/EU);
                   One minus the HHI based on four-digit SIC industries.
petition                                                                             Compustat (for US firms)
                   Natural logarithm of one plus average employee wages in firm
Wages                                                                                Compustat Global (UK/EU)
                   i in year t, measured at the end of fiscal year.



                                                     45
                                      Table 2: Summary Statistics

In Panel A of this table we report summary statistics of all the variables in our UK/EU sample. Panel B presents
summary statistics of CSR in Thomas Reuters ASSETS4 for firms in the UK and the 15 other European countries
during the period 2005 - 2015. Variable definitions are provided in Table 1.

Panel A
Variables                     10%          Mean           Median        90%        Std. Dev.      Firm-Yrs
                             Pctile                                    Pctile
CSR                          34.00          56.19          56.92        77.27         16.23         7329
CSR-Env                      31.42         60.02          61.18         87.35         20.76         7329
CSR-Nonenv                   62.38         107.83         108.69       151.41         33.40         7329
Firm Size                     6.60          8.90           8.67         11.48          1.92         7328
ROA                           0.02           0.12           0.11         0.22          0.09         7292
Leverage                      0.03           0.26           0.24         0.50          0.17         6944
Capital Expenditure           0.01          0.05           0.04        0.1040          0.04         5772
R&D Intensity                   0            0.01             0          0.04          0.03         7328
Asset Tangibility             0.01          0.46           0.36         1.02           0.40         6893
Financial Constraint         -0.06          0.10           0.07          0.24          0.26         5642
Industry Competition            0           0.58           0.64           1            0.34         7329

Panel B
Country                      Mean         Median       Std. Dev.         Min          Max         Firm-Yrs
Austria                      50.84         50.08         12.64          22.11         83.23          170
Belgium                      50.05         51.29         16.51          17.14         84.57          260
Denmark                      51.60         52.69         15.73          15.44         82.38          225
Finland                      55.86         56.52         13.84          21.68         86.74          221
France                       62.87         63.98         14.40          23.92         94.33          780
Germany                      59.07         60.36         16.65          15.44         95.34          736
Ireland                      47.93         45.70         14.50          12.97         84.37          216
Italy                        53.30         53.30         18.60          14.36         93.17          446
Luxembourg                   53.54         53.10         15.75          15.76         85.63           79
Netherlands                  59.47         60.66         16.45          16.09         93.91          334
Norway                       56.63         57.59         16.05          18.63          87.7          150
Portugal                     59.86         63.88         15.69          20.98         82.46          119
Spain                        62.29         64.69         15.88           7.76         92.62          477
Sweden                       57.27         58.34         14.27          21.41         86.87          422
Switzerland                  53.34         53.06         18.87          12.13         96.17          624
United Kingdom               54.44         54.70         14.79           9.87         94.64         2,070
Total                        56.19         56.92         16.23           7.76         96.17         7,329




                                                     46
                      Table 3: Oversight and CSR: UK-EU Pooled Sample
This table presents coefficients estimates of regressions which examine the effect of governments' ability to
monitor firms' compliance on firms' engagement in CSR. We use the introduction of the mandatory disclosure
of greenhouse gas emissions to capture the exogenous change in governments' ability to monitor firms. We
construct a UK-EU pooled sample by pooling UK firms with firms from the other 15 European countries. The
dependent variable is CSR for firm i in year t. "Treat" is a dummy variable that takes on the value one for
UK-listed firms, zero for all EU firms in the data. "After" is a dummy for before or after the introduction
of the 2013 Companies Act. "Treat × After" is the interaction term that provides the difference in difference
estimate. Specifically, column (1) presents the results showing the impact of oversight on CSR. Column (2)
includes firm and industry level characteristics. Columns (3) - (6) further control for year, industry, country, and
firm fixed effects respectively. The sample period is from 2005-2015. All variables are defined in Table 1. The
standard errors reported in parentheses below the coefficient estimates are adjusted for within-firm clustering.
Significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level is indicated by *,**, ***, respectively.


Variables                       (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)               (6)
Treat                          -1.65       5.55***       5.50***       4.50***      12.97***
                              (1.050)      (1.045)       (1.051)       (1.150)       (2.290)
After                         3.26***      3.48***
                              (0.458)      (0.501)
T reat × Af ter               -1.70**     -2.35***      -2.39***       -2.18**       -2.15**            -1.57*
                              (0.860)      (0.888)       (0.889)       (0.864)       (0.856)           (0.883)
Firm Size                                  5.14***       5.14***      5.55***        6.53***          2.36***
                                           (0.299)       (0.300)       (0.330)       (0.351)           (0.676)
ROA                                       13.88***      14.75***        7.89*       11.98***              3.12
                                           (4.641)       (4.706)       (4.416)       (4.189)           (4.394)
Leverage                                   -5.89**       -5.87**         -4.01      -7.23***             -0.03
                                           (2.511)       (2.521)       (2.696)       (2.677)           (2.257)
Capital Expenditure                        -16.91*        -13.45         -1.58        -0.41           15.74**
                                           (8.744)       (8.860)      (10.308)       (9.902)           (7.084)
R&D Intensity                               20.57          20.07        36.59*      35.02**              -2.20
                                          (14.337)      (14.350)      (19.420)      (17.449)          (15.237)
Asset Tangibility                          3.00***        2.80**       3.41**        3.30**              -0.62
                                           (1.161)       (1.169)       (1.582)       (1.463)           (1.754)
Financial Constraint                        -0.91          -0.62         -0.54        -0.19               0.55
                                           (0.706)       (0.727)       (0.737)       (0.739)           (0.623)
Industry Competition                         0.19           0.02         -2.13        -1.83              -0.64
                                           (1.483)       (1.487)       (1.614)       (1.616)           (1.400)

Year FE                          No           No             Yes         Yes           Yes               Yes
Industry FE                      No           No             No          Yes           Yes               No
Country FE                       No           No             No          No            Yes               No
Firm FE                          No           No             No          No            No                Yes

R-squared                      0.012        0.254          0.264        0.484         0.520            0.805
Clusters                       1,024         780            780          780           780              780
Observations                   7,329        5,549          5,549        5,549         5,549            5,549




                                                        47
            Table 4: Difference-in-Difference Analysis for CSR Dynamics
This table reports regression estimates of the CSR dynamics of treatment and control firms surrounding
the mandatory regulation in UK in 2011. The dependent variable is CSR for firm i in year t. The standard
errors reported in parentheses below the coefficient estimates are adjusted for within-firm clustering.
Significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level is indicated by *,**, ***, respectively.


Variables                             (1)      Variables                            (1) Continued
Treat                             14.32***     T reat × Regulation(t + 1)               -3.100*
                                   (2.539)                                              (1.699)
Regulation (t-5 )                   -1.01*     T reat × Regulation(t + 2)               -2.870*
                                   (0.660)                                              (1.709)
Regulation (t-4 )                    0.230     T reat × Regulation(t + 3)              -4.140**
                                   (0.786)                                              (1.757)
Regulation (t-3 )                 2.330***     T reat × Regulation(t + 4)             -3.840***
                                   (0.811)                                              (1.765)
Regulation (t-2 )                 3.230***     Firm Size                               6.510***
                                   (0.835)                                              (0.348)
Regulation (t-1 )                 5.220***     ROA                                     12.33***
                                   (0.827)                                              (3.757)
Regulation (t)                    5.370***     Leverage                                -5.850**
                                   (0.886)                                              (2.285)
Regulation (t+1 )                 5.370***     Capital Expenditure                        3.49
                                   (0.848)                                              (9.397)
Regulation (t+2 )                 5.800***     R&D Intensity                              3.49
                                   (0.864)                                             (17.378)
Regulation (t+3 )                 5.740***     Asset Tangibility                         3.15**
                                   (0.896)                                              (1.461)
Regulation (t+4 )                 8.110***     Financial Constraint                      -0.270
                                   (0.899)                                              (0.732)
T reat × Regulation(t - 5)           1.220     Industry Competition                      -1.870
                                   (1.264)                                             (21.611)
T reat × Regulation(t - 4)          -1.780     Industry Fixed Effects                     Yes
                                  (1.5310)
T reat × Regulation(t - 3)          -1.920     Country Fixed Effects                       Yes
                                   (1.615)
T reat × Regulation(t - 2)          -1.860     R-squared                                 0.520
                                   (1.681)
T reat × Regulation(t - 1)          -1.440     Clusters                                    780
                                   (1.428)
T reat × Regulation(t)             -3.280*     Observations                              5,549
                                   (1.721)




                                                  48
                                            Table 5: Pearson Correlations
This table presents the Pearson correlations among CSR, Firm Size, ROA, Leverage, Capital Expenditure, R&D Intensity, Asset
Tangibility, Financial Constraint, and Industry Competition. Significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level is indicated by *,**, ***,
respectively.

Variables           CSR           Firm          ROA         Leverage       Capital         R&D         Asset       Financial          Industry
                                  Size                                   Expenditure     Intensity   Tangibility   Constraint       competition
CSR                   1

Firm Size         0.4103***         1

ROA              -0.0305***    -0.3600***         1

Leverage           -0.0004     0.1095****    -0.0937***         1

Capital            -0.0194*      -0.0227      0.2381***     0.0761***          1
Expenditure

R&D Intensity      0.0173*     -0.1296***     0.0981***    -0.2034***     -0.1614***         1

Asset             0.0731***     -0.159***     0.2116***     0.165***       0.493***       -0.0093         1
Tangibility

Financial         -0.0667**    -0.1527***     0.3105***      -0.0094      -0.0749***      0.0048     -0.0504***         1
Constraint

Industry          0.0323***     0.3473***     -0.2498**     0.1278**        0.0169       -0.1116**    -0.2291**      -0.0023            1
Competition




                                                              49
                           Table 6: UK-EU Matched Sample

Panel A of this table shows the matching of treatment and control firms. Panel B of this table
reports the country representation in the treatment and control groups after matching.


Panel A
                              Treatment        Control          Total
Available firms                  201            550              751
Less: Unmatched Firms             9             358              367
Matched Sample                   192            192              384




Panel B
                                    Treatment                          Control
                              Frequency Percentage           Frequency     Percentage
United Kingdom                   192        100%                  0             0%
Austria                                                          4            2.08%
Belgium                                                          6            3.13%
Denmark                                                          11           5.73%
Finland                                                          7            3.65%
France                                                           26          13.54%
Germany                                                          36          18.75%
Ireland                                                          6            3.13%
Italy                                                            11           5.73%
Luxembourg                                                       3            1.56%
Netherland                                                       12           6.25%
Norway                                                            5           2.60%
Portugal                                                          3           1.56%
Spain                                                            15           7.81%
Sweden                                                           16           8.33%
Switzerland                                                      31          16.15%
Total                             192             100%          192           100%




                                             50
                    Table 7: Oversight and CSR: UK-EU Matched Sample
This table presents coefficients estimates of regressions which examine the effect of governments' ability to
monitor firms' regulatory compliance on CSR. We construct a UK-EU matched sample by matching each UK
firm with a firm from the other 15 European countries. The dependent variable is CSR for firm i in year
t. "Treat" is a dummy variable that takes on the value one for UK-listed firms, zero for all EU firms in the
data. "After" is a dummy for before or after the introduction of the 2013 Companies Act. "Treat × After"
is the interaction term that provides the difference in difference estimate. Specifically, column (1) presents the
results showing the impact of oversight on CSR. Column (2) includes firm and industry level characteristics.
Columns (3) - (6) further control for year, industry, country, and firm fixed effects respectively. The sample
period is from 2005-2015. All variables are defined in Table 1. The standard errors reported in parentheses
below the coefficient estimates are adjusted for within-firm clustering. Significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
level is indicated by *,**, ***, respectively.


Variables                       (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)               (6)
Treat                          0.65       5.96***       6.00***       7.52***     12.84***
                             (1.492)      (1.375)       (1.383)       (1.624)      (4.142)
After                        3.87***      3.66***
                             (0.707)      (0.693)
T reat × Af ter               -1.81*       -1.67*        -1.69*       -2.12**      -1.95**            -1.71*
                             (1.041)      (0.987)       (0.988)       (0.972)      (0.976)           (0.940)

Firm Size                                  4.52***      4.52***      6.01***       6.50***           1.95**
                                           (0.423)      (0.426)       (0.521)      (0.525)           (0.831)
ROA                                       24.54***     25.14***      15.56**      17.91***           8.23**
                                           (6.309)      (6.369)       (6.467)      (5.916)           (4.166)
Leverage                                    -1.30        -1.32          -2.64        -3.96              1.48
                                           (2.987)      (3.009)       (3.720)      (3.636)           (2.591)
Capital Expenditure                       -28.51**     -25.20**        -23.28       -17.75             4.19
                                          (11.796)     (11.967)      (15.195)     (14.898)           (8.591)
R&D Intensity                               31.92        31.71          -6.07         8.92            -30.84
                                          (21.299)     (21.428)      (26.734)     (24.371)          (18.959)
Asset Tangibility                          4.94***      4.57***      5.09***       4.35**             3.05*
                                           (1.536)      (1.547)       (1.902)      (2.141)           (1.809)
Financial Constraint                        -0.18         0.11           0.11         0.09             0.48
                                           (1.783)      (1.799)       (1.543)      (1.526)           (1.142)
Industry Competition                      -5.48***     -5.55***         -3.55        -4.24             -0.45
                                           (2.066)      (2.076)       (2.699)      (2.734)           (2.701)

Year FE                         No           No             Yes         Yes           Yes              Yes
Industry FE                     No           No             No          Yes           Yes              No
Country FE                      No           No             No          No            Yes              No
Firm FE                         No           No             No          No            No               Yes

R-squared                      0.010        0.199         0.208        0.503        0.543             0.795
Clusters                        384          384           384          384          384               384
Observations                   3,633        3,633         3,633        3,633        3,633             3,633




                                                       51
                              Table 8: Oversight and CSR: UK Sample

Panel A of this table presents summary statistics based on reporting status for companies that provide en-
vironmental data to the CDP project. "Public" means that the company in question allows its report to be
publicly viewed, while Private indicates that the company provides data for aggregation purposes but does not
voluntarily disclose it publicly. Panel B of this table presents coefficients estimates of regressions which examine
the effect of governments' ability to monitor firms' regulatory compliance on CSR. The dependent variable is
CSR for firm i in year t. "Treat" is a dummy variable that takes on the value one for the UK-listed firms
that did not voluntarily disclose their carbon emissions, zero for all other UK firms in the data. "After" is
a dummy for before or after the introduction of the 2013 Companies Act. "Treat × After" is the interaction
term that provides the difference in difference estimate. Specifically, column (1) of Panel B presents the results
showing the impact of oversight on CSR. Column (2) of Panel B includes firm and industry level characteristics.
Columns (3) - (5) of Panel B further control for year, industry and firm fixed effects, respectively. The sample
period is from 2005-2015. All variables are defined in Table 1. The standard errors reported in parentheses
below the coefficient estimates are adjusted for within-firm clustering. Significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
level is indicated by *,**, ***, respectively.

Panel A: CDP Data (UK Firms)
Response Status       Mean                    Median            SD           Min          Max          Firm-Yrs
Public                60.64                    61.29           13.71         9.24         94.64          1,715
Private and N/A       47.88                    47.22           12.92         7.69         85.91          1,027

Panel B: Oversight and CSR (UK Firms)
Variables                  (1)       (2)                        (3)           (4)          (5)
Treat                  -11.28*** -4.67***                    -4.78***      -5.00***
                         (1.489)   (1.526)                    (1.534)       (1.671)
After                    4.00***   3.63***
                         (0.683)   (0.739)
T reat × Af ter         -3.20***  -3.55***                    -3.50***       -2.23*       -2.18*
                         (1.178)   (1.281)                     (1.288)      (1.221)      (1.301)
Firm Size                          5.04***                     5.03***     6.66***      3.47***
                                   (0.400)                     (0.403)      (0.465)      (1.181)
ROA                               23.21***                    24.05***        8.14          5.39
                                   (7.510)                     (7.539)      (5.888)      (6.146)
Leverage                            -2.35                       -2.21         -3.99        -2.35
                                   (3.314)                     (3.338)      (4.293)      (3.567)
Capital Expenditure              -44.60***                   -41.09***       -19.42        -1.87
                                  (11.216)                    (11.299)     (15.107)     (13.064)
R&D Intensity                       -6.02                       -6.06         13.26        -5.30
                                  (14.029)                    (14.213)     (18.826)     (21.200)
Asset Tangibility                   2.41*                        2.11      7.90***          3.48
                                   (1.438)                     (1.455)      (1.936)      (2.792)
Financial Constraint                -2.04                       -1.63         0.18          0.62
                                   (1.440)                     (1.469)      (1.298)      (1.299)
Industry Competition                -0.52                       -0.53       -6.85**         -3.7
                                   (1.773)                     (1.777)      (3.380)      (3.391)

Year FE                           No             No            Yes            Yes          Yes
Industry FE                       No             No            No             Yes          No
Firm FE                           No             No            No             No           Yes

R-squared                       0.187          0.389           0.397         0.643        0.771
Clusters                         340            253             253           253          253
Observations                    2,742          2,158           2,158         2,158        2,158




                                                        52
                 Table 9: Oversight and Environmental and Non-Environmental CSR

This table presents coefficients estimates of regressions which examine the effect of governments' ability to monitor firms'
regulatory compliance on the sub-dimensions of CSR ratings. We investigate the differential impacts of oversight on firms'
performance in CSR-Environment and CSR-Nonenvironment. The dependent variable in columns (1), (3), and (5) is CSR-
Environment, and the dependent variable in columns (2), (4), and (6) is CSR-Nonenvironment for firm i in year t. Columns
(1) and (2) present the results based on the UK-EU pooled sample. Columns (3) - (4) report the results using the UK-EU
matched sample. And columns (5) and (6) report the results using within-UK sample. The sample period is from 2005-2015.
All variables are defined in Table 1. The standard errors reported in parentheses below the coefficient estimates are adjusted
for within-firm clustering. Significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level is indicated by *,**, ***, respectively.


Dependent Variables          CSR-Env       CSR-Nonenv         CSR-Env        CSR-Nonenv        CSR-Env        CSR-Nonenv
Variables                        (1)           (2)                (3)            (4)              (5)             (6)
T reat × Af ter                -1.78*         -2.14             -2.53*          -2.35           -3.80**          -4.04
                              (1.146)        (2.064)           (1.293)         (2.248)          (1.750)         (3.018)

Firm Size                      1.86**         4.99***           2.14**          3.61**             2.64          8.54***
                               (0.810)         (1.666)          (1.081)         (1.742)          (1.863)          (2.745)
ROA                              3.34           9.73*          12.16**           11.80             5.58            14.02
                               (3.838)         (5.570)          (6.117)         (9.868)          (9.367)         (15.365)
Leverage                         0.16             0.51            0.69            6.84             -1.77            -3.71
                               (2.906)         (4.089)          (3.569)         (5.997)          (5.228)          (7.514)
Capital Expenditure            15.63*            27.86            9.80           -7.90             15.93           -20.60
                               (9.296)        (17.457)         (13.092)        (21.062)         (15.405)         (32.949)
R&D Intensity                     3.37            9.50         -57.89**          -9.00             -9.77            18.81
                              (10.362)        (18.922)         (25.993)        (45.251)         (28.916)         (55.651)
Asset Tangibility                -2.42           -1.38           -0.65          8.23**              1.82          11.34*
                               (2.167)         (4.074)          (2.471)         (4.147)          (3.730)          (6.590)
Financial Constraint             0.00            -0.17           -0.72            2.05              0.01             1.39
                               (0.056)         (0.217)          (1.517)         (3.039)          (2.014)          (3.357)
Industry Competition            -0.530          -4.875           -3.65            2.07            -8.29*            -4.47
                               (2.215)         (3.712)          (3.601)         (6.582)          (4.807)          (8.507)

Year FE                         Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
Firm FE                         Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes

R-squared                      0.791            0.737             0.771          0.733            0.752            0.685
Clusters                        780              780               384            384              243              243
Observations                   5,549            5,549             3,325          3,325            1,944            1,944




                                                             53
                      Table 10: Oversight and CSR: Confounding Policies
This table presents coefficients estimates of regressions which examine the effect of governments' ability to
monitor firms' regulatory compliance on CSR ratings when taking confounding policies into consideration. Due
to the confounding laws or policies during our sample period 2005-2015, we take out of our sample the firms from
France, Norway, Ireland, and Switzerland where there are confounding policies in place. The dependent variable
is CSR for firm i in year t. Columns (1) - (3) present the results based on the UK-EU pooled sample, and
columns (4) - (6) report the results using the UK-EU matched sample. The sample period is from 2005-2015.
All variables are defined in Table 1. The standard errors reported in parentheses below the coefficient estimates
are adjusted for within-firm clustering. Significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level is indicated by *,**, ***,
respectively.


Variables                       (1)          (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)              (6)
Treat                         5.10***     11.73***                    6.15***      14.96***
                              (1.137)      (2.425)                    (1.596)       (4.655)
After                         3.64***                                 3.87***
                              (0.640)                                 (0.896)
T reat × Af ter              -2.48***     -2.19***        -1.65*       -1.95*        -1.99*         -2.24**
                              (0.970)      (0.946)       (0.966)      (1.134)       (1.151)         (1.091)

Firm Size                    4.77***      6.29***       1.99***       4.14***       6.94***            1.54
                              (0.355)      (0.431)       (0.758)      (0.464)       (0.587)         (0.799)
ROA                            9.53*         8.53          4.83      21.04***      21.52***         9.48**
                              (5.505)      (5.199)       (4.789)      (7.009)       (6.326)         (4.351)
Leverage                       -5.12*      -7.34**         0.46         -0.70        -3.15            2.69
                              (2.849)      (3.140)       (2.640)      (3.343)       (4.139)         (2.874)
Capital Expenditure            -14.79        6.04        13.89*      -29.83**        -7.85             0.27
                              (9.027)      (9.294)       (7.791)     (12.621)      (12.993)         (9.288)
R&D Intensity                   18.58      31.99*         -6.68        38.45*         3.41           -17.59
                             (16.836)     (17.849)      (15.744)     (21.448)      (22.346)        (20.438)
Asset Tangibility            3.62***         2.52          0.15       5.19***       4.67**             2.43
                              (1.263)      (1.631)       (2.033)      (1.664)       (2.152)         (1.883)
Financial Constraint            -0.61        0.30          0.83         -1.21        -1.13             0.04
                              (0.763)      (0.847)       (0.722)      (1.775)       (1.569)         (1.165)
Industry Competition             0.25       -1.80         -0.45         -2.44        -4.82            -0.75
                              (1.641)      (1.786)       (1.537)      (2.207)       (2.959)         (2.954)

Year FE                         No           Yes            Yes         No            Yes             Yes
Industry FE                     No           Yes            No          No            Yes             No
Country FE                      No           Yes            No          No            Yes             No
Firm FE                         No           No             Yes         No            No              Yes
R-squared                      0.232        0.515          0.787       0.178         0.524           0.785
Clusters                        592          592            592         316           316             316
Observations                   4,172        4,172          4,172       2,962         2,962           2,962




                                                      54
                    Table 11: Oversight and CSR: Non - EU ETS Sample
This table presents coefficients estimates of regressions which examine the effect of governments' ability to
monitor firms' regulatory compliance on CSR ratings using non-EU ETS sample. The dependent variable is
CSR for firm i in year t. "Treat" is a dummy variable that takes on the value one for UK-listed firms, zero for
all the other matched EU firms in the data. "After" is a dummy for before or after the introduction of the 2013
Companies Act. "Treat × After" is the interaction term that provides the difference in difference estimate. The
non-EU ETS sample is constructed by taking out the firms associated with EU ETS from the UK-EU matched
sample. The sample period is from 2005-2015. All variables are defined in Table 1. The standard errors reported
in parentheses below the coefficient estimates are adjusted for within-firm clustering. Significance at the 10%,
5%, and 1% level is indicated by *,**, ***, respectively.


Variables                      (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)             (6)
Treat                          1.63       6.38***       6.44***       7.73***        11.01
                             (1.919)      (1.876)       (1.890)       (2.409)       (8.118)
After                        4.45***      4.05***
                             (0.874)      (0.931)
T reat × Af ter              -2.63**      -2.44**        -2.44**      -2.98**      -3.08**           -2.17*
                             (1.230)      (1.231)        (1.233)      (1.189)      (1.201)          (1.154)

Firm Size                                  4.22***       4.22***      5.49***       5.75***           1.81*
                                           (0.598)       (0.601)       (0.766)      (0.772)         (0.929)
Leverage                                     -4.19         -4.13        -1.27        -0.94             3.03
                                           (3.476)       (3.507)       (4.643)      (4.372)         (3.055)
ROA                                       27.87***      28.29***         9.77       15.80**            7.67
                                           (7.605)       (7.663)       (7.901)      (6.955)         (5.094)
Capital Expenditure                      -43.73***     -39.79***       -35.26*     -32.50**           -5.12
                                          (14.512)      (14.879)      (18.412)     (16.159)        (10.322)
R&D Intensity                                 3.30          3.40        -2.19        15.85           -35.60
                                          (22.713)      (22.814)      (25.021)     (24.785)        (26.257)
Asset Tangibility                         5.83***        5.36**          4.10         4.28           5.06*
                                           (2.185)       (2.218)       (2.800)      (2.742)         (2.690)
Financial Constraint                         -0.41         -0.25         0.58         1.14             0.09
                                           (2.225)       (2.223)       (1.814)      (1.773)         (1.459)
Industry Competition                        -4.89*        -4.95*        -0.43        -0.41             1.69
                                           (2.506)       (2.518)       (3.324)      (3.262)         (3.404)

Year FE                        No            No            Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes
Industry FE                    No            No            No            Yes          Yes             No
Country FE                     No            No            No            No           Yes             Yes
Firm FE                        No            No            No            No           No              Yes

R-squared                     0.010        0.156           0.164        0.538        0.594           0.786
Clusters                       258          258             258          258          258             258
Observations                  2,402        2,402           2,402        2,402        2,402           2,402




                                                      55
                          Table 12: Oversight and CSR: Sustainalytics
This table presents coefficients estimates of regressions which examine the effect of governments' ability to
monitor firms' regulatory compliance on CSR using another CSR database - Sustainalytics. The dependent
variable is CSR for firm i in year t. Specifically, columns (1) - (2) present the results based on the UK-EU
pooled sample, columns (3) - (4) report the results using the UK-EU matched sample, and columns (5) -
(6) present the results using the within UK sample. The sample period is from 2009-2015. All variables are
defined in Table 1. The standard errors reported in parentheses below the coefficient estimates are adjusted for
within-firm clustering. Significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level is indicated by *,**, ***, respectively.


Variables                       (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)         (5)              (6)
Treat                         2.26***                     1.67*                    -4.28**
                              (0.689)                    (0.887)                   (1.784)
T reat × Af ter              -1.37***      -1.72***     -1.51***     -1.66***      -1.75**           -1.25*
                              (0.440)       (0.382)      (0.514)      (0.475)      (0.767)          (0.732)

Firm Size                     3.02***         0.40      2.91***         0.20       1.50***            0.74
                               (0.198)      (0.308)      (0.358)      (0.397)      (0.429)          (0.629)
ROA                              4.91         3.05          5.20        3.14         8.32             9.22
                               (3.183)      (2.256)      (4.421)      (2.845)      (6.926)          (5.766)
Leverage                        -1.29        -0.63         -2.33        0.77        -5.01             2.78
                               (1.765)      (1.378)      (2.667)      (2.005)      (3.925)          (2.470)
Capital Expenditure          -24.06***        4.00        -16.84        1.95         4.96             7.07
                               (8.845)      (5.074)     (12.307)      (7.920)     (13.637)          (8.658)
R&D Intensity                   16.90         4.69         27.86        1.09      99.09***           21.90
                              (11.247)      (8.958)     (20.196)     (12.736)     (17.838)         (25.063)
Asset Tangibility             4.45***         1.14       3.61**        2.32*        -0.11             1.85
                               (1.043)      (0.760)      (1.584)      (1.269)      (2.469)          (2.400)
Financial Constraint          1.00***       0.43***         0.28        0.25        -0.08            0.32
                               (0.269)      (0.136)      (0.327)      (0.198)      (0.693)          (0.269)
Industry Competition            -2.06        -0.64         -1.24       -0.52        -4.84             0.84
                               (1.278)      (1.080)      (1.630)      (1.488)      (3.605)          (3.468)

Year FE                         Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes              Yes
Industry FE                     Yes           No            Yes         No           Yes              No
Firm FE                         No            Yes           No          Yes          No               Yes
R-squared                      0.495         0.916         0.593       0.907        0.697            0.908
Clusters                       1,066         1,066          468         468          230              230
Observations                   5,204         5,204         2,623       2,623        1,005            1,005




                                                      56
                              Table 13: Oversight and CSR: TruValue
This table presents coefficients estimates of regressions which examine the effect of governments' ability to
monitor firms' regulatory compliance on CSR using non-self-reported CSR data from TruValue. The dependent
variable is CSR for firm i in year t. Specifically, columns (1) - (2), columns (3) -(4), and columns (5)-(6)
present the results using UK-EU pooled sample, UK-EU matched sample, and UK only sample, respectively.
The sample period is from 2007-2017. All variables are defined in Table 1. The standard errors reported in
parentheses below the coefficient estimates are adjusted for within-firm clustering. Significance at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% level is indicated by *,**, ***, respectively.


Variables                      (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)              (6)
Treat                         1.74*                      1.44                      1.72
                             (0.981)                   (1.414)                   (2.135)
T reat × Af ter *            -1.99**     -2.32**      -3.88***     -4.00***       -3.63*            -2.31
                             (0.983)     (1.060)       (1.233)      (1.253)      (2.117)           (2.190)

Firm Size                     -0.44*       -0.38       -0.12          -0.52        -0.10             1.77
                             (0.224)      (0.857)     (0.446)       (1.222)      (0.595)           (2.104)
ROA                             1.62        1.92        7.55          6.37       17.45*             19.17
                             (3.982)      (4.789)     (5.730)       (6.518)      (8.968)          (11.704)
Leverage                        0.73       -0.12       -1.98          -2.18        -1.82             -5.08
                             (2.198)      (3.031)     (2.801)       (3.947)      (4.074)           (6.216)
Capital Expenditure             8.93        6.09      17.24**          7.89        18.16             -5.93
                             (6.215)      (6.891)     (8.497)       (9.792)     (13.407)          (16.016)
R&D Intensity                   3.88       23.15       -8.27         -23.95       -12.91            -11.73
                             (9.098)     (21.364)     (9.491)      (22.828)     (11.896)          (22.700)
Asset Tangibility              -1.33       -2.39        1.72          -1.28         0.91             3.09
                             (0.940)      (1.587)     (1.365)       (2.377)      (1.735)           (3.485)
Financial Constraint           -0.12       0.02        -0.06           0.18        0.20               0.68
                             (0.107)      (0.196)     (0.178)       (0.123)      (0.527)           (0.885)
Industry Competition            1.17       2.85        -1.04           0.09        -4.82              2.42
                             (2.188)      (2.571)     (3.057)       (3.104)      (3.042)           (3.915)

Year FE                        Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes               Yes
Industry FE                    Yes          No           Yes          No           Yes               No
Firm FE                        No           Yes          No           Yes          No                Yes

R-squared                     0.285        0.563        0.384        0.541        0.244             0.555
Clusters                       809          809          300          300          151               151
Observations                  5,181        5,181        2,335        2,335         999               999




                                                      57
            Table 14: Government Monitoring, CSR, and Outsourcing Intensity

Panel A of this table reports summary statistics for US firms taken from the KLD database. This measure is
a net sum of plusses (+1) and minusses (-1) across a range of specific CSR categories. Panel B of this table
presents coefficients estimates of regressions which examine the effect of governments' ability to monitor firms'
regulatory compliance and CSR. We use the variation in U.S. industry-level foreign outsourcing to capture the
variation in governments' ability to monitor firms. We construct sample I based on 405 industries in years
2007 and 2012, and sample II based on 71 industries from 2005-2016. The dependent variable is CSR for firm
i in year t. Columns (1) - (3) present the results based on US sample I. Columns (4) - (6) reports the results
based on US sample II. All variables are defined in Table 1. The standard errors reported in parentheses below
the coefficient estimates are adjusted for within-firm clustering. Significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level is
indicated by *, **, ***, respectively.


Panel A: KLD Data (US         Firms)
Time Period                   Mean       Median          SD         Min         Max              Firm-Yrs
Net-CSR (2007, 2012)          0.189        0            2.123        -7          15                3,090
Net-CSR (2005-2012)           0.015        0            2.609       -7           17                7,010

Panel B: Government Monitoring, CSR, and Outsourcing Intensity
Variables               (1)       (2)      (3)       (4)        (5)                                 (6)
Foreign Outsourcing   0.64**    0.97***   1.17*    0.73**     0.74**                              1.09**
                     (0.303) (0.305)     (0.644) (0.372) (0.329)                                  (0.528)

Firm Size                                 0.55***     0.38***                  0.76***            0.79***
                                          (0.043)     (0.068)                  (0.067)            (0.067)
ROA                                        -0.26         -0.1                    -0.38             -0.22
                                          (0.218)     (0.348)                  (0.235)            (0.232)
Leverage                                 -0.58***      -0.36*                 -0.77***           -0.88***
                                          (0.174)     (0.215)                  (0.271)            (0.262)
Capital Expenditure                         0.81         0.77                   2.72**            2.94***
                                          (0.986)     (1.388)                  (1.164)            (1.097)
Market-to-Book                            0.13***     0.11***                  0.20***            0.20***
                                          (0.030)     (0.042)                  (0.029)            (0.030)
Asset Tangibility                        -0.98***       -0.56                 -1.39***           -1.50***
                                          (0.264)     (0.509)                  (0.482)            (0.474)
Industry Competition                       -0.31        -0.13                    -0.07             -0.20
                                          (0.230)     (0.332)                  (0.301)            (0.316)

Year FE                        No           No           Yes         No          No                 Yes
Industry FE                    No           No           Yes         No          No                 Yes
Clusters                      2,017        1,720        1,720       1445        1400               1400
R-square                      0.002        0.157        0.146       0.003       0.196              0.266
Observations                  3,066        2,500        2,500       6,841       6,350              6,350




                                                      58
                           Table 15: Firms' CSR and Employee Wages

This table presents regression estimates of the effect of CSR on employee wages. The dependent variable is the
natural logarithm of one plus the average employee wage for firm i in year t. Columns (1) and (2), columns (3)
and (4), and columns (5) and (6) present the results based on UK-EU pooled sample, UK-EU matched sample,
and within UK sample, respectively. The sample period is from 2005-2015. All other variables are defined in
Table 1. The standard errors reported in parentheses below the coefficient estimates are adjusted for within-firm
clustering. Significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level is indicated by *,**, ***, respectively.


Variables                        (1)         (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)              (6)
CSR                          -0.01***     -0.02***     -0.01***      -0.01**       0.004            0.005
                              (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.004)          (0.004)
Firm Size                     0.25***     0.25***       0.15***      0.15***       0.08*             0.09
                              (0.029)      (0.038)      (0.042)      (0.048)      (0.043)          (0.063)
Leverage                     -0.83***     -0.86***     -0.86***       -0.61*     -0.77***            -0.39
                              (0.217)      (0.228)      (0.283)      (0.321)      (0.274)          (0.340)
ROA                           0.87**        0.75*        1.39**      1.39**         0.36             0.07
                              (0.419)      (0.451)      (0.623)      (0.556)      (0.700)          (0.643)
Capital Expenditure           -1.74**       -0.50         -1.99         0.04        2.05             1.60
                              (0.862)      (0.836)      (1.315)      (1.175)      (1.257)          (1.106)
R&D Intensity                  3.39**        1.27       4.63***         2.49      3.02***          4.18**
                              (1.452)      (2.089)      (1.500)      (1.835)      (1.034)          (1.625)
Asset Tangibility               0.19         0.18         0.03         -0.02      -0.34**           -0.36*
                              (0.122)      (0.142)      (0.179)      (0.195)      (0.138)          (0.213)
Financial Constraint         -0.28***       -0.13       -0.44**       -0.29*       -0.17             0.27
                              (0.101)      (0.087)      (0.188)      (0.158)      (0.222)          (0.196)
Industry Competition            -0.16        0.04         0.11         -0.13        0.03             0.12
                              (0.128)      (0.202)      (0.182)      (0.351)      (0.166)          (0.261)

Year FE                         No           Yes          No           Yes          No               Yes
Industry FE                     No           Yes          No           Yes          No               Yes
R-squared                      0.070        0.335        0.053        0.436        0.039            0.480
Clusers                         757          757          350          350          251              251
Observations                   4,856        4,856        2,637        2,637        1,937            1,937




                                                      59
                             Table 16: Oversight and Employee Wages

This table presents regression estimates of the effect of oversight on employee wages. The dependent variable
is the natural logarithm of one plus the average employee wage for firm i in year t. Columns (1) - (2), columns
(3)- (4), and columns (5)- (6) present the results based on EU-UK pooled sample, EU-UK matched sample,
and within UK sample, respectively. The sample period is from 2005-2015. All other variables are defined in
Table 1. The standard errors reported in parentheses below the coefficient estimates are adjusted for within-firm
clustering. Significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level is indicated by *,**, ***, respectively.


Variables                       (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)                (6)
Treat                        -0.58***                 -0.61***                 -0.37**
                              (0.109)                  (0.124)                 (0.165)
After                        0.60***                   0.91***                 2.09***
                              (0.117)                  (0.158)                 (0.222)
T reat × Af ter              0.38***      0.32***       0.21*        0.20*      0.30*              0.32*
                              (0.091)     (0.095)      (0.114)      (0.120)    (0.154)            (0.169)

Firm Size                    0.13***        0.12         0.06         -0.20    0.95***            0.90***
                              (0.035)     (0.104)      (0.042)      (0.128)    (0.049)            (0.185)
Leverage                     -0.83***     -0.62**       -0.58*        -0.26      -0.24               0.17
                              (0.228)     (0.311)      (0.310)      (0.359)    (0.426)            (0.574)
ROA                             0.65        0.31        1.06*          0.26    1.40***            1.41***
                              (0.466)     (0.462)      (0.545)      (0.557)    (0.454)            (0.520)
Capital Expenditure            -0.72        0.54         -0.32         0.68     3.20**              2.84*
                              (0.824)     (0.948)      (1.120)      (1.381)    (1.367)            (1.472)
R&D Intensity                   0.25        0.23          2.42        -3.55    5.84***             4.33**
                              (2.195)     (1.724)      (1.723)      (2.215)    (1.020)            (1.829)
Asset Tangibility              0.05        0.42*         -0.10        -0.03     0.44**               0.48
                              (0.146)     (0.216)      (0.191)      (0.242)    (0.184)            (0.411)
Financial Constraint           -0.10      -0.21**      -0.33**       -0.27*       0.38               0.27
                              (0.089)     (0.091)      (0.160)      (0.164)    (0.243)            (0.267)
Industry Competition            0.07       -0.17         -0.06        -0.14     -0.61*              -0.36
                              (0.197)     (0.202)      (0.341)      (0.335)    (0.349)            (0.375)

Year FE                         No           Yes         No           Yes         No                Yes
Industry FE                     Yes          No          Yes          No          Yes               No
Firm FE                         No           Yes         No           Yes         No                Yes

R-squared                      0.330        0.639       0.446        0.594       0.650             0.701
Clusters                        757          757         350          350         256               256
Observations                   4,856        4,856       2,637        2,637       1,994             1,994




                                                      60
                Table 17: Oversight, Employee Wages and CSR: SUR Model

This table presents regression estimates of the effect of oversight on employee wages and CSR using SUR model.
The dependent variable are CSR and the natural logarithm of one plus the average employee wage for firm i
in year t, in columns (1), (3), and (5), columns (2), (4), and (6), respectively. Panels A, B and C present the
results based on EU- UK pooled sample, UK-EU matched sample, and within UK sample. Specifically, in each
panel, columns (1) and (2) presents the results with CSR and the average employee wage growth as dependent
variable respectively, controlling for the impacts of firm and industry level characteristics. Columns (3) and (4)
report the results when year and industry fixed effects are further included in the regressions. And columns (5)
and (6) show the results further controlling for year and firm fixed effects. The sample period is from 2005-2015.
All other variables are defined in Table 1. The standard errors reported in parentheses below the coefficient
estimates are adjusted for within-firm clustering. Significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level is indicated by *,**,
***, respectively.


Dependent Variables           CSR         Wages          CSR         Wages         CSR              Wages
Panel A
Treat                        5.45***     -0.75***      4.46***      -0.58***
                             (0.637)      (0.066)      (0.656)       (0.070)
After                        3.57***        0.03
                             (0.462)      (0.048)
T reat × Af ter             -2.50***      0.35***      -2.14***     0.38***      -1.78***          0.32***
                             (0.849)      (0.088)       (0.718)     (0.077)       (0.457)          (0.060)
Controls                       Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes              Yes
Year FE                        No            No           Yes         Yes           Yes              Yes
Industry FE                    No            No           Yes         Yes           No               No
Firm FE                        No            No           No          No            Yes              Yes
R-squared                     0.242        0.083         0.482       0.330         0.815            0.639
Observations                  4,856        4,856         4,856       4,856         4,856            4,856
Panel B
Treat                       4.26***      -0.67***      3.92***      -0.61***
                            (0.739)       (0.078)      (0.747)       (0.079)
After                       4.46***       0.15**
                            (0.714)       (0.075)
T reat × Af ter             -2.13**        0.19*       -2.02**       0.21**      -1.98***          0.20***
                            (1.008)       (0.106)      (0.801)       (0.084)      (0.570)          (0.075)
Controls                      Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes              Yes
Year FE                       No            No           Yes           Yes          Yes              Yes
Industry FE                   No            No           Yes           Yes          No               No
Firm FE                       No            No           No            No           Yes              Yes
R-squared                    0.264         0.089        0.557         0.446        0.790            0.594
Observations                 2,637         2,637        2,637         2,637        2,637            2,637
Panel C
Treat                       -4.81***       -0.13       -5.73***     -0.33***
                             (0.804)      (0.087)       (0.837)      (0.090)
After                        3.34***      0.44***
                             (0.655)      (0.071)
T reat × Af ter             -3.04***       0.22*        -1.63*      0.24***        -1.33*           0.21**
                             (1.077)      (0.117)      (0.851)      (0.091)       (0.707)           (0.086)
Controls                       Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes            Yes              Yes
Year FE                        No           No            Yes         Yes            Yes              Yes
Industry FE                    No           No            Yes         Yes            No               No
Firm FE                        No           No            No          No             Yes              Yes
R-squared                     0.394        0.076         0.655       0.483          0.788            0.592
Observations                  1,937        1,937         1,937       1,937          1,937            1,937




                                                       61
                                     Figures



   !# , !$

   !!                                                                             !# !
                                                                                     "


    #
   !"                                                                            !$ !
                                                                                    "

 !
 "% &


!
"" &

    !

             !    !
                  "" &     "% &
                           !         #
                                    !"         !!                                        "
                                                                                         !

Figure 1: Equilibrium actions ! and " in a pure profit-maximizing organization and a purpose-
driven organization, respectively, as functions of the regulatory ceiling ".
              #& , #%

          #" !!                                                                    #% !
                                                                                      "


          #% !!                                                                    #& !
                                                                                      "


    #       #
#% !" = #" !"
          #" !
             ""
 #% !
    "% = #" !
            "%




                        !      !
                               "" (            "% (
                                               !
                                                        #
                                                       !"          !!                     !
                                                                                          "

Figure 2: Entrepreneur's payoffs ! and " in a pure profit-maximizing organization and a
purpose-driven organization, respectively, as functions of the regulatory ceiling ".
   #+ ,#
       ./
 #
 .+,-

   #!
                                                                                            $
                                                                                            (* &
                       CSR                                                                  $% &
    #
   #"




    #

                                                 !%                                 1   !
        0
            Nomonitoring:effectiveceilingabove        Monitoring:ceilingbelow$*
                                                                              ) .
            (&'( > $*
            $       ) .FirmengagesinCSR.              Firm"just"complies.NoCSR.


Figure 3: Equilibrium regulatory ceiling   "# and equilibrium action " as functions of monitoring
efficiency . At high levels of monitoring efficiency   # , the regulator can impose a low
ceiling, the firm "just" complies with regulation, and there is no CSR.
At low levels of monitoring efficiency  < # , the regulator no longer monitors the firm, and the
effective ceiling is "$%&  0. The firm could select pure profit-maximizing action ' , but instead
                                                                     (
chooses to engage in CSR by self-regulating and selecting action "     < ' .
                     62



                     60



                     58



                     56
Average CSR scores




                                                                                                                    Treat
                     54
                                                                                                                    Control

                     52



                     50



                     48



                     46
                          2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010         2011          2012   2013   2014   2015


                                                                    Intervention Year


Figure 4: Average CSR scores over 2005-2015.
