                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

  ESG PREFERENCE, INSTITUTIONAL TRADING, AND STOCK RETURN PATTERNS

                                           Jie Cao
                                       Sheridan Titman
                                        Xintong Zhan
                                       Weiming Zhang

                                     Working Paper 28156
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28156

                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2020

We thank Vikas Agrawal, Hendrik Bessembinder, Jennifer Carpenter, Tarun Chordia, Zhi Da,
Amit Goyal, Charlie Hadlock, Bing Han, Samuel Hartzmark, Kewei Hou, Ozgur Ince
(discussant), Hao Jiang, Kose John, Lars Kaiser, Ralph Koijen, Jeffrey Pontiff, Adam Reed
(discussant), Luke Taylor (discussant), Patrick Verwijmeren, Neng Wang, Robert Whitelaw,
David Yermack, and seminar participants at Erasmus University Rotterdam, Hong Kong
Polytechnic University, Korea University, NYU Stern, Michigan State University,
Northeastern University, Schroders Systematic Investments, and Tsinghua University for
helpful discussions and useful suggestions. We have benefited from the comments of participants
at Western Finance Association Annual Meeting, Northern Finance Association Annual
Conference, China International Conference in Finance, Finance Down Under Conference,
Fixed Income and Financial Institutions (FIFI) Conference, Luxembourg Asset
Management Summit, FMA Consortium on Asset Management, CQAsia-BoAML
Conference, Deutsche Bank Global Quantitative Strategy Conference, INQUIRE Europe Autumn
Seminar, and Geneva Summit on Sustainable Finance. We acknowledge the best paper award
at 2020 FMA Consortium on Asset Management, and the 2019 AAM-CAMRI Prize in
Asset Management. The work described in this paper was supported by a grant from the Research
Grant Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China (Project No. CUHK
24501519), the 2019 Alternative Risk Premia Research Grant of the Paris-Dauphine House of
Finance and Unigestion, and a grant from Geneva Institute for Wealth Management. A
previous version was circulated under the title "ESG Preference and Market Efficiency: Evidence
from Mispricing and Institutional Trading". All errors are our own. Sheridan Titman
acknowledges that he has had consulting arrangements with institutions that use some of the
strategies described in this paper.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not
been peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that
accompanies official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Jie Cao, Sheridan Titman, Xintong Zhan, and Weiming Zhang. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
ESG Preference, Institutional Trading, and Stock Return Patterns
Jie Cao, Sheridan Titman, Xintong Zhan, and Weiming Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 28156
November 2020
JEL No. G12,G4

                                                 ABSTRACT

Socially responsible (SR) institutions tend to focus more on the ESG performance and less on quantitative
signals of value. Consistent with this difference in focus, we find that SR institutions react less to quantitative
mispricing signals. Our evidence suggests that the increased focus on ESG may have influenced stock
return patterns. Specifically, abnormal returns associated with these mispricing signals are greater
for stocks held more by SR institutions. The link between SR ownership and the efficacy of mispricing
signals only emerges in recent years with the rise of ESG investing, and is significant only when there
are arbitrage-related funding constraints.


Jie Cao                                                  Xintong Zhan
Department of Finance                                    Dept of Finance
Chinese University of Hong Kong                          Chinese University of Hong Kong
Shatin, NT 00000                                         Shatin, NT 00000
Hong Kong                                                Hong Kong
jiecao@cuhk.edu.hk                                       xintongzhan@cuhk.edu.hk

Sheridan Titman                                          Weiming Zhang
Finance Department                                       Department of Finance
McCombs School of Business                               Chinese University of Hong Kong
University of Texas at Austin                            Shatin, NT 00000
Austin, TX 78712-1179                                    Hong Kong
and NBER                                                 elainezhang@link.cuhk.edu.hk
titman@mail.utexas.edu
1. Introduction
The strategies and tastes of institutional investors have changed in a number of ways in the past
20 years. On one hand, perhaps because of the influence of academic research, institutions tend to
take a more quantitative approach to investing. On the other hand, a number of institutions have
broadened their perspectives, and incorporated a firm's ESG (Environmental, Social, and
Governance) performance into the investment decision making process. 1 According to a 2016
report by the U.S. SIF Foundation, 20% of the professionally managed assets in the U.S. --$8.72
trillion or more in aggregate, are influenced by socially responsible investment principles.
         This paper builds on growing literatures that examine the investment performance of both
quantitative and socially responsible investment strategies. The evidence on quantitative investing
suggests that the increased popularity of this approach may have led to a decline in the performance
of these strategies in recent years. 2 In this sense, the market has become more efficient. The
literature on the link between ESG performance and investment performance is somewhat mixed
and to our knowledge, there is no clear evidence on the investment performance of socially
responsible (SR) institutions. 3
         We contribute to both literatures by studying how the interaction of these two investment
styles may have influenced stock return patterns. Specifically, we test the hypothesis that because
of limited attention, investors that focus on the social performance of firms pay relatively less
attention to quantitative measures of value. 4 According to this hypothesis, the portfolio holdings
of socially responsible institutions respond less to quantitative mispricing signals, and because of
this, the returns of those stocks held more by these institutions may be more predictable.
         As we show in Figure 1, the assets devoted to socially responsible investing accelerated
sometime around 2004. Our conjecture, which we empirically explore, is that in the years prior to



1
  See, for example, Starks, Venkat, and Zhu (2018) and Hartzmark and Sussman (2019).
2
  See, for example, Chordia, Subrahmanyam, and Tong (2014) and McLean and Pontiff (2016).
3
  Hong and Kacperczyk (2009) find stocks in "sin" industries earn significantly higher abnormal returns than firms in
other industries. Conversely, firms that are listed as the "100 Best Companies to Work for in America" demonstrate
generate higher alphas in the future, as the market undervalues the intangible assets (Edmans (2011)). Using the release
of Morningstar sustainability rating, Hartzmark and Sussman (2019) shows that there is a reverse relation between
fund performance and sustainability rating. Pedersen, Fitzgibbons, and Pomorski (2020) model investor's portfolio
choice under the ESG efficient frontier. Pastor, Stambaugh, and Taylor (2020) propose an equilibrium model of
sustainable investing and its implication to the return of green assets.
4
  Our conversations with a quantitative asset management group that has added social performance to their asset
selection model support our hypothesis. Specifically, by adding social performance to their asset selection model, the
managers put less weight on traditional quantitative signals.

                                                           2
2004, socially responsible investors had very little influence on return patterns. However, in the
post 2004 period, the introduction of a growing group of socially responsible investors with
interests that go beyond risk and return may have at least temporarily influenced these return
patterns.
           We start our analysis by following Hwang, Titman, and Wang (2018) and classify
institutions into those that are and are not socially responsible institutions, according to the value-
weighted ESG scores (from the MSCI KLD database) of their portfolio holdings. 5 Our analysis
indicates that in addition to having higher ESG scores, the stocks held by SR institutions tend to
be somewhat larger, more liquid, and are followed by more analysts on average. Given these
characteristics, we would expect that all else equal, these stocks should be more efficiently priced
than their smaller counterparts that tend to be held more by other institutions.
           Based on this classification, we examine how the holdings of SR institutions respond to
quantitative signals that are associated with future stock returns. Specifically, we consider the
standardized unexpected earnings signal (SUE) explored in the accounting literature, 6 as well as a
composite score measure of 11 quantitative mispricing signals, which we refer to as the SYY signal
since it is based on the analysis of Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan (2015). The SUE signal has the
advantage that its timing is very clear, while SYY has the advantage that it is a more
comprehensive signal. The evidence indicates that SR institutions do in fact pay less attention to
quantitative signals. Specifically, we find that during the 2004-2014 sample period, relative to
other institutions, SR institutions are less likely to sell (buy) stocks with unfavorable (favorable)
quantitative signals.
           We then examine the extent to which the SUE and SYY signal predict stock returns. Our
conjecture is that if SR institutions pay less attention to these signals, the returns of the stocks they
follow will under react to this information, suggesting that the signals will better predict future
returns for these stocks. We find that this is indeed the case. The efficacy of both the SUE and
SYY score is significantly stronger for the stocks that are held more by SR institutions. Specifically,
in our 2004-2014 sample period, a value-weighted long-short strategy that exploits the SUE
mispricing signal generates a significant monthly return of 0.59% on stocks that are held more by
socially responsible institutions. In contrast, we find a statistically insignificant return of -0.21%


5
    This approach is also quite similar to how Morningstar is currently assessing the sustainability rating of mutual funds.
6
    For example, Foster, Olsen, and Shevlin (1984); Bernard and Thomas (1989).

                                                              3
per month for stocks that are held more by institutions that are not classified as socially responsible.
Our results using the composite SYY signal are very similar. The signal generates significantly
stronger abnormal returns for those stocks held more by SR institutions, despite the fact that those
stocks tend to be larger and more liquid.
        As a placebo test, we repeat the analysis in the earlier 1996-2003 sample period that pre-
dates the rise in ESG investing. The tests, which fail to find a significant relationship between the
holdings of SR institutions and return patterns in the earlier period, support our conjecture that the
significant results in the 2004-2014 period are related to the limited attention of the SR institutions.
We also consider the return patterns in subperiods within our 2004-2014 sample period. If the
return patterns we identify reflect mispricing, then we expect the patterns to be stronger when the
cost of shorting and other capital constraints are higher. To explore this possibility, we follow
Adrian, Etula, and Muir (2014) and proxy for changes in capital constraints using shocks to the
broker-dealer leverage. As we show, the inefficiency caused by socially responsible institutions is
only observed when capital constraints are likely to be tight.
        As a further test of the relationship between SR institutional ownership and stock return
patterns we consider the relationship between SR institutional ownership and the Hou and
Moskowitz (2005) Price Delay measure, which measures the extent to which individual stock
returns respond to market returns with a lag. Our panel regressions demonstrate that higher SR
institutional ownership is in fact associated with a larger Price Delay in the 2004-2014 sample
period, and this effect is stronger in the period with greater funding constraints. We again find no
such relationship in the placebo 1996-2003 period.
        It is natural to ask whether the KLD ESG scores directly influence stock return patterns.
To evaluate this possibility, we do a triple sort on ESG scores, SR institutional ownership, and the
SYY mispricing scores. We find that when we control for the ESG scores, there is still a significant
relation between SR institutional ownership and return patterns, but after controlling for SR
institutional ownership, ESG scores do not seem to influence returns. To better understand why
this might be the case we examine alternative ESG scores provided by Thomson Reuter ASSET4,
which is a Swiss private firm that provides ESG ratings for stocks in major indexes around the
world, including FTSE 250, MSCI Europe, MSCI World Index, S&P 500, and Russell 1000. We
find that the correlation between the Thomson Reuter ASSET4 scores and the KLD scores is
relatively low, suggesting that the scores provided by individual providers are relatively noisy


                                                   4
indicators of the market's sentiment about the attractiveness of stocks to SR investors. However,
we find a substantially higher correlation between the SR institutional ownership measures
constructed with the alternative ESG scores, suggesting that our holdings measure may provide a
more robust indicator of the extent to which a stock is part of the SR institutions' investment
universe.
       We also consider the extent to which our results are influenced by the fact that SR
institutions tend to be less active. Indeed, as shown by Starks, Venkat, and Zhu (2018), socially
responsible institutions tend to have longer investment horizons, suggesting that many of them
may be closet indexers. We address this possibility in two ways. First, we examine whether we get
similar results when we sort stocks by the holdings of long horizon institutions rather than SR
institutions. We find that the returns of the SYY strategy do not appear to be related to the holdings
of long horizon institutions. Second, we define SR active ownership from the holdings of active
mutual funds, which tend to trade more actively and have shorter horizons than the average SR
institutions. We find that when we repeat our analysis defining the SR institutions' investment
universe with the holdings of active mutual funds, we get similar results.
       Finally, we highlight a puzzling size-related return pattern that might be partly due to the
growing importance of socially responsible investors. Specifically, we find that the returns of the
SYY strategy, which historically have been much stronger for small market capitalization stocks,
are actually stronger for the larger capitalization stocks in the recent period. One possible
explanation is that the relative efficiency of large capitalization stocks has declined because they
are increasingly being held in passive investing vehicles, like index funds. A second possible
explanation is that their decline is due to large capitalization stocks being held by SR institutions.
       Our results suggest that the behavior of SR institutions provides the more plausible of the
two explanations. Specifically, we find that for subsamples segmented by either high or low SR
institutional ownership, there is no relation between market capitalization and the returns of the
SYY strategy. We do, however, find a significant relation between the profitability of the SYY
strategy and the holdings of SR institutions for both the small capitalization and the large
capitalization subsamples.
       Although we believe that this is the first paper to explore the interaction between the ESG
preferences of institutional investors and stock return patterns, two recent papers motivate our
analysis. The first, Hartzmark and Sussman (2019), provide an explanation for why mutual funds


                                                  5
may want to allocate more attention to identifying high ESG stocks, and perhaps as a result, devote
less attention to quantitative signals. Using the release of Morningstar sustainability ratings, they
find a positive flow to mutual funds with good sustainability ratings and a negative flow to mutual
funds with poor ratings.7 There is also evidence that socially responsible mutual funds are able to
charge higher fees. 8 The second paper, Starks, Venkat, and Zhu (2018), document that socially
responsible institutional investors tend to be more patient with high ESG firms, e.g., they are less
inclined to sell the stocks even after negative news or poor stock performance. This observation is
consistent with our finding that socially responsible institutions react less to mispricing signals.
         We also contribute to the literature that explores how limited investor attention can
influence investor behavior and stock return patterns. Our analysis is particularly close to
Hirshleifer, Lim and Teoh (2009), who also examine how constraints on attention affect stock
returns around earnings announcements. 9 However, we are not aware of other studies that explore
how broadening investor objectives influences their attention in ways that influence return patterns
as well as portfolio choices.
         More generally, our paper is related to the literature that describes various frictions, taste
considerations, and other distractions that influence the investment decisions of institutional
investors, e.g., Almazan, Brown, Carlson, and Chapman (2004), Fama and French (2007), Cao,
Han, and Wang (2017), Lewellen (2011). Our analysis is particular close to Edelen, Ince, and
Kadlec (2016), which also examines the extent to which institutional trades are consistent with the
quantitative signals that have been proposed in the academic literature. We contribute to this
literature by considering a setting where tastes clearly changed, and by doing so, we provide clearer
evidence on the link between tastes, portfolio choices, and return patterns.
         Finally, our paper is related to the literature that examines the impact of funding liquidity
on asset pricing. As described by Shleifer and Vishny (1997), there are a variety of frictions that




7
  See also, Ridel and Smeets (2017), who find that socially responsible investors are willing to forgo financial
performance because of their preference for positive social impacts.
8
  Based on the report of Morningstar Direct, the asset-weighted average expenses ratios are higher for ESG funds
comparing to Non-ESG funds for six out of seven Morningstar categories. Please refer to Appendix Table A1 for
details.
9
  One might think that limited attention affects only retail investors, but recent studies by Ben-Rephael, Da, and
Israelsen (2017) and Schmidt (2019) show that institutional investors are also subject to inattention, and examine the
link between limited attention and returns around earnings announcements.

                                                          6
impose limits on the ability of investors to arbitrage financial markets. 10 We show that the
predictable patterns we observe occur mainly in periods when borrowing is the most constrained.
         The rest of the paper is as follows. Section 2 describes our data and measures. We present
our baseline results in Section 3. Section 4 discusses alternative explanations and robustness tests.
Section 5 concludes the paper.


2. Data and Measures
2.1. Data sources and sample coverage
Stock returns, price, and trading volumes are obtained from the Center for Research on Security
Prices (CRSP). We take the Fama-French common risk factors and the risk-free rate from Kenneth
French's website. The accounting data are collected from Compustat. The analyst coverage and
forecast data are from I/B/E/S. We obtain quarterly institutional holdings (13F) and mutual fund
holdings (s12) data from Thomson Reuters. The stock lending fee data are from Markit for the
period from 2006 to 2014. The Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan (2015) mispricing score measure for
individual stocks are obtained from Robert Stambaugh's website.
         We collect data on firms' Environmental, Social and Corporate Governance (ESG)
performance from MSCI ESG KLD STATS database (formerly known as KLD). Developed by a
for-profit company, the ESG scores are similar to credit ratings. The scores measure the firm-level
social performance, including community relations, product characteristics, environmental impact,
employee relations, workforce diversity, and corporate governance. 11 The database covers both
the social benefits and harms of a firm, and thus influences both the negative and positive screening
processes of socially responsible investing. 12 Our empirical tests focus on the period from 2004 to
2014, during which the dataset covers the top 3,000 U.S. firms. Figure 2 shows the stock coverage
of the MSCI ESG KLD database over each of these years.


10
   There are a number of related theories that include Garleanu and Pedersen (2011), Gromb and Vayanos (2002,
2018), and Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009). In addition, there is a growing empirical literature that examines how
capital flows to hedge funds influence mispricing, e.g., Akbas, Armstrong, Sorescu, and Subrahmanyam (2015, 2016).
11
   MSCI ESG KLD STATS scans public databases such as those that have experienced employee strikes and
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) violations and uses a team of analysts to measure these and other social-
responsibility dimensions of firm production. The database has been frequently used in the relevant literature for
corporate social responsibility (see e.g., Flammer (2015); Lins, Servaes, and Tamayo (2017); Cao, Liang, and Zhan
(2019)).
12
   Negative screening is largely used for socially responsible investment (SRI), where fund managers exclude certain
stocks that are creating social harms, for example sin stocks. Positive screening, however, is seeking stocks that create
social benefits. For ESG investment, both social harms and benefits are considered to better capture the risks.

                                                           7
        The ESG data are published close to the end of each calendar year and we apply it to
calculate the socially responsible institutional ownership (SR_IO) and the monthly returns of the
next calendar year. For our stock return test sample, we only include observations of common
stocks (CRSP share code 10 and 11) traded on NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ. Stocks with prices
below five dollars on the last trading day of the previous month are excluded. Our sample covers
277,573 stock-month observations from January 2004 to December 2014, with 4,324 unique
stocks. 13 On average, we have 2,103 stocks each month, covering 31.16% of the full CRSP sample
in terms of numbers and 66.43% in terms of market value. Most of them are relatively large growth
stocks, with 72% institutional ownership and 9.43 analyst coverage on average. Relative to the full
CRSP sample, the average size percentile and book to market ratio percentile are 0.72 and 0.42,
respectively, indicating that our results are not driven by small, illiquid stocks, or stocks in certain
industries.


2.2. Key measures
2.2.1. Socially responsible institutional ownership measure (SR_IO)
We follow Hwang, Titman, and Wang (2018) and use four steps to calculate the socially
responsible institutional ownership (SR_IO) for each stock each quarter.
        First, we calculate an ESG score for each firm in each year. ESG scores include a firm's
performance along several dimensions, and are updated on an annual basis. Following the related
literature, we include five dimensions, environment, community, diversity, employee relationship,
and corporate governance, 14 and consider both the social benefits and harms of the company. In
the database, a social benefit is flagged as a strength. For example, in the "environment" category,
"strengths" include environmentally beneficial products and services, pollution prevention,
recycling, clean energy, communication on environmental issues. Moreover, a harm is flagged as
a concern. For instance, hazardous waste and ozone-depleting chemicals are environmental
concerns. To capture the net social performance, we focus on the difference between the number
of strengths and the number of concerns in each category. Then we sum up the net score for each




13
  Appendix Table A2 tabulates the details of our sample coverage.
14
  We do not exclude corporate governance dimension, as it is one of the factors in ESG investment guidelines. The
results still uphold even if we do so.

                                                       8
dimension and obtain the raw firm-level ESG score. A higher raw ESG score indicates a better
social performance.
         Because larger firms tend to have higher raw ESG scores, we size-adjust the scores by
sorting the stocks into 10 deciles based on size, calculating the average ESG score for each size
decile, and subtracting the average ESG score of corresponding decile from the raw ESG score of
the stock. Our results hold if we instead use raw ESG scores.
         Second, we measure an institution's social preference by examining its holdings in each
period. Following the literature, we measure the investment preference / style of institutional
investors, , , by taking a value-weighted average of the size-adjusted ESG scores of all stocks
in their portfolios at the end of each quarter, using the following equation:

                                       , =  ,                                                                   (1)


where  is the size-adjusted ESG score of stock  in the previous year, , is the weight of
stock  in institution  's portfolio at the end of quarter  and , is the social responsibility
score for institution  at the end of quarter  .
         Third, we define socially responsible (SR) institutions according to certain cutoffs for all
institutions. Each quarter, we sort all institutions into three groups based on the calculated , ,
i.e., the value-weighted size-adjusted ESG score of their holding portfolios. Institutions in the top
group are defined as socially responsible (SR) institutions. 15
         Finally, socially responsible institutional ownership (SR_IO) at the stock level is calculated
as the percentage of shares held by SR institutions, divided by shares held by all institutions.

                                #      
                  _, =                                                                                          (2)
                                #      



2.2.2. Mispricing signals
Our hypothesis is that because of the limited attention of SR institutions, the stocks held by these
institutions will tend to under react to quantitative measures of mispricing. To illustrate this, we


15
  We also sort all the institutions into two (four) groups based on ISRS. Then we define SR institutions in the first
half (quartile) as socially responsible (SR) institutions. The results do not change.

                                                         9
start by examining the link between a stock's holdings by SR institutions and its tendency to under
react to earnings announcements. This analysis is similar to Hirshleifer, Lim, and Teoh (2009),
who also examine how constraints on attention affect stock returns around earnings
announcements. Specifically, we follow Foster, Olsen, and Shevlin (1984) and Bernard and
Thomas (1989) and examine responses to firms' standardized unexpected earnings (SUE),
computed as the difference between their current quarter's earnings and the earnings four quarters
ago, scaled by the standard deviation of unexpected earnings over the last eight quarters.
        We also follow Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan (2015), and consider a monthly updated
composite quantitative signal, constructed by combining each stock's rankings on 11 anomaly
variables. The 11 anomalies are Net Stock Issues, Composite Equity Issues, Accruals, Net
Operating Assets, Asset Growth, Investment-to-Assets, Distress, O-score, Momentum, Gross
Profitability Premium, and Return on Assets. For each anomaly, the stocks are ranked and sorted
into 100 groups and assigned a rank from 1 to 100; the highest rank is assigned to the stocks
associated with the lowest average abnormal future return, as documented in the literature. The
composite quantitative signal of a stock is the arithmetic average of its rankings on the 11
anomalies, ranging between 1 and 100. For the convenience of analysis in our paper, we define
SYY score, ranging between -100 and -1, as the opposite of the composite signal in Stambaugh,
Yu, and Yuan (2015). According to this measure, stocks with the highest SYY score are the most
underpriced and the future expected returns are the most positive. Those with the lowest values
are the most overpriced and are expected to have the lowest expected future returns. Our results
are also robust to an alternative composite mispricing score measure covering 12 anomalies used
in Chordia, Subrahmanyam, and Tong (2014). 16


2.3. Sample summary
Table 1 Panel A reports the descriptive statistics of the most important variables we consider
(socially responsible institutional ownership, SUE score, and SYY score) and other firm
characteristics, during our January 2004 to December 2014 sample period. Socially responsible
institutional ownership (SR_IO), defined as the percentage of shares held by SR institutions



16
  The 12 anomalies in Chordia, Subrahmanyam, and Tong (2014) include size, book-to-market ratio, reversal,
momentum, accruals, asset growth, cash holding, analyst dispersion, new equity issues, idiosyncratic volatility,
profitability, and standardized unexpected earnings.

                                                      10
divided by shares held by all institutions, has a mean of 13.93%. The average SUE score is 0.14%,
which by construction should be close to 0. And the average SYY score is -49.56, which by
construction should be close to -50. The ESG score has a mean of -0.17 and a small standard
deviation as the distribution clusters around 0. The average market capitalization of firms in our
sample is $6.23 billion.


                                       [Insert Table 1 about here]


        We report the time-series average of the cross-sectional Pearson correlations and Spearman
correlations of the relevant variables in Panel B of Table 1. The Pearson correlation between the
ESG scores and SR_IO is 0.27, which is significantly positive, but somewhat lower than our initial
priors. The relatively low correlation probably reflects a couple of things. The first is disagreement
about the appropriate ESG scores ­ indeed, we examine ESG scores provided by competing data
providers and find that the correlation between their scores and the KLD scores are not particularly
high. 17 It is also likely that some SR institutions hold some stocks in low ESG industries to
diversify their portfolios and to track their benchmarks.
        Table 1 Panel C reports summary statistics for different types of institutions. On average,
SR institutions have $2.76 billion in assets under management, which is somewhat less than the
non-SR institutions ($5.52 billion). SR institutions and non-SR institutions have a similar number
of stocks in their portfolios, but SR institutions tend to have a longer investment horizon. We use
the reciprocal of the churn ratio (Gaspar, Massa, and Matos (2005)) to measure the investment
horizon. Specifically, socially responsible institutions on average hold 207 stocks in their
portfolios and have an average investment horizon of 4.35 quarters, while non-SR institutions hold
260 stocks and have an average investment horizon of 2.63 quarters. 18 We also report the equal-
weighted and value-weighted portfolio ESG score, SUE score, and SYY score for the portfolios
held by institutions. Socially responsible institutions have a much higher portfolio ESG score, no
matter which weighting method we use. Compared with non-SR institutions, SR institutions tend
to hold stocks with slightly lower SUE and a little bit higher composite SYY score.


17
   Similar evidence that the correlations among MSCI ESG score and other ESG scores are low is documented in
Gibson, Krüger, and Schmidt (2020). In our sample, correlations between MSCI KLD ESG scores and Thomson
Reuter ASSET4 ESG scores is 0.34.
18
   We define the investment horizon explicitly in equation (6) in Section 4.3.

                                                    11
3. Empirical Results
3.1. ESG preference and institutions' trading behaviors
In this subsection, we explore whether socially responsible (SR) institutions and non-SR
institutions respond differently to quantitative signals. Specifically, we relate the change in the
quarterly holdings of the institutions at the end of a given quarter to both the SUE score calculated
during the quarter and the average of a stock's SYY score in the last month of the previous quarter
and the first two months of the current quarter. We calculate these relations for the sample of SR
institutions as well as for the sample of non-SR institutions.19
         The change in holdings is calculated in two different ways. We calculate the change in the
percentage of shares held by each institutional type as well as the change in the number of
institutions of each type that holds the shares. We are interested in changes in the number of
institutions holding shares, since previous research suggests that the number of institutions holding
a stock, rather than the amount that they hold, predicts future stock returns (Sias, Starks, and
Titman (2006), Khan, Kogan, and Serafeim (2012), Edelen, Ince, and Kadlec (2016)).
         The results reported in Table 2 indicate that SR institutions react less to the mispricing
signals. Panel A.1. reports the relationship between SUE score and the percentage change in
ownership by different institutions. As the table reveals, changes in the aggregate holdings of SR
institutions are positively related to the SUE score during the quarter, but the relationship is only
marginally significant. In contrast, we observe a much more significant relationship between the
SUE scores and changes in the holdings of non-SR institutions. Most notably, for stocks in SUE
quintile 1 (the overpriced stocks) non-SR institutions decrease their holdings by 0.75%. In contrast,
for stocks in SUE quintile 5 (the underpriced stocks) non-SR institutions increase their holdings
by 0.43%. The difference between these flows, 1.19%, is highly significant. SR institutions only
increase their holdings by 0.08% for high SUE stocks and decrease their holdings by 0.08% for
low SUE stocks.
         Panel A.2. report the relationship between SUE scores and changes in the number of
institutions. For stocks that experience the most negative earnings surprise, the number of SR
institutions holding the stock decreases by 0.14% in the following quarter. For stocks that



19
   To address the concern that the classification of institutions will change at the end of quarter t+1, we also use
alternative measure by requiring the institutions to be in the same category at the end of both quarter t and t+1. The
results are qualitatively same.

                                                         12
experience the most positive earnings surprise, the number of SR institutions remains virtually
unchanged. In contrast, non-SR institutions react much stronger towards SUE scores. The number
of these institutions holding stocks with the most negative unexpected earnings decreases by 2.30%
and the number of institutions holding stocks with the most positive earnings surprises increase by
0.49%, yielding a significant difference of 2.78%. In summary, the results in Panel A are consistent
with our conjecture that SR institutions respond less to SUE than non-SR institutions.


                                    [Insert Table 2 about here]


       We repeat the analysis for our second mispricing signals, SYY score, and report the results
in Panel B of Table 2. The results are consistent. Panel B.1. shows that SR institutions increase
(decrease) the holdings less than non-SR institutions, when the stocks are underpriced (overpriced).
We find a similar pattern for changes in the number of institutions in Panel B.2. Taken together,
our analysis of institutional reaction to mispricing signals reveals that SR institutions are less
responsive to these signals compared with non-SR institutions.


3.2. Mispricing signals, socially responsible institutional ownership, and stock return patterns
In this subsection, we investigate the relationship between socially responsible institutional
ownership (SR_IO) and future return patterns. As we have shown in Table 2, SR institutions tend
to be less responsive to mispricing signals, which suggests that if a stock is held more by SR
institutions, the signals may more strongly predict future returns.
       To test this hypothesis, we perform independent double sorts (2×5) based on SR_IO and
our two quantitative signals (SUE score and the SYY score). Each month, we independently divide
all sample stocks into two groups based on their previous quarter's SR_IO, and into five groups
based on the most recent SUE score within previous three months or the SYY score of last month.
P1 contains the stocks that are most "overpriced" and P5 contains stocks that are most
"underpriced". Our hypothesis is that the return difference between the P1 and P5 portfolios is
higher for the sample of stocks that have higher SR_IO.
       Panel A of Table 3 reports the value-weighted CAPM alphas, Fama-French 3-factor alphas,
and Carhart 4-factor alphas of portfolios that are formed based on SUE score. We report these
portfolio returns for three samples of firms ­ the entire sample, a low SR_IO sample, and a high


                                                 13
SR_IO sample. The first thing to note is that for portfolios formed on stocks from the entire sample
of firms, the predictability of SUE score is only marginally significant. The FF-3 alpha for the
long-short P5-P1 portfolio is 0.45%, which is only significant at 10% level and the CAPM and
Carhart 4-factor alphas are insignificant. A comparison of the samples of high and low SR_IO
stocks reveals that the return spread is in fact significant for the high SR_IO stocks but not for the
low SR_IO stocks. The differences in these spreads range from 0.76% to 0.80% per month and are
statistically significant for each of the factor models. These differences come mainly from the low
SUE score stocks, which may reflect potential short selling constraints.
        Panel B of Table 3 presents our evidence on the predictability of SYY score. As we show
in the first row, which includes all of our sample stocks, SYY score does predict risk-adjusted
returns in our sample period. Value-weighted CAPM alpha increases from P1 to P5, generating a
long-short P5-P1 CAPM alpha of 0.73%, which is significant at the 1% level. The spread is similar
for multi-factor models. A comparison of the samples of high and low SR_IO stocks reveals that
this spread is only significant for the high SR_IO stocks. The difference in these spreads is about
0.5% per month, and is statistically significant for each of the benchmarks. These differences again
come mainly from the overpriced stocks measured by SYY score, which can again reflect short
selling constraints.


                                     [Insert Table 3 about here]


       Taken together, the results are consistent with our conjecture that the efficacy of the
mispricing signals is greater for stocks held more by SR institutions.


3.3. The emergence of ESG investing and stock return patterns: 1996-2003 vs. 2004-2014
The concept of ESG investing emerged as a response to the corporate scandals in the early 2000s
and prior to 2004 influenced a relatively small part of the investment industry. After that, ESG
investing gradually increased and in recent years experienced rapid growth. In this subsection we
replicate our return evidence during the 1996 to 2003 sample period as a placebo test. Panel A and
Panel B of Table 4 tabulate the results for SUE score and SYY score as mispricing signals,
respectively. In this specific and relatively short period, SUE does not predict future returns
regardless of institution type. As shown in Panel A.1., before 2004, the abnormal return of the


                                                 14
long-short P5-P1 portfolio sorted on SUE score is 0.48% for stocks with low SR_IO and 0.29%
for stocks with high SR_IO. These return spreads are not statistically different from zero, and the
difference in the spreads are not significant either.


                                           [Insert Table 4 about here]


         As we show in Panel B of Table 4, the SYY score is an especially strong predictor of
returns in the early period - the abnormal return of the long-short P5-P1 portfolio spread is 1.09%
for stocks with low SR_IO and 1.05% for stocks with high SR_IO. These return spreads are
statistically different from zero, but in contrast to our findings for the post-2004 period, they are
not significantly different from each other. In other words, the holdings of socially responsible
institutions in the earlier period do not have a material influence on the returns of SYY score sorted
portfolios.


3.4. Socially responsible institutional ownership, limits to arbitrage measures, and funding
liquidity
As shown in Table 3, the return spread between the underpriced and overpriced stocks is only
significant for high SR_IO stocks, and the significant performance comes mainly from the short
side of these arbitrage portfolios. In this subsection, we examine the extent to which this evidence
is influenced by the financing and short-selling frictions that may limit the ability of market
participants to arbitrage away the mispricing (Shleifer and Vishny (1997)). 20
      To start with, we examine whether there is any systematic difference of characteristics
between low and high SR_IO stocks that may influence the extent to which mispricing can be
arbitraged away. Panel A of Table 5 compares stocks with high SR_IO and low SR_IO in both
underpriced and overpriced quintiles, across a number of dimensions that are associated with limits
to arbitrage ­ these include size, idiosyncratic risk, illiquidity proxied by stock turnover, analyst
coverage, institutional ownership, 21 and stock borrowing costs proxied by indicative lending fees
(the Markit data on lending fee is available from 2006). In most cases, the stocks with low SR_IO

20
   Lewellen (2011) also provides evidence that institutions' investment decisions are constrained by the limits of
arbitrage considerations.
21
   Nagel (2005) argues that short-sale constraints are most likely to bind among stocks with low institutional ownership.
Evans, Ferreira, and Prado (2017) argue that fund managers, even if not allowed to sell, tend to lend shares to earn
lending fees.

                                                          15
and high SR_IO look similar along these dimensions. The exception is that stocks with high SR_IO
are generally larger and followed by more analysts, which makes our evidence of mispricing
especially surprising.


                                              [Insert Table 5 about here]


         We also examine the extent to which the "apparent" profits of the long-short portfolios are
related to the cost of shorting and other borrowing constraints. To examine the importance of these
capital constraints, we use the aggregate funding liquidity factor of Adrian, Etula, and Muir (2014),
calculated as shocks to the book leverage of security broker-dealers to measure the availability of
arbitrage capital. 22 A negative shock to broker-dealer leverage indicates the funding conditions
deteriorate and the available arbitrage capital decreases. We split our sample of 2004-2014 into
two subperiods based on the leverage shock of the previous quarter. 23 We then re-do our analysis
in Table 3 using the two subsamples.
         Panel B reports the results for the whole period and two subperiods, the high availability
of funding period and the low availability of funding period. We focus on the long-short P5-P1
return spread generated by SUE score (Panel B.1.) and the SYY score (Panel B.2.) among high
SR_IO stocks and low SR_IO stocks, and the difference between the two groups. As we showed
earlier in Table 3, the first two rows of the two sub-panels show that over the entire sample period,
the mispricing signals generate significant return predictability for the high SR_IO group. The
second two rows repeat this analysis, but only for the time period when the availability of funding
is high. During this period, there is no reliable evidence of abnormal performance for either the
high or low SR_IO group. Finally, in the last two rows, we repeat the tests during the period of
low funding availability. In this period, the arbitrage portfolio, formed using high SR_IO stocks,
generates very significant alphas (0.97%, t-stat 2.21 when using SUE score; 1.37%, t-stat 3.94
when using SYY score). The difference in the long-short P5-P1spreads between the high SR_IO
group and the low SR_IO group is statistically significant (1.07%, t-stat 2.64 in Panel B.1.; 0.93%,

22
   The broker-dealer quarterly leverage is defined as total financial asset / (total financial asset - total financial liability)
by Adrian, Etula, and Muir (2014). The leverage shock is the seasonally adjusted log changes in the level of broker-
dealer leverage. The data are obtained from Table L.129 of the Federal Reserve Flow of Funds.
http://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/z1/current/data.htm
23
   Our results hold if we use the level of broker-dealer leverage to define funding liquidity, i.e., both funding liquidity
and the availability of arbitrage capital is lower when the level of broker-dealer leverage is high.

                                                               16
t-stat 2.77 in Panel B.2.) during the low funding liquidity period and is close to zero when the
capital constraints are loose. 24


3.5. Socially responsible institutional ownership and stock price efficiency
In this subsection we consider an additional test of our hypothesis that the presence of SR
institutions slows down the speed that stock prices respond to information. We consider the Price
Delay measure, proposed by Hou and Moskowitz (2005), which captures the extent that stocks
underreact to market information. Specifically, following Hou and Moskowitz (2005), we run a
regression of each stock's weekly returns on contemporaneous and four weeks of lagged returns
of the market portfolio.

                                                 4
                                                      (-)
                      , =  +  , +                            ,- + ,                                          (3)
                                                =1



Where , is the return on stock j and , is the return on the CRSP value-weighted market index
in week t. 25 Then, using the estimated coefficients from this regression, we compute the Hou and
Moskowitz (2005) measure of Price Delay for each firm, which is the fraction of the variation of
contemporaneous individual stock returns explained by lagged market returns. Specifically, the
                                                                              (-)
measure is one minus the  2 from above regression restricting                       = 0,    [1,4], over the

 2 with no restrictions.

                                                       2(-)
                                                              =0, [1,4]
                                = 1 -                                                                         (4)
                                                               2

The larger the Price Delay measure, the more a stock's return variation is captured by lagged
market returns, and hence the stronger is the delay in response to return innovations.
        We estimate this Price Delay measure for each stock using weekly returns over each
calendar year. We then regress the measure on a variety of control variables of previous year (e.g.,
size, turnover, institutional holdings, and year fixed effects) along with SR institutional ownership.


24
   In unreported tests, we show that excluding financial crisis period from our sample does not change our baseline
results or the findings about funding liquidity qualitatively.
25
   We also use two factor model including market and industry to run the regression, the results are similar.

                                                        17
The estimates from this regression, both in the 2004-2014 period of interest as well as the earlier
placebo period, are shown in Table 6.


                                          [Insert Table 6 about here]


        Consistent with our earlier results, the holdings of socially responsible institutions are
associated with a slow response to market information in the later period of interest but not in the
placebo period. In column (2), a one-standard-deviation increase in SR_IO is associated with a
2.6% increase in Price Delay relative to its unconditional mean. 26 If we further split the 2004-2014
sample into two subperiods based on the funding liquidity proxied by shock to the broker-dealer
leverage, the effect of SR_IO on Price Delay is much stronger during the period when the funding
liquidity is low.


4. Robustness and Discussion
In this section, we discuss various alternative explanations for our documented results and conduct
robustness tests. Specifically, we show that the results hold if we define SR_IO using ESG
measures from an alternative database. Moreover, our empirical evidence shows that SR_IO is
more important than ESG score in influencing the stock return patterns. We further provide
evidence that suggests that the results are not driven by investment horizon or the increase in
passive investing over this sample period. Finally, we investigate the effect of firm size on our
baseline results.


4.1. Alternative methods of defining socially responsible institutions and SR_IO
For our baseline results, we identify socially responsible institutions and measure SR_IO using
MSCI KLD database. Although ESG scores from the MSCI KLD database are widely used in the
literature, 27 the measures are the subjective views of individual analysts. Moreover, the ESG
scores assign the same weight to different dimensions of social performance and are not continuous.
We therefore examine alternative ESG ratings to check that robustness of our results.


26
   Hou and Moskowitz (2005) Price Delay measure has an unconditional mean of 0.34 and the variable SR_IO has a
standard deviation of 0.29. Therefore, 2.6% = (0.03 x 0.29)/0.34. The magnitude is economically large and about half
of the magnitude of short selling risk. (Engelberg, Reed, and Ringgenberg (2018)).
27
   For example, Deng, Kang and Low (2013), Krüger (2015), Lins, Servaes and Tamayo (2017), and among others.

                                                        18
           Following the same steps in Section 2.2.1., we re-construct SR_IO measure using ESG
scores from the Thomson Reuters ASSET4 ESG database. The correlation between the MSCI ESG
scores and the ASSET4 ESG scores is 0.34. Such low correlation is consistent with Gibson, Krüger,
and Schmidt (2020), who find that correlations of ESG scores from different vendors are low. In
contrast, the correlation between SR_IO measures constructed using MSCI KLD database and
ASSET4 database is 0.68, which is much higher than the correlation of the ESG scores. Given the
higher correlation, one might conclude that SR_IO is a more robust measure of the attractiveness
of a stock to socially responsible institutions.


                                          [Insert Table 7 about here]


           To check whether the results still hold if we use an alternative data source for ESG scores,
we perform an independent double sort on alternative SR_IO measure and the SYY score. The
results are tabulated in Table 7. Based on the alternative measure constructed using the ASSET4
ESG database, for the sample of high SR_IO stocks, the portfolio of the most underpriced stocks
have a FF-3 alpha of 0.67% per month, and the long-short P5-P1 portfolio generates a 0.81%
monthly alpha. This is quite similar to the results that use SR_IO constructed with the MSCI KLD
data. 28


4.2. The direct effect of firm's social performance (ESG Score)
Thus far, we have documented that the mispricing signals predict returns better for stocks with
higher socially responsible institutional ownership. The question we ask in this subsection is
whether it is the holdings, per se, that influence the return patterns, or whether there is a direct
effect coming from the ESG scores of the stocks.
           To explore this possibility, we classify the stocks into three ESG groups. We plot the
distribution of ESG scores in our sample in Figure 3. As the figure illustrates, a large portion of
the firms have ESG scores of -1, 0, and 1. We therefore apply more extreme values as cut-off
points and classify our sample firms into Low, Medium, and High ESG groups. We choose the



28
  We also consider different alternative measures of SR_IO. For example, using the number of SR institutions divided
by the total number of institutions instead of number of shares, using equal weighted method instead of value weighted
when evaluate ESG performance on institution level, etc. The results are very similar.

                                                         19
15th percentile and the 85th percentile as our breakpoints, which is a balance between the variation
of ESG scores and portfolio diversification. We then perform an independent triple sort (2×3×5)
based on SR_IO, the ESG score, and the SYY score. 29 At the end of each month, we divide stocks
into low SR_IO and high SR_IO groups as well as into low, medium, and high ESG groups. The
stocks are then independently sorted into five mispricing quintiles, based on their SYY scores. P5
contains the stocks that are considered the most "underpriced" and P1 contains those considered
the most "overpriced". Based on these portfolio sorts, we form value-weighted portfolios, and
report the Fama-French 3-factor alphas of the various portfolios in Table 8.
         Panel A reports the alphas for the various portfolios of high SR_IO stocks. The estimated
alphas support the idea that for stocks with high SR_IO, the underpriced stocks outperform the
overpriced stocks regardless of ESG scores. The return spread between the overpriced and
underpriced stocks is strongest for the high ESG group. However, the difference between the
spread for the stocks with high ESG scores and the spread for the stocks with low ESG scores is
not statistically significant. Panel B reports the alphas for the various low SR_IO portfolios. The
estimated alphas exhibit no significant relation between mispricing signal and returns. It should be
stressed that these findings are consistent with our conclusion in the previous subsection, that
SR_IO is a more robust measure of the attractiveness of a stock to SR investors than the more
subjective ESG measure.


                                           [Insert Table 8 about here]


         It is worth noting that, in Panel A, among high SR_IO-underpriced stocks, the positive
alpha is strongest for stocks with poor ESG performance and is absent for stocks with superior
ESG performance. In addition, among high SR_IO-overpriced stocks, the negative alpha is
strongest for stocks with good ESG performance and is absent for stock with poor ESG
performance. This evidence suggests that when trading signals are aligned with the preference of
SR institutions, these institutions indeed actively correct mispricing by selling overpriced-poor
ESG stocks and buying underpriced-good ESG stocks.



29
  To validate our analysis, we first confirm that ESG score itself does not predict the stock returns in our sample. In
unreported table, the monthly raw return decreases from 0.96% to 0.82% in ESG score. The spread between High
ESG portfolio and Low ESG portfolio, however, is insignificant.

                                                          20
4.3. The effect of investment horizon
One potential concern is that socially responsible institutions are long-term oriented (Starks,
Venkat, and Zhu (2018)) and therefore do not respond to short-term quantitative signals. To
examine this possibility, we follow Gaspar, Massa, and Matos (2005) and Starks, Venkat, and Zhu
(2018) and measure the investment horizon for each institution each quarter using following
equation:

                                   |,,  , - ,,-1   , |
               , =                                                                                 (5)
                                  |   + ,,-1  ,-1 |
                                   ,, ,
                                           2


,, is the number of shares of stock i held by institution j, at the end of quarter t. Institution-level
investment horizon is proxied by the reciprocal of the churn ratio. As shown in Table 1 Panel C,
socially responsible institutions indeed have longer investment horizons, which is consistent with
their underreaction to short-term mispricing signals.
       To rule out the possibility that our documented results are driven by the fact that SR
institutions have longer horizons, we investigate how the investment horizons of the institutions
that hold a firm's stock affect its return pattern. Specifically, for stock i in quarter t, we define
stock-level investment horizon, by taking a weighted average of the churn ratios of the institutions
that hold the shares, where the weight is the number of shares held by institution j. Then we take
the reciprocal and obtain stock-level investment horizon:

                                                    1
           , =                                                                                     (6)
                                                  ( ,  ,, )
                                                     ,,


       Then we perform a 2×5 independent double sort based on stock-level investment horizon
and SYY score. The results, described in Table 9, reveal that the alphas of the SYY strategy do
not seem to be related to the investment horizons of the institutions that hold the shares. Therefore,
it is unlikely that our documented results about SR_IO and mispricing return patterns are driven
by the longer investment horizons of SR institutions.



                                                  21
                                          [Insert Table 9 about here]


4.4. Socially responsible active mutual funds
Another potential confounding effect is the growth of passive investing in our sample period. It is
plausible that some socially responsible institutions are passive indexers and do not respond to
quantitative mispricing signals. We therefore focus on a particular type of institutions, active
mutual funds, which are assumed to trade more actively and have a shorter investment horizon
compared with the average institutions. Using the holdings of mutual funds, we repeat our tests by
constructing socially responsible active mutual fund ownership (SR_MO). 30
         As we show in Table 10, consistent with our previous findings, SYY score predicts future
stock returns more reliably for stocks that are held more by socially responsible active mutual
funds. We find that long-short SYY portfolios of stocks with high SR_MO generate a monthly
value-weighted Fama-French 3-factor alpha of 0.82%. The spread is much smaller and
insignificant for firms with low SR_MO. The difference in these spreads is about 0.55% per month
and is statistically significant. We again confirm our baseline results using alternative asset pricing
models.
         Taken together, our empirical finding that socially responsible institutions react less to
mispricing signals are not driven by differences in investment horizon or passive investing.


                                          [Insert Table 10 about here]


4.5. Socially responsible institutional ownership vs. firm size
Socially responsible institutions tend to hold stocks that are larger on average. Indeed, as shown
in Panel B of Table 1, the correlation between SR_IO and firm size is 0.42. In this subsection we
more closely examine the relation between SR_IO and firm size, and explore how this relation
may have influenced our findings.



30
   Specifically, we eliminate index funds by deleting those whose name includes the word "index" or the abbreviation
"ind", "S&P", "Wilshire", and/or "Russell" (Amihud and Goyenko (2013)). Following similar steps in Section 2.2.1,
we first calculate a size-adjusted value weighted ESG score for each mutual fund each quarter. Then we divide them
into three groups, those with highest portfolio ESG score are defined as socially responsible mutual fund. After that,
we calculate a socially responsible mutual fund ownership (SR_MO) for each stock. In unreported results, SR_MO
has 0.79 correlation with SR_IO.

                                                         22
       We explore the relationship between SR_IO and firm size within the context of two related
issues. The first is the observation that at least historically, mispricing signals have worked much
better for small firms than for large firms, which are much easier to arbitrage. The question we
address is whether this relation between firm size and mispricing continues to hold following the
emergence of quantitative investors, who try to exploit the mispricing, and SR investors, who focus
more on larger stocks. The second is the emergence of indexers, who also tend to focus on large
stocks such as those in the S&P 500. It is possible that the observed relation between the efficacy
of mispricing signals and SR_IO is due the fact that high SR_IO stocks tend to be in the S&P 500,
and are held more by passive investors such as index funds.
       To explore these possibilities, we first examine the efficacy of the SYY signal among the
largest 1,000 stocks and the rest of CSRP stock sample for 1996-2003 and 2004-2014 period,
respectively. As shown in Panel A of Table 11, a value-weighted long-short strategy that exploits
the SYY signal among small stocks generates a much stronger abnormal return of 2.09% (vs. 1.45%
among 1,000 largest stocks) per month in the 1996-2003 period. Consistent with Chordia,
Subrahmanyam, and Tong (2014) and McLean and Pontiff (2016), we find that the abnormal return
of these strategies have declined in the more recent 2004-2014 period ­ the value-weighted
portfolio that includes 1,000 largest stocks exhibits an abnormal (5-1) return spread of 0.85% per
month. Interestingly, the abnormal return of the long-short portfolio that excludes the largest 1,000
stocks is only 0.49% per month in the same sample period. In other words, the relationship between
firm size and price efficiency seems to have reversed in the recent period.


                                    [Insert Table 11 about here]


       To investigate whether this reversal is due to rise of ESG investing, we separately
investigate the effect of size on the efficacy of mispricing signals, for high SR_IO stocks and low
SR_IO stocks, respectively. Specifically, we conduct an independent triple sort on SR_IO, size,
and SYY score for 2004-2014 sample period. Panel B of Table 11 shows that among high SR_IO
stocks, SYY score predicts returns for both large stocks and small stocks. The long-short return
spread is 0.74% for large stocks and is 0.83% for small stocks, and the difference between these
two numbers is not significantly different from zero. In contrast, among low SR_IO stocks, SYY
score does not predict returns for either large stocks or small stocks. In other words, once we


                                                 23
control for SR_IO, the efficacy of the SYY signal does not seem to depend on the capitalization
of the stocks.
        The triple sort results in Panel B of Table 11 also address the concern that the return
patterns we observe is due to the emergence of passive investing in the more recent period. The
large stocks are more likely to be indexed and held by passive investors than small stocks. However,
the holdings of socially responsible investors are similarly associated with the efficacy of the SYY
signal in both subsamples.


5. Conclusion
In addition to their preference for high ESG stocks, socially responsible investors tend to trade
differently than their less socially responsible peers. They exhibit lower turnover, and their
portfolio choices appear to be less sensitive to quantitative signals. Our evidence suggests that,
perhaps because of their different trading behaviors, the emergence of these investors has had an
important influence on the efficacy of quantitative signals. Specifically, we find that although the
predictive power of SUE score and SYY score is much weaker in the post-2004 period, these
quantitative mispricing signals continue to predict the returns of those stocks with high socially
responsible institutional ownership.
        Our analysis illustrates that investor tastes have indirect as well as direct effects on return
patterns. The direct effect has received substantial attention in the literature. If investors prefer
certain firm characteristics, then stocks with those characteristics may be associated with higher
stock prices relative to various measures of fundamental value (such as book value). We believe
that we are the first to study the indirect effect -- if investors focus on characteristics that are not
directly linked to returns, this focus may crowd out the investors' attention to signals that do predict
returns. We conjecture that the increased focus on ESG by socially responsible institutions may
explain why the efficacy of quantitative signals is reduced substantially more for small
capitalization than for large capitalization stocks in the recent period.
        While the evidence provided in this paper is consistent with mispricing, we would
recommend caution to those who would want to implement these insights in quantitative strategies
going forward. The period that we study is special for a couple of reasons. The first is that ESG
investing took off in this time period, so the implications of these investing strategies may not have




                                                  24
been fully understood. The second, our results are significant only when the ability of hedge funds
to offset the effect of socially responsible investors is significant curtailed.




                                                   25
References:
Adrian, Tobias, Erkko Etula, and Tyler Muir, 2014, Financial intermediaries and the cross-section
of asset returns, Journal of Finance 69, 2557-2596.

Akbas, Ferhat, Will J. Armstrong, Sorin Sorescu, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2015, Smart
money, dumb money, and capital market anomalies, Journal of Financial Economics 118, 355-
382.

Akbas, Ferhat, Will J. Armstrong, Sorin Sorescu, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2016, Capital
market efficiency and arbitrage efficacy, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 51, 387-
413.

Almazan, Andres, Keith C. Brown, Murray Carlson, and David A. Chapman, 2004, Why constrain
your mutual fund manager?, Journal of Financial Economics 73, 289-321.

Amihud, Yakov, and Ruslan Goyenko, 2013, Mutual fund's R2 as predictor of performance,
Review of Financial Studies 26, 667-694.

Ang, Andrew, Robert J. Hodrick, Yuhang Xing, and Xiaoyan Zhang, 2006, The cross-section of
volatility and expected returns, Journal of Finance 61, 259-299.

Ben-Rephael, Azi, Zhi Da, and Ryan D. Israelsen, 2017, It depends on where you search:
Institutional investor attention and underreaction to news, Review of Financial Studies 30, 3009-
3047.

Bernard, Victor L., and Jacob K. Thomas, 1989, Post-earnings-announcement drift: Delayed price
response or characteristic premium?, Journal of Accounting Research 27, 1-36.

Brunnermeier, Markus, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2009, Market liquidity and funding liquidity,
Review of Financial Studies 22, 2201-2238.

Cao, Jie, Bing Han, and Qinghai Wang, 2017, Institutional investment constraints and stock prices,
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 52, 465-489.

Cao, Jie, Hao Liang, and Xintong Zhan, 2019, Peer effects of corporate social responsibility,
Management Science 65, 5487-5503.

Carhart, Mark, 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance 52, 57-82.

Chordia, Tarun, Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, and Qing Tong, 2014, Have capital market anomalies
attenuated in the recent era of high liquidity and trading activity?, Journal of Accounting and
Economics 58, 41-58.




                                               26
Deng, Xin, Jun-koo Kang, and Buen Sin Low, 2013, Corporate social responsibility and
stakeholder value maximization: Evidence from mergers, Journal of Financial Economics 110,
87-109.

Edelen, Roger M., Ozgur S. Ince, and Gregory B. Kadlec, 2016, Institutional investors and stock
return anomalies, Journal of Financial Economics 119, 472-488.

Edmans, Alex, 2011, Does the stock market fully value intangibles? Employee satisfaction and
equity prices, Journal of Financial Economics 101, 621-640.

Engelberg, Joseph E., Adam V. Reed, and Matthew C. Ringgenberg, 2018, Short-selling risk,
Journal of Finance 73, 755-786

Evans, Richard, Miguel A. Ferreira, and Melissa Porras Prado, 2017, Fund performance and equity
lending: Why lend what you can sell?, Review of Finance 21, 1093-1121.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and
bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2007, Disagreement, tastes, and asset prices, Journal of
Financial Economics 83, 667-689.

Flammer, Caroline, 2015, Does corporate social responsibility lead to superior financial
performance? A regression discontinuity approach, Management Science 61, 2549-2568.

Foster, George, Chris Olsen, and Terry Shevlin, 1984, Earnings releases, anomalies, and the
behavior of security returns, Accounting Review 59, 574-603.

Garleanu, Nicolae, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2011, Margin-based asset pricing and deviations
from the law of one price, Review of Financial Studies 24, 1980-2022.

Gaspar, Jose´-Miguel, Massimo Massa, and Pedro Matos, 2005, Shareholder investment horizons
and the market for corporate control, Journal of Financial Economics 76,135-165.

Gibson, Rajna, Philipp Krüger, and Peter Steffen Schmidt, 2020, ESG rating disagreement and
stock returns, Working Paper.

Gromb, Denis, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2002, Equilibrium and welfare in markets with financially
constrained arbitrageurs, Journal of Financial Economics 66, 361-407.

Gromb, Denis, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2018, The dynamics of financially constrained arbitrage,
Journal of Finance 73, 1713-1750.

Hartzmark, Samuel M., and Abigail Sussman, 2019, Do investors value sustainability? A natural
experiment examining ranking and fund flows, Journal of Finance 74, 2789-2837.


                                              27
Hirshleifer, David, Sonya Seongyeon Lim, and Siew Hong Teoh, 2009, Driven to distraction:
Extraneous events and underreaction to earnings news, Journal of Finance 64, 2289-2325.

Hong, Harrison, and Marcin Kacperczyk, 2009, The price of sin: The effects of social norms on
markets, Journal of Financial Economics 93, 15-36.

Hou, Kewei, and Tobias J. Moskowitz, 2005, Market frictions, price delay, and the cross-section
of expected returns, Review of Financial Studies 18, 981-1020.
Hwang, Chun Yang, Sheridan Titman, and Ying Wang, 2018, Investor tastes, corporate behavior
and stock returns: An analysis of corporate social responsibility, Working Paper.

Khan, Mozaffar, Leonid Kogan, and George Serafeim, 2012, Mutual fund trading pressure: Firm-
level stock price impact and timing of SEOs, Journal of Finance 67, 1371-1395.

Krüger, Philipp, 2015, Corporate goodness and shareholder wealth, Journal of Financial
Economics 115, 304-329.

Lewellen, Jonathan, Institutional investors and the limits of arbitrage, 2011, Journal of Financial
Economics 102, 62-80.

Lins, Karl, Henri Servaes, and Ane Tamayo, 2017, Social capital, trust, and firm performance: The
value of corporate social responsibility during the financial crisis, Journal of Finance 72, 1785-
1824.

McLean, David, and Jeffrey Pontiff, 2016, Does academic publication destroy stock return
predictability?, Journal of Finance 71, 5-32.

Nagel, Stefan, 2005, Short sales, institutional investors, and the cross-section of stock returns,
Journal of Financial Economics 78, 277-309.

Newey, Whitney, and Kenneth D. West, 1987, A simple positive semi-definite, heteroskedasticity
and autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix, Econometrica 55, 703-708.

Pastor, Lubos, Robert F. Stambaugh, and Lucian A. Taylor, 2020, Sustainable investing in
equilibrium, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Pedersen, Lasse Heje, Shaun Fitzgibbons, and Lukasz Pomorski, 2020, Responsible investing: The
ESG-efficient frontier, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Ridel, Arno, and Paul Smeets, 2017, Why do investors hold socially responsible mutual funds?,
Journal of Finance 72, 2505-2550.

Schmidt, Daniel, 2019, Distracted institutional investors, 2019, Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 52, 2453-2491.


                                                28
Shleifer, Andrei, Robert W. Vishny, 1997, The limits of arbitrage, Journal of Finance 52, 35-55.

Sias, Richard W., Laura T. Starks, and Sheridan Titman, 2006, Changes in institutional ownership
and stock returns: Assessment and methodology, Journal of Business 79, 2869-2910.

Stambaugh, Robert, Jianfeng Yu, and Yu Yuan, 2015, Arbitrage asymmetry and the idiosyncratic
volatility puzzle, Journal of Finance 70, 1903-1948.

Starks, Laura, Parth Venkat, and Qifei Zhu, 2018, Corporate ESG profiles and investor horizons,
Working Paper.




                                               29
                                       Table 1. Summary Statistics
This table reports descriptive statistics of stock and institution characteristics. Panel A reports the stock-
month summary statistics of socially responsible institutional ownership (SR_IO), standardized unexpected
earnings (SUE) score, SYY score, ESG score, and other firm characteristics. The statistics are the time-
series average of cross-sectional distributions from January 2004 to December 2014. At the end of each
quarter, we calculate value-weighted size-adjusted portfolio ESG score for each institution, those ranked
top tercile are defined as socially responsible (SR) institutions. Socially responsible institutional ownership
(SR_IO) is defined as the number of shares held by SR institutions divided by the total number of shares
held by all institutions. SUE score is computed as the difference between current quarter's earnings and the
earnings four quarters ago, then divided by the standard deviation of unexpected earnings over the last eight
quarters. Each month, we use the most recent SUE score within previous three months. SYY score is the
opposite of a monthly updated composite mispricing score from Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan (2015).
Specifically, the composite mispricing score for a stock is constructed by combining its rankings on 11
anomaly variables computed at the end of each month. ESG score is the raw net score of last year from
MSCI ESG STATS database. Other firm characteristics include market capitalization in $billion, stock
turnover in the previous month, AXHZ (2006) idiosyncratic risk (IVOL) of last month, analyst coverage of
last month, and institutional ownership of most recent quarter-end. Panel B reports the time-series average
of cross-sectional correlations among mispricing signals (SUE score and SYY score), socially responsible
institutional ownership (SR_IO), ESG score, and other firm characteristics. The Pearson correlations are
shown below the diagonal with Spearman correlations above the diagonal. Panel C reports the institution-
quarter average of characteristics for different types of institutions, respectively. Institution characteristics
include asset under management (AUM), the number of stocks in the portfolio, investment horizon proxied
by the reciprocal of the churn ratio, equal-weighted and value-weighted ESG scores, SYY scores, and SUE
scores.



          Panel A. Stock Characteristics: Time-Series Average of Cross-Sectional Distributions

      Jan 2004 ­ Dec 2014            Mean        Std         10-Pctl    Q1        Med         Q3       90-Pctl


 SR_IO (%)                           13.93      10.10         4.72     6.73       10.64      18.18      81.28

 SUE score (%)                       0.14       10.14        -1.62     -0.37      0.12       0.53        1.65
 SYY score                          -49.56      12.53        -66.17    -57.91    -49.13     -40.68      -33.64

 ESG score                           -0.17       2.30        -2.36     -1.64      -0.64      0.91        2.64

 Market capitalization ($billion)    6.23       21.32         0.26     0.49       1.22       3.66       12.14

 Stock turnover (%)                  21.15      20.32         5.71     9.72       15.86      25.97      41.22

 IVOL (%)                            8.40        5.04         3.89     5.21       7.27       10.23      14.02

 Analyst coverage                    9.43        6.90         2.16     4.08       7.58       13.16      19.33

 Institutional ownership             0.72        0.23         0.39     0.58       0.76       0.87        0.96




                                                        30
                                                      Panel B. Correlations among Stock Characteristics

                      Spearman                                                                                    Market           Analyst             Institutional
                                     SUE score           SYY score           SR_IO              ESG score
  Pearson                                                                                                      capitalization     coverage              ownership

  SUE score                              1.00               -0.06               -0.02             -0.03            0.06                0.01                0.02

  SYY score                              0.13               1.00                0.13              0.11             0.24                0.11                0.07

  SR_IO                                  -0.01              0.14                1.00              0.38             0.53                0.42               -0.08

  ESG score                              -0.01              0.13                0.27              1.00             0.19                0.17               -0.08

  Market capitalization                   0.00              0.15                0.42              0.31             1.00                0.69                0.20

  Analyst coverage                        0.00              0.14                0.45              0.25             0.41                1.00                0.25

  Institutional ownership                -0.01              0.08                -0.08             -0.06            -0.05               0.21                1.00




                                Panel C. Institution Characteristics: Time-Series Average of Cross-Sectional Mean

Q1.2004 ­ Q4.2014                                                     Investment         EW           EW           EW            VW             VW             VW
                                           AUM            # of
                                                                        horizon         ESG          SUE          SYY           ESG             SUE           SYY
Institution Type                         ($billion)      stocks
                                                                    (1/churn ratio)     score      score (%)      score         score         score (%)       score


Socially Responsible (SR) Institutions     2.76           207            4.35           2.52         -0.03        -43.76        3.53            0.09         -42.01

Non-SR institutions                        5.21           260            2.63           0.69         0.25         -47.62        0.84            0.32         -46.69




                                                                                 31
  Table 2. The Effect of Mispricing Signals on the Trading Behaviors of SR institutions and
                                            Non-SR institutions

 This table reports the summary of quarterly trading behavior of socially responsible (SR) institutions and
 non-SR institutions, towards stocks with different SUE scores and SYY scores in Panel A and Panel B,
 respectively. In Panel A, we use SUE score in most recent quarter as the quarterly mispricing signal. In
 Panel B, one month before the end of each quarter, we calculate the average SYY scores of preceding three
 months for each stock. In Panel A.1., we report the changes in institutional ownership for SR institutions
 and non-SR institutions. In Panel A.2., we report the changes in the number of institutions for SR
 institutions and non-SR institutions, scaled by the total number of institutions at the beginning of the period.
 Panel B.1. and Panel B.2. report the parallel results using SYY score as mispricing signal. The sample
 period is from 2004 to 2014. To adjust for serial correlation, robust Newey-West (1987) t-statistics are
 reported in parentheses.


                   Panel A.1. Sorted on SUE Score: Change in Institutional Ownership (%)
    SUE Score                P1              P2             P3           P4              P5            P5-P1
                        (Overpriced)                                               (Underpriced)    (H-L spread)

SR Institutions            -0.08           -0.08            0.07        0.08            0.08            0.16*

                          (-1.39)          (-1.02)       (0.78)        (0.89)          (1.04)          (1.75)

Non-SR institutions       -0.75**          -0.67*         -0.45         -0.47           0.43           1.19***

                          (-2.37)          (-1.72)       (-1.24)       (-1.19)         (1.18)          (8.68)

Diff (SR ­ Non-SR)         0.67**           0.59            0.52        0.55           -0.35           -1.02***

                           (2.23)          (1.58)        (1.51)        (1.50)         (-1.05)          (-7.88)




                  Panel A.2. Sorted on SUE Score: Change in the Number of Institutions (%)
    SUE Score                P1              P2             P3           P4             P5             P5-P1
                        (Overpriced)                                               (Underpriced)    (H-L spread)

SR Institutions           -0.14**          -0.17**        -0.07         -0.13          -0.07            0.07*

                          (-2.20)          (-2.21)       (-0.85)       (-1.54)        (-1.06)           (1.83)

Non-SR institutions       -2.30***        -1.49***      -1.33***        -0.19           0.49           2.78***

                          (-6.75)          (-3.90)       (-4.00)       (-0.57)         (0.80)           (5.56)

Diff (SR ­ Non-SR)        2.16***          1.32***       1.26***        0.06           -0.55           -2.71***

                           (6.69)          (3.59)        (3.86)        (0.17)         (-0.91)          (-5.34)



                                                       32
                   Panel B.1. Sorted on SYY Score: Change in Institutional Ownership (%)
    SYY Score               P1             P2            P3         P4             P5           P5-P1
                       (Overpriced)                                          (Underpriced)   (H-L spread)

SR Institutions            0.11           0.12        0.13*        0.16**         0.03          -0.08

                           (1.58)        (1.51)       (1.77)       (2.07)        (0.47)         (-1.51)

Non-SR institutions        -0.83          -0.08          0.05       0.10         0.69*          1.53***

                          (-1.47)        (-0.16)      (-0.30)      (0.22)        (1.84)         (3.86)

Diff (SR ­ Non-SR)         0.94*          0.20           0.08       0.06         -0.66*        -1.60***

                           (1.83)        (0.43)       (0.19)       (0.16)        (-1.89)        (-4.35)




                  Panel B.2. Sorted on SYY Score: Change in the Number of Institutions (%)
    SYY Score               P1             P2            P3          P4            P5           P5-P1
                        (Overpriced)                                         (Underpriced)   (H-L spread)

SR Institutions             0.10          0.39        0.43**       0.51**        0.42**         0.32*

                           (0.43)        (1.62)       (2.15)       (2.47)        (2.27)       1.80

Non-SR institutions       -1.75**         0.28           1.24      1.51*         1.66***       3.41***

                          (-2.34)        (0.36)       (1.23)       (1.82)        (3.36)       5.91

Diff (SR ­ Non-SR)        1.85***         0.11         -0.81       -1.00        -1.24***       -3.09***

                           (3.15)        (0.19)       (-0.90)      (-1.28)       (-2.99)      -5.77




                                                    33
                   Table 3. Monthly Returns for Portfolios Independently Sorted on
            SR_IO (Socially responsible institutional ownership) and Mispricing Signals
This table reports the value-weighted average monthly abnormal returns (in percentage) of portfolios double
sorted on socially responsible institutional ownership (SR_IO) and standardized unexpected earnings (SUE) score
in Panel A, and SYY score in Panel B. SUE score is computed as the difference between current quarter's earnings
and the earnings four quarters ago, then divided by the standard deviation of unexpected earnings over the last
eight quarters. SYY score for a stock is the opposite of mispricing score in Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan (2015). To
calculate SR_IO, we first calculate value-weighted size-adjusted ESG score as socially responsible score for all
the institutions. Then we define socially responsible (SR) institutions (one third of all) based on their score. SR_IO
is the number of shares held by SR institutions divided by the total number of shares held by all the institutions.
In Panel A, at the end of each month, all available stocks are sorted into five quintiles based on the most recent
SUE score within previous three months. P5 refers to the stocks with the highest SUE score (most "underpriced")
and stocks in P1 are those with lowest SUE score (most "overpriced"). In Panel B, at the end of each month, all
available stocks are sorted into five mispricing quintiles based on the SYY score of last month. P5 refers to the
most "underpriced" stocks and stocks in P1 are the most "overpriced". Then the stocks are independently sorted
into low and high SR_IO groups in both panels based on the SR_IO of previous quarter. We report value-weighted
CAPM alpha, Fama-French (1993) three-factor alpha, and Carhart (1997) four-factor alpha of all the portfolios
for the next month. In addition, we report: 1) High-minus-low spread based on mispricing signals for all stocks,
low SR_IO group, and high SR_IO group; 2) Difference of high-minus-low spread between low SR_IO group
and high SR_IO group. The sample period is from January 2004 to December 2014. To adjust for serial correlation,
robust Newey-West (1987) t-statistics are reported in parentheses.

                     Panel A. Value-Weighted Portfolio Return Sorted on SUE Score (%)
            SUE Score                       P1             P2, P3 & P4              P5               P5-P1
                                       (Overpriced)       (Fairly priced)     (Underpriced)       (H-L spread)
                                         -0.37**               0.05                0.07               0.44
                All Stocks
                                         (-2.04)              (1.22)              (0.47)             (1.65)
                                           0.15                0.13                -0.06              -0.21
   CAPM-        Low SR_IO
                                          (0.67)              (1.26)             (-0.23)            (-0.59)
                                         -0.47**               0.05                0.12              0.59**
                High SR_IO
                                         (-2.27)              (0.91)              (0.81)             (2.06)
                                                                                                     0.80**
                                                                                   Diff
                                                                                                     (2.04)
                                          -0.38**              0.05                0.07                0.45*
                All Stocks
                                          (-2.20)             (1.20)              (0.48)              (1.77)
                                            0.15               0.14*               -0.06               -0.21
    FF-3        Low SR_IO
                                           (0.88)             (1.74)             (-0.21)             (-0.62)
                                          -0.47**              0.05                0.12               0.59**
                High SR_IO
                                          (-2.46)             (0.93)              (0.80)              (2.18)
                                                                                                      0.80**
                                                                                   Diff
                                                                                                      (2.11)
                                          -0.29**              0.04                0.02                0.32
                All Stocks
                                          (-2.18)             (1.08)              (0.15)              (1.38)
                                            0.20               0.12*               -0.10               -0.30
 Carhart-4      Low SR_IO
                                           (1.27)             (1.72)             (-0.37)             (-0.94)
                                          -0.39**              0.04                0.07                0.46*
                High SR_IO
                                          (-2.48)             (0.82)              (0.44)              (1.80)
                                                                                                      0.76**
                                                                                   Diff
                                                                                                      (1.98)


                                                         34
                  Panel B. Value-Weighted Portfolio Return Sorted on SYY Score (%)
          SYY Score                    P1              P2, P3 & P4           P5            P5-P1
                                  (Overpriced)        (Fairly priced)   (Underpriced)   (H-L spread)
                                    -0.59***               -0.02            0.14          0.73***
             All Stocks
                                     (-3.12)              (-0.48)          (1.64)          (2.83)
CAPM-                                 -0.23                 0.13            0.05            0.28
             Low SR_IO
                                     (-1.33)               (0.92)          (0.32)          (1.55)
                                    -0.68***               -0.05            0.15          0.83***
             High SR_IO
                                     (-3.03)              (-0.95)          (1.58)          (2.84)
                                       Diff                                                0.54**
                                                                                           (2.11)
                                    -0.59***              -0.02             0.14          0.73***
             All Stocks
                                     (-2.99)             (-0.48)           (1.61)         (2.69)
  FF-3                                -0.23                0.14             0.06           0.28
             Low SR_IO
                                     (-1.36)              (1.08)           (0.47)         (1.56)
                                    -0.68***              -0.05             0.14          0.83***
             High SR_IO
                                     (-2.95)             (-0.99)           (1.57)         (2.71)
                                       Diff                                               0.54**
                                                                                          (2.03)
                                    -0.52***              -0.02             0.11          0.63***
             All Stocks
                                     (-3.05)             (-0.44)           (1.35)          (2.63)
Carhart-4                             -0.21                0.11             0.02            0.23
             Low SR_IO
                                     (-1.21)              (0.93)           (0.20)          (1.25)
                                    -0.60***              -0.04             0.12          0.72***
             High SR_IO
                                     (-3.12)             (-0.83)           (1.33)          (2.72)
                                                                                           0.49**
                                                                            Diff
                                                                                          (-2.01)




                                                 35
                Table 4. The Emergence of ESG Investing and Stock Return Patterns:
                                         1996 ­ 2003 vs. 2004 ­ 2014
This table reports the comparison of main results between the period of 1996­2003 and the period of 2004­2014.
In Panel A, all available stocks are sorted into five quintiles based on most recent SUE score within previous three
months. P5 refers to the stocks having the highest SUE score (most "underpriced") and stocks in P1 are those with
the lowest SUE score (most "overpriced"). In Panel B, at the end of each month, all available stocks are sorted
into five quintiles based on the SYY score of last month. P5 refers to the stocks having the highest SYY score
(most "underpriced") and stocks in P1 are those with the lowest SYY score (most "overpriced"). The stocks are
then independently sorted into low SR_IO and high SR_IO groups in both panels. We report value-weighted
Fama-French (1993) three-factor alpha of all the portfolios during the period of 1996-2003 (Panel A.1. & Panel
B.1.) and the period of 2004-2014 (Panel A.2. & Panel B.2.). In addition, we report: 1) High-minus-low spread
based on two mispricing signals for low SR_IO group and high SR_IO group; 2) Difference of high-minus-low
spread between low SR_IO group and high SR_IO group. To adjust for serial correlation, robust Newey-West
(1987) t-statistics are reported in parentheses.

                      Panel A. Value-Weighted Portfolio Return Sorted on SUE Score (%)
                                             P1              P2, P3, & P4          P5               P5-P1
    Panel A.1. Sample Period of 1996­2003
                                            -0.49                0.17             -0.00              0.48
                  Low SR_IO
                                           (-1.42)              (0.91)           (-0.01)            (1.23)
    FF-3 
                                            -0.19                0.22              0.10              0.29
                  High SR_IO
                                           (-0.43)              (1.22)            (0.34)            (0.60)
                                                                                                     -0.19
                                                                                  Diff
                                                                                                   (-0.37)
    Panel A.2. Sample Period of 2004­2014
                                             0.15               0.14*             -0.06              -0.21
                  Low SR_IO
                                            (0.88)              (1.74)           (-0.21)           (-0.62)
    FF-3 
                                           -0.47**               0.05              0.12             0.59**
                  High SR_IO
                                           (-2.46)              (0.93)            (0.80)            (2.18)
                                                                                                    0.80**
                                                                                  Diff
                                                                                                    (2.11)


                      Panel B. Value-Weighted Portfolio Return Sorted on SYY Score (%)
                                             P1              P2, P3, & P4          P5               P5-P1
    Panel B.1. Sample Period of 1996­2003
                 Low SR_IO              -0.60**                  0.04             0.49*             1.09**
                                        (-2.56)                 (0.24)           (1.71)             (2.59)
    FF-3 
                                         -0.44                   0.08            0.62***            1.05**
                 High SR_IO
                                        (-1.33)                 (0.38)           (2.74)             (2.63)
                                                                                  Diff               -0.04
                                                                                                   (-0.09)
    Panel B.2. Sample period of 2004­2014
                 Low SR_IO               -0.23                   0.14             0.06              0.28
                                        (-1.36)                 (1.08)           (0.47)            (1.56)
    FF-3 
                                       -0.68***                 -0.05             0.14             0.83***
                 High SR_IO
                                        (-2.95)                (-0.99)           (1.57)            (2.71)
                                                                                                   0.54**
                                                                                  Diff
                                                                                                   (2.03)
                                                        36
                                    Table 5. Stock Characteristics and the Effect of Funding Liquidity
Panel A reports the average stock characteristics of portfolios independently double sorted on socially responsible institutional ownership (SR_IO),
and two mispricing signals (SUE score and SYY score) from January 2004 to December 2014. Standardized unexpected earnings (SUE) score is
computed as the difference between current quarter's earnings and the earnings four quarters ago, then divided by the standard deviation of
unexpected earnings over the last eight quarters. Each month, we use the most recent SUE score within previous three months. SYY score for a
stock is the opposite of mispricing score in Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan (2015). To calculate SR_IO, we first calculate value-weighted size-adjusted
ESG score as socially responsible score for all the institutions. Then we define socially responsible (SR) institutions (one third of all) based on their
score. SR_IO is the number of shares held by SR institutions divided by the total number of shares held by all the institutions. At the end of each
month, all available stocks are sorted into five SUE/SYY quintiles. The stocks are then independently sorted into low SR_IO and high SR_IO groups.
Panel A.1. and Panel A.2. report the stock characteristics of portfolios sort based on SUE & SR_IO, and SYY & SR_IO, respectively. Stock
characteristics include SR_IO, the size percentile ranking at the end of last month, stock turnover in the previous month, AXHZ (2006) idiosyncratic
risk (IVOL) of last month, analyst coverage of last month, institutional ownership of most recent quarter-end, and the indicative lending fee (2006-
2014) at the end of last month.
Panel B reports the main results for the entire sample period from 2004 to 2014, high funding liquidity period, and low funding liquidity period,
respectively. We use the aggregate funding liquidity factor of Adrian, Etula, and Muir (2014) to measure the availability of arbitrage capital and
split our sample into two subperiods based on the shock to broker-dealer leverage of previous quarter. Each month, stocks are sorted into two groups
based on SR_IO, then we independently sort stocks into quintiles based on SUE score in Panel B.1 and SYY score in Panel B.2. H-L is the spread
portfolio of buying stocks in quintile 5 and shorting stocks in quintile 1. We report value-weighted (VW) Fama-French (1993) three factor-alpha of
the next month. In addition, we report differences of high- minus-low spread between low SR_IO group and high SR_IO group. To adjust for serial
correlation, robust Newey-West (1987) t-statistics are reported in parentheses.




                                                                           37
                                  Panel A. Stock Characteristics of SR_IO-Mispricing Signals Portfolios

                                  Panel A.1. Sorted on SUE Score                                Panel A.2. Sorted on SYY Score
                           P1: Lowest SUE              P5: Highest SUE                  P1: Lowest SYY              P5: Highest SYY
                          (Overpriced Stocks)        (Underpriced Stocks)              (Overpriced Stocks)        (Underpriced Stocks)
                                  SR_IO                       SR_IO                             SR_IO                      SR_IO
                           Low            High         Low            High               Low            High       Low             High
SR_IO (%)                  6.17        18.57           6.20        18.01                 5.41       17.09          5.83          19.06

Size ranking (%)          67.12        78.91           70.94       81.43                63.22       70.59          69.37         84.38

Stock turnover (%)        24.58        26.95           26.98       26.59                23.31       25.22          21.33         20.40

IVOL (%)                   9.51           8.46         9.45           8.11              10.26           9.29       8.48            6.67

Analyst coverage           7.67        11.58           7.87        11.89                 7.44           9.71       7.68          13.61

Institutional ownership    0.78           0.76         0.79           0.76               0.70           0.68       0.74            0.74

Lending fee (%)            0.76           0.71         0.58           0.65               1.22           1.28       0.68            0.56




                                                                      38
                                                      Panel B. The Effect of Funding Liquidity

                                Panel B.1. Value-Weighted FF-3 Alpha (%) of (H-L) Return Spread Sorted on SUE Score

H-L portfolio VW FF-3  (%)                          All Stocks               Low SR_IO             High SR_IO          Diff

                                                      0.45*                    -0.21                  0.59**          0.80**
Entire period (2004­2014)
                                                      (1.77)                  (-0.62)                 (2.18)          (2.11)

High funding liquidity period                         0.33                     0.22                    0.39            0.17

(More arbitrage capital)                              (1.15)                   (0.51)                 (1.32)          (0.42)

Low funding liquidity period                          0.81**                   -0.10                  0.97**          1.07**

(Less arbitrage capital)                              (2.05)                  (-0.44)                 (2.21)          (2.64)


                                Panel B.2. Value-Weighted FF-3 Alpha (%) of (H-L) Return Spread Sorted on SYY Score

                                                    All Stocks               Low SR_IO             High SR_IO          Diff

                                                     0.73***                   0.28                   0.83***         0.54**
Entire period (2004­2014)
                                                      (2.69)                   (1.56)                 (2.71)          (2.03)

High funding liquidity period                         0.32                     0.27                    0.32            0.05

(More arbitrage capital)                              (0.86)                   (1.48)                 (0.71)          (0.12)

Low funding liquidity period                         1.16***                   0.43*                  1.37***         0.93***

(Less arbitrage capital)                              (3.80)                   (1.68)                 (3.94)          (2.77)




                                                                        39
            Table 6. Socially Responsible Institutional Ownership and Stock Price Efficiency
     This table presents the panel regression coefficients of stocks' price efficiency measure on socially
     responsible institutional ownership (SR_IO) and other control variables in the previous year. The dependent
     variable is Price Delay (Hou and Moskowitz (2005)), measured on an annual basis for each calendar year.
     Control variables include institutional ownership, stock-level investment horizon, the logarithm of market
     capitalization, and stock turnover. Stock-level investment horizon is defined as the weighted average of the
     churn ratios of the holding institutions each quarter and then take the reciprocal. SR_IO, institutional
     ownership, and investment horizon are the quarterly average of previous year. LnME is measured at the
     end of last year. Turnover is the monthly average of previous year. All regressions control for year fixed
     effect and firm fixed effect. Column (1) shows the results for sample period from 1996 to 2003. Column
     (2), (3) and (4) show the results for the entire sample period from 2004 to 2014, high funding liquidity
     period, and low funding liquidity period, respectively. The t statistics in the brackets are calculated from
     robust clustered standard errors by firm. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels,
     based on a two-sided test.


                                      Price Delay (Hou and Moskowitz (2005))

                                     1996­2003                                       2004­2014

                                                                                    High funding          Low funding
                                                                Entire period
                                                                                   liquidity period     liquidity period
                                         (1)                         (2)                  (3)                  (4)

SR_IO                                   0.007                      0.030*               0.003               0.053**
                                        (0.47)                     (1.78)               (0.11)               (2.16)
Institutional ownership               -0.079***                   -0.027*               -0.020             -0.058***
                                       (-3.75)                     (-1.81)              (-0.91)              (-2.86)
Stock-level investment horizon          0.013                      -0.046              -0.124*               0.022
                                        (0.30)                     (-0.93)              (-1.66)              (0.32)
LnME                                   -0.004                     -0.041***            -0.048***           -0.035***
                                       (-0.92)                    (-12.83)             (-10.34)              (-7.93)
Stock turnover                        -0.168***                   -0.032***            -0.044***             -0.020
                                       (-8.09)                     (-3.26)              (-2.61)              (-1.33)


Firm Fixed Effect                        Yes                        Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Time Fixed Effect                        Yes                        Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Adjusted R-squared                      0.332                      0.452                0.457                0.450
Observations                           28,755                      36,734               15,959               19,098




                                                           40
    Table 7. Monthly Returns for Portfolios Sorted on Alternative SR_IO and SYY score
This table reports the value-weighted average monthly abnormal returns (in percentage) of portfolios double
sorted on alternative socially responsible institutional ownership (SR_IO) and SYY score. SYY score for a
stock is the opposite of mispricing score in Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan (2015). To calculate the alternative
SR_IO, we use the ESG score from Thomson Reuter database (formerly known as ASSET4). We first
calculate value-weighted size-adjusted ESG score as socially responsible score for all the institutions. Then
we define socially responsible (SR) institutions (one third of all) based on their score. SR_IO is the number
of shares held by SR institutions divided by the total number of shares held by all the institutions. At the
end of each month, all available stocks are sorted into five mispricing quintiles based on the SYY score of
last month. P5 refers to the most "underpriced" stocks and stocks in P1 are the most "overpriced". Then the
stocks are independently sorted into low and high SR_IO groups based on the SR_IO of previous quarter.
We report value-weighted CAPM alpha, Fama-French (1993) three-factor alpha, and Carhart (1997) four-
factor alpha of all the portfolios for the next month. In addition, we report: 1) High-minus-low spread based
on mispricing signals for all stocks, low SR_IO group and high SR_IO group; 2) Difference of high-minus-
low spread between low SR_IO group and high SR_IO group. The sample period is from January 2004 to
December 2014. To adjust for serial correlation, robust Newey-West (1987) t-statistics are reported in
parentheses.

                             Value-Weighted Portfolio Return Sorted on SYY Score (%)

            SYY Score                       P1               P2, P3 & P4           P5              P5-P1

                                        (Overpriced)        (Fairly priced)   (Underpriced)     (H-L spread)
                                          -0.59***              -0.02              0.14            0.73***
                All Stocks
                                           (-3.13)             (-0.47)            (1.66)           (2.84)
                                            -0.21                0.09             -0.04             0.18
  CAPM-         Low SR_IO
                                           (-1.14)              (0.65)           (-0.20)           (0.94)
                                          -0.66***              -0.04              0.15            0.81***
                High SR_IO
                                           (-3.03)             (-0.71)            (1.62)           (2.84)
                                                                                                   0.63**
                                                                                  Diff
                                                                                                   (2.38)

                                          -0.59***              -0.02              0.14            0.73***
                All Stocks
                                           (-3.00)             (-0.47)            (1.62)           (2.70)
                                            -0.21                0.10             -0.03             0.18
    FF-3        Low SR_IO
                                           (-1.26)              (1.29)           (-0.27)           (0.91)
                                          -0.67***              -0.04              0.15            0.81***
                High SR_IO
                                           (-3.00)             (-0.77)            (1.61)           (2.73)
                                                                                                   0.63**
                                                                                  Diff
                                                                                                   (2.35)

                                          -0.52***              -0.02              0.11            0.63***
                All Stocks
                                           (-3.05)             (-0.43)            (1.36)           (2.64)
                                            -0.16                0.09             -0.06             0.11
 Carhart-4      Low SR_IO
                                           (-0.97)              (1.23)           (-0.53)           (0.53)
                                          -0.59***              -0.04              0.12            0.71***
                High SR_IO
                                           (-3.15)             (-0.69)            (1.36)           (2.74)
                                                                                                   0.61**
                                                                                  Diff
                                                                                                   (2.38)



                                                       41
   Table 8. Monthly Returns for Portfolios Sorted on SR_IO, ESG Score, and SYY Score
This table presents the value-weighted average monthly abnormal returns (in percentage) of triple-sorted
portfolios based on socially responsible institutional ownership (SR_IO), SYY score, and ESG score from
January 2004 to December 2014. SYY score for a stock is the opposite of mispricing score in Stambaugh,
Yu, and Yuan (2015). To calculate SR_IO, we first calculate value-weighted size-adjusted ESG score as
socially responsible score for all the institutions. Then we define socially responsible (SR) institutions (one
third of all) based on their score. SR_IO is the number of shares held by SR institutions divided by the total
number of shares held by all the institutions. ESG score is the net score (positive score minus negative score)
of last year from MSCI ESG STATS database. At the end of each month, all available stocks are
independently sorted into 2x3x5 groups based on SR_IO, ESG score, and SYY score. We report value-
weighted Fama-French (1993) three-factor alpha for high SR_IO stocks and low SR_IO stocks in Panel A
and Panel B, respectively. To adjust for serial correlation, robust Newey-West (1987) t-statistics are
reported in parentheses.



                Panel A. Value-Weighted FF-3 Alpha (%) among High SR_IO Stocks

                                         P1           P2, P3 & P4           P5               P5-P1
            SYY Score
                                   (Overpriced)      (Fairly priced)   (Underpriced)     (H-L spread)
                                      -0.68***             -0.05            0.14            0.83***
    All High SR_IO Stocks
                                      (-2.95)              (-0.99)         (1.57)            (2.71)

                                       -0.34                 0.03           0.34*            0.68
                     Low
                                      (-1.09)               (0.19)         (1.67)           (1.63)
    ESG                               -0.71***               0.08           0.15            0.86***
                   Medium
   Scores                             (-3.51)               (0.60)         (1.41)           (3.51)
                                      -0.79***               -0.15          0.07            0.86**
                     High
                                      (-2.73)              (-1.62)         (0.63)           (2.44)
                                       -0.45                 -0.18          -0.27
                     H-L
                                      (-1.45)              (-0.75)        (-1.16)

                   Panel B. Value-Weighted FF-3 Alpha (%) among Low SR_IO Stocks

                                          -0.23                0.14           0.06              0.28
        All Low SR_IO Stocks
                                         (-1.36)              (1.08)         (0.47)            (1.56)

                                          -0.20                0.18            0.10             0.31
                         Low
                                         (-0.81)              (0.82)          (0.55)           (0.99)
       ESG                                -0.23                0.11            0.12             0.35
                        Medium
      Scores                             (-1.23)              (0.88)          (0.75)           (1.45)
                                          -0.21                0.23            0.07             0.29
                         High
                                         (-0.49)              (1.53)          (0.36)           (0.77)
                                          -0.01                0.05            -0.03
                         H-L
                                         (-0.02)              (0.20)         (-0.13)




                                                      42
   Table 9. Monthly Returns for Portfolios Sorted on Investment Horizon and SYY score
This table reports the value-weighted average monthly abnormal returns (in percentage) of portfolios double
sorted on investment horizon and SYY score. Stock-level investment horizon is defined as the weighted
average of the churn ratios of the holding institutions in the previous quarter and then take the reciprocal.
At the end of each month, all available stocks are independently sorted into 2x5 groups based on investment
horizon measure and SYY score. We report value-weighted CAPM alpha, Fama-French (1993) three-factor
alpha and Carhart (1997) four-factor alpha of all the portfolios for the next month. In addition, we report:
1) High-minus-low spreads based on SYY score for shorter and longer investment horizon group,
respectively; 2) Difference of high-minus-low spreads between shorter investment horizon group and
longer investment horizon group. The sample period is from January 2004 to December 2014. To adjust
for serial correlation, robust Newey-West (1987) t-statistics are reported in parentheses.



              Value-Weighted Portfolio Return Sorted on Investment Horizon and SYY Score (%)

                                           P1              P2, P3 & P4           P5              P5-P1
            SYY Score
                                      (Overpriced)        (Fairly priced)   (Underpriced)     (H-L spread)
                Shorter Investment        -0.48*              -0.00             0.26*            0.74***
                     Horizon             (-1.82)             (-0.02)           (1.79)             (2.84)
  CAPM-
                Longer Investment        -0.61**              -0.04             0.11             0.73***
                    Horizon              (-2.59)             (-0.53)           (1.06)             (2.63)
                                                                                                  -0.01
                                                                                Diff
                                                                                                 (-0.05)

                Shorter Investment        -0.48*               0.00            0.27**            0.74***
                     Horizon             (-1.78)              (0.00)           (2.22)             (2.76)
   FF-3 
                Longer Investment        -0.62***              -0.04            0.11             0.73***
                    Horizon              (-3.11)             (-0.71)           (1.05)             (2.90)
                                                                                                  -0.01
                                                                                Diff
                                                                                                 (-0.06)

                Shorter Investment        -0.43*              -0.01            0.25**            0.68***
                     Horizon             (-1.69)             (-0.07)           (2.14)            (2.75)
 Carhart-4 
                Longer Investment        -0.54**              -0.04             0.08             0.62**
                    Horizon              (-2.55)             (-0.58)           (0.80)            (2.44)
                                                                                                  0.06
                                                                                Diff
                                                                                                 (0.21)




                                                     43
                       Table 10. Monthly Returns for Portfolios Sorted on
       SR_MO (Socially Responsible Active Mutual Fund Ownership) and SYY Score

This table presents the average monthly abnormal returns (in percentage) of high-minus-low spread based
on socially responsible active mutual fund ownership (SR_MO) and SYY score from January 2004 to
December 2014. To calculate SR_MO, we first calculate value-weighted size-adjusted ESG score as
socially responsible score for all the active mutual funds. Then we define socially responsible (SR) active
mutual funds (one third of all) based on their score. SR_MO is the number of shares held by SR active
mutual funds divided by the total number of shares held by all the active mutual funds. At the end of each
month, we independently sort stocks into 2x5 portfolios based on SR_MO measure and SYY score. We
report value-weighted CAPM alpha, Fama-French (1993) three-factor alpha, and Carhart (1997) four-factor
alpha of all the portfolios for the next month. In addition, we report: 1) High-minus-low spread based on
mispricing signals for all stocks, low SR_MO group and high SR_MO group; 2) Difference of high-minus-
low spread between low SR_MO group and high SR_MO group. To adjust for serial correlation, robust
Newey-West (1987) t-statistics are reported in parentheses.
                  Value-Weighted Portfolio Return Sorted on SR_MO and SYY Score (%)

                                           P1              P2, P3 & P4           P5            P5-P1
           SYY Score
                                      (Overpriced)        (Fairly priced)   (Underpriced)   (H-L spread)
                                         -0.22                 0.13             0.06            0.28
                  Low SR_MO
                                        (-1.27)               (0.89)           (0.34)          (1.49)
  CAPM-
                                        -0.68***               -0.05            0.14           0.82***
                 High SR_MO
                                        (-3.02)              (-0.96)           (1.56)          (2.83)
                                                                                               0.55**
                                                                                Diff
                                                                                               (2.11)

                                         -0.21                 0.13             0.06            0.28
                  Low SR_MO
                                        (-1.29)               (1.04)           (0.49)          (1.52)
   FF-3 
                                        -0.68***               -0.05            0.14           0.82***
                 High SR_MO
                                        (-2.95)              (-1.00)           (1.55)          (2.69)
                                                                                               0.55**
                                                                                Diff
                                                                                               (2.03)

                                         -0.19                 0.11             0.03            0.22
                  Low SR_MO
                                        (-1.14)               (0.90)           (0.22)          (1.20)
 Carhart-4 
                                        -0.60***               -0.04            0.12           0.71***
                 High SR_MO
                                        (-3.12)              (-0.84)           (1.31)          (2.71)
                                                                                               0.49**
                                                                                Diff
                                                                                               (2.01)




                                                     44
      Table 11. Monthly Returns for Portfolios Sorted on Size, SR_IO, and SYY Score
Panel A presents the average monthly returns (in percentage) of portfolios sorted by SYY score from 1996
to 2003 (Panel A.1) and 2004 to 2014 (Panel A.2), using full CRSP sample with non-missing SYY score.
For each portfolio, we report value-weighted Fama-French (1993) three-factor alpha of next month, for the
largest 1,000 stocks and the other stocks. Panel B presents the value-weighted average monthly abnormal
returns (in percentage) of triple-sorted portfolios based on socially responsible institutional ownership
(SR_IO), size, and SYY score from January 2004 to December 2014. At the end of each month, all available
stocks are independently sorted into 2x2x5 groups based on SR_IO, size, and SYY score. We report value-
weighted Fama-French (1993) three-factor alphas for high SR_IO stocks and low SR_IO stocks in Panel
B.1 and Panel B.2, respectively. SYY score for a stock is the opposite of mispricing score in Stambaugh,
Yu, and Yuan (2015). To calculate SR_IO, we first calculate value-weighted size-adjusted ESG score as
socially responsible score for all the institutions. Then we define socially responsible (SR) institutions (one
third of all) based on their score. SR_IO is the number of shares held by SR institutions divided by the total
number of shares held by all the institutions. To adjust for serial correlation, robust Newey-West (1987) t-
statistics are reported in parentheses.



                    Panel A.1. Value-Weighted FF-3 Alpha (%) for 1996­2003 Period

  Sorted on                P1               P2, P3 & P4               P5                        P5-P1

 SYY Score            (Overpriced)         (Fairly priced)      (Underpriced)               ((H-L) spread)

Largest 1,000            -0.99***               0.08               0.42***                      1.42***
   stocks                (-3.91)               (1.01)               (3.33)                      (4.05)
                         -1.41***               0.12               0.67***                      2.08***
 Other stocks
                         (-5.01)               (0.89)               (3.72)                      (6.15)



                    Panel A.2. Value-Weighted FF-3 Alpha (%) for 2004­2014 Period
  Sorted on                P1               P2, P3 & P4               P5                        P5-P1
 SYY Score            (Overpriced)         (Fairly priced)      (Underpriced)               ((H-L) spread)

Largest 1,000            -0.70***              -0.03                0.14*                       0.85***
   stocks                (-3.30)              (-0.59)               (1.73)                      (3.00)
                         -0.42***              0.11*                 0.07                       0.49***
 Other stocks
                         (-3.80)               (1.87)               (0.77)                      (3.33)




                                                        45
 Panel B.1. Value-Weighted FF-3 Alpha (%) among High SR_IO Stocks for 2004­2014 Period

                                 P1              P2, P3 & P4        P5            P5-P1
            SYY Score
                             (Overpriced)    (Fairly priced)   (Underpriced)   (H-L spread)
                               -0.68***             -0.05          0.14          0.83***
   All High SR_IO Stocks
                               (-2.95)             (-0.99)        (1.57)          (2.71)

                               -0.42**               0.10          0.32**        0.74***
                   Small
                               (-2.17)              (0.74)         (2.18)        (3.34)
Firm Size
                               -0.69***              -0.05          0.14         0.83**
                   Large
                               (-2.83)             (-1.05)         (1.55)        (2.61)
                                -0.26                -0.15          -0.18         0.09
                    H-L
                               (-1.06)             (-1.07)        (-1.07)        (0.28)




 Panel B.2. Value-Weighted FF-3 Alpha (%) among Low SR_IO Stocks for 2004­2014 Period

                                 P1              P2, P3 & P4        P5            P5-P1
            SYY Score
                             (Overpriced)    (Fairly priced)   (Underpriced)   (H-L spread)
                                -0.23               0.14           0.06           0.28
   All Low SR_IO Stocks
                               (-1.36)             (1.08)         (0.47)          (1.56)

                               -0.36***             0.07            -0.12          0.24
                   Small
                               (-3.71)             (0.90)         (-1.05)         (1.63)
Firm Size
                                 -0.17              0.18            0.09           0.26
                   Large
                               (-0.74)             (1.05)          (0.59)         (1.09)
                                 0.22               0.11            0.21          -0.01
                    H-L
                                (0.93)             (0.54)          (1.13)        (-0.04)




                                            46
      Figures 1. Sustainable and Responsible Investing in the United States 1995-2018

This figure plots the size ($billion) of the U.S. sustainable and responsible investment universe from 1995
to 2018. Blue area represents the assets involved in ESG incorporation strategy. Orange area represents the
assets involved in shareholder advocacy. Grey area represents the assets involved in both strategies.




            Source: U.S. Forum for Sustainable and Responsible Investment Foundation




                                                    47
        Figures 2. Stock Coverage of ESG Scores                        Figures 3. The Distribution of ESG Scores over Time

Figure 2 plots the number of CSRP stocks covered by MSCI ESG          Figure 3 plots the cross-sectional distributions (Q1, Median, and
KLD database and the number of stocks retained after filtering        Q3) of ESG scores from 1995 to 2013.
from 1995 to 2013. Our sample covers common stocks with last
month-end price above $5 and excludes stocks with missing ESG
scores or the composite mispricing measure.




                                                                 48
                                    Supplementary Appendix for
              ESG Preference, Institutional Trading, and Stock Return Patterns
                                           Variable Definitions

                                              Mispricing Measures


                             Standardized unexpected earnings score is computed as the difference between current
SUE score                    quarter's earnings and the earnings four quarters ago, then divided by the standard
                             deviation of unexpected earnings over the last eight quarters.


                             SYY score, ranging between -100 and -1, is the opposite of composite mispricing measure
SYY score                    in Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan (2015). Stocks with lowest SYY values are most
                             "overpriced" and those with the highest values are most "underpriced". Updated monthly.


                                Corporate Social Performance (ESG) measures


                             Net score provided by MSCI ESG STATS (formerly known as KLD), calculated as the
                             sum of Strengths minus the sum of Concerns. Five dimensions are considered, including
ESG score
                             Corporate Governance, Community, Diversity, Employee Relations and Environments.
                             Updated annually.

                                             Stock Price Efficiency


                             Price Delay, proposed by Hou and Moskowitz (2005), measures the degree of a stock's
                             return variation captured by lagged market returns. Higher Price Delay measure indicates
                             stronger delay in response to return innovations. We run weekly return regression over
                             each calendar year on contemporaneous and four weeks of lagged market returns as
                             follows,
                                                                           4
                                                                                (-)
                                                     , =  +  , +                      ,- + ,
Price Delay                                                               =1

                             Price Delay measure is one minus the ratio of the 2 from above regression restricting
                              (-)
                                    = 0,    [1,4], over the 2 with no restrictions.

                                                                               2(-)
                                                                                      =0, [1,4]
                                                         = 1 -
                                                                                      2


                         Socially Responsible Institutional Ownership (SR_IO) measures

                             Percentage of shares held by socially responsible institutions out of shares held by all the
                             institutions. We use size-adjusted ESG score to calculate value-weighted ESG scores
SR_IO
                             (ISRS) for all the institutions and define top tercile as socially responsible institution.
                             Updated quarterly.


                                                       49
                                 Percentage of shares held by socially responsible active mutual funds out of shares held
                                 by all the active mutual funds. We use size-adjusted ESG score to calculate value-weighted
SR_MO
                                 ESG scores for all the active mutual funds and define top tercile as socially responsible
                                 active mutual funds. Updated quarterly.

                                                  Stock Characteristics

Size                             The market value of the firm's equity at the end of previous month.

Size ranking (%)                 The size percentiles are defined using the full CRSP sample each month.

Institutional ownership          The percentage of common stocks owned by institutions in the previous quarter.

Stock lending fee                The indicative lending fee from Markit at the end of last month.

Analyst coverage                 The number of analysts following the firm in the previous month.

                                 Idiosyncratic volatility, as in Ang, Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang (2006), computed as the
IVOL                             standard deviation of the regression residual of individual stock returns on the Fama and
                                 French (1993) three factors using daily data in the previous month.

                                 The total stock trading volume scaled by the average daily shares outstanding in the
Stock turnover
                                 previous month.

                                 The investment horizon of a firm's institutional investors is defined as the weighted
                                 average of the churn ratios of the holding institutions in the previous quarter and then take
Stock-level investment horizon
                                 the reciprocal. The churn ratio for each institution each quarter is calculated using the
                                 procedure by Gaspar, Massa, and Matos (2005).

                                                Institution Characteristics

AUM ($billion)                   Total market value of stocks in the institutions' portfolio in the end of each quarter.


                                 A higher churn ratio indicates shorter investment horizon. It is calculated for each
                                 institution each quarter, following the procedure used by Gaspar, Massa, and Matos
                                 (2005). For each institution j holding stock universe I, at the end of quarter t, we calculate
Churn ratio                      churn ratio using:
                                                                            |,, , - ,,-1 , |
                                                      , =
                                                                               |  + ,,-1 ,-1 |
                                                                           ,, ,
                                                                                           2




                                                            50
  Table A1. Asset-Weighted Average Expense Ratios of ESG Funds and Non-ESG Funds
This table reports the asset-weighted average expense ratios of ESG funds and non-ESG funds based on
Morningstar Direct, accessed on March 15th, 2017. We divide funds within each Morningstar category into
two groups, tagged as "socially conscious" (ESG), and all others (Non-ESG). Using the most recent annual
reports, this table compares the asset-weighted average net expense ratio for ESG funds and non-ESG funds
within each category.



                   Asset-Weighted Average Expense Ratios by Morningstar Category

                                                  ESG Funds                    Non-ESG Funds

 Large Blend                                        0.73%                           0.69%
 Large Growth                                       0.91%                           0.74%

 Large Value                                        0.56%                           0.68%
 World Stock                                        0.94%                           0.90%
 Foreign Large Blend                                0.80%                           0.79%
 Allocation ­ 50% to 70% Equity                     0.83%                           0.60%
 Intermediate-Term Bond                             0.57%                           0.50%
 Source: Morningstar Direct, data as 03/15/2017




                                                   51
                         Table A2. Coverage of Stock Return Test Sample
This table provides details about the stock-month sample from January 2004 to December 2014. Our sample
covers common stocks with last month-end price above $5. In addition, we exclude stocks with missing ESG
scores. Panel A reports the time-series summary statistics and Panel B reports the time-series average of
cross-sectional distributions. Panel C reports the time series average of Fama-French twelve industry
distribution for the stocks in our sample. Percent coverage of stock universe (EW) is the number of sample
stocks, divided by the total number of CRSP stocks. The percent coverage of the stock universe (VW) is the
total market capitalization of sample stocks divided by the total market value of all CRSP stocks. Firm size
is the firm's market capitalization. Book-to-market is the fiscal year-end book value of common equity
divided by the calendar year-end market value of equity. The size and book-to-market percentiles are defined
using the full CRSP sample. Institutional ownership is the percentage of common stocks owned by institutions
in the previous quarter. Analyst coverage is the number of analysts following the firm in the previous month.


                           Panel A. Time-Series Distribution (132 Monthly Obs)

  Jan 2004 ­ Dec 2014                          Mean         Std     10-Pctl      Q1   Med       Q3      90-Pctl

  Number of stocks in the sample each month    2,103        233      1,781    1,979   2,032    2,238     2,467
  Stock % coverage of stock universe (EW)      31.16        3.51     25.94    29.58   30.22    32.59     36.69
  Stock % coverage of stock universe (VW)      66.43        6.46     61.15    61.63   64.72    66.47     78.99
  Stock % traded at NYSE/AMEX                  51.36        1.52     50.07    50.39   50.98    51.95     52.94


        Panel B. Time-Series Average of Cross-Sectional Distributions (277,573 Stock-Month Obs)

  Jan 2004 ­ Dec 2014                          Mean         Std     10-Pctl      Q1   Med       Q3      90-Pctl

  Size CRSP percentile                          0.72        0.18      0.46    0.59    0.74     0.87       0.95
  Book-to-market CRSP percentile                0.42        0.25      0.09    0.21    0.40     0.61       0.77
  Institutional ownership                       0.72        0.23      0.39    0.58    0.76     0.87       0.96
  Analyst coverage                              9.43        6.90      2.16    4.08    7.58     13.16     19.33


                          Panel C. Time-Series Average of Industry Distribution
                                  This         CRSP                                     This            CRSP
  FF-12 Industry                                                   FF-12 Industry
                                Sample        sample                                  Sample           sample
  Consumer nondurables           5.26%         4.85%                 Telecom           2.78%            3.01%
  Consumer durables              2.54%         2.25%                 Utilities         3.91%            2.55%
  Manufacturing                 10.29%         8.57%                Wholesale         10.89%            9.38%
  Energy                         4.34%         3.93%                Healthcare         9.00%           11.02%
  Chemicals                      2.56%         2.06%                 Finance          17.79%           19.58%
  Business Equipment            15.60%        16.55%                  Others          15.05%           16.27%




                                                       52
