                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

         GENDER IDENTITY, RACE, AND ETHNICITY DISCRIMINATION IN
                    ACCESS TO MENTAL HEALTH CARE:
    PRELIMINARY EVIDENCE FROM A MULTI-WAVE AUDIT FIELD EXPERIMENT

                                        Patrick Button
                                           Eva Dils
                                       Benjamin Harrell
                                        Luca Fumarco
                                       David Schwegman

                                      Working Paper 28164
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28164

                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020

The views expressed in this paper do not necessarily represent the views of the Office of
Evaluation Sciences, the General Services Administration, or the United States government. We
are thankful for internal grant support from the Murphy Institute, the School of Liberal Arts, the
Newcomb Institute, and the COR Research Fellowship. We also thank the National Institutes of
Health via a postdoctoral training grant for Patrick Button (5T32AG000244-23), which funded
his early research on this project at the RAND Corporation. The views expressed are our own
and not those of any funders. We thank Sean Alvarez, Emma Brick-Hezeau, Batu El,
Christopher Hoffler, Lucía Paternostro, Nile Pierre, Matthew Shernicoff, Gregory Shoats,
Kodhai Thirumalai, Brandon Ware, and especially Kyla Denwood for excellent research
assistance and comments. We also thank Lee Badgett, Stephanie Budge, Kitt Carpenter,
Joanna Lahey, Thomas LaViest, Kathleen Mullen, Derek Ruiz, and Janna Wisniewski for
helpful comments and discussions. We received helpful feedback from seminar and conference
participants at RAND, the CSQIEP Virtual Seminar, the Advances in Field Experiments
Seminar at UChicago, the Vanderbilt Applied Microeconomics conference, the Association
for Public Policy Analysis and Management Conference, the Southern Economic
Association conference, and the Triangle Health Economics seminar. This study was approved
by the Tulane University IRB (2019-1122-TU Uptown). This experiment is pre-registered at
the American Economic Association's registry for randomized controlled trials (RCT ID:
AEARCTR-0006560). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not
been peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that
accompanies official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Patrick Button, Eva Dils, Benjamin Harrell, Luca Fumarco, and David
Schwegman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Gender Identity, Race, and Ethnicity Discrimination in Access to Mental Health Care: Preliminary
Evidence from a Multi-Wave Audit Field Experiment
Patrick Button, Eva Dils, Benjamin Harrell, Luca Fumarco, and David Schwegman
NBER Working Paper No. 28164
December 2020
JEL No. C93,I11,I14,I18,J15,J16

                                           ABSTRACT

A broad body of interdisciplinary research establishes that transgender and non-binary individuals
face discrimination across many contexts, including healthcare. Simultaneously, transgender
individuals face various mental health disparities, including higher rates of depression and anxiety,
suicidality, and PTSD. Therefore, understanding the role of discrimination in access to mental
health care is essential. However, no previous research quantifies the extent to which transgender
and non-binary people face discrimination in mental healthcare markets. We provide the first
experimental evidence, using an audit study, of the extent to which cisgender women, transgender
women, transgender men, non-binary people, and racial and ethnic minorities (African American
and Hispanic individuals) face discrimination in access to mental health services. While data
collection is ongoing, we find significant discrimination against transgender or non-binary African
Americans and Hispanics in access to mental health care appointments.


Patrick Button                                   Luca Fumarco
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
Tulane University                                Tulane University
6823 St. Charles Avenue                          6823 St. Charles Avenue
New Orleans, LA 70118                            New Orleans, LA 70118
and NBER                                         lfumarco@tulane.edu
pbutton@tulane.edu
                                                 David Schwegman
Eva Dils                                         Department of Public Administration and Policy
Department of Economics                          School of Public Affairs
Texas A&M University                             American University
4228 TAMU                                        4400 Massachusetts Avenue NW
College Station, TX 77843                        Washington, DC 20016
United States                                    United States
dils.eva@gmail.com                               schwegma@american.edu

Benjamin Harrell
Department of Economics
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Georgia State University
55 Park Place
Suite 644
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
United States
bharrell4@gsu.edu
         Individuals who identify as transgender and non-binary1 (TNB individuals) face

socioeconomic status and health disparities as well as confront considerable stigma and

discrimination 2 in their everyday lives (Badgett et al. 2009; Grant et al. 2011; Hughto, Reisner,

and Pachankis 2015; James et al. 2016; Carpenter, Eppink, and Gonzales 2020). Compared to

cisgender1 people in the United States, TNB individuals are more likely to live in poverty, to be

food insecure (Russomanno et al. 2019), to have been incarcerated, to have been the victim of an

assault (particularly intimate partner violence), to be unemployed (Badgett, Carpenter, and

Sansone 2020; Leppel 2020), and to lack health insurance (Carpenter, Eppink, and Gonzales

2020; James et al. 2016; Liszewski et al. 2018; Waters and Yacka-Bible 2017). TNB individuals

are significantly more likely to experience mental illness and severe psychological stress: TNB

individuals have higher rates of anxiety, depression, substance misuse, and suicidality than non-

TNB individuals (Grossman and D'Augelli 2007; Lagos 2018; Meyer et al. 2017; Miller and

Grollman 2015; Mustanski et al. 2010; Nuttbrock et al. 2010; Scanlon et al. 2010; Streed et al.

2018; Su et al. 2016). These disparities are stark. In a sample of 1,053 transgender persons, for

example, 41 percent report having attempted suicide. This rate is 26 times higher than the

general population (Safer et al. 2016).3




1
  Throughout the paper, we will discuss transgender and non-binary (TNB) individuals together; however, these are
separate gender identities and our experimental design allows us to differentially test between binary transgender
and non-binary individuals. Liszewski et al. (2018) propose useful definitions that we adopt. Someone who is
transgender identifies with a gender identity that does not exclusively match their gender assigned at birth. Someone
who is transgender may identify as a gender that is different than the one assigned at birth, with both genders, or no
gender. Non-binary individuals identify neither as exclusively male nor exclusively female, may identify as
something other than male or female, may identify as multi-gendered, or may not identify with any gender.
Cisgender individuals have a gender identify that matches their sex assigned at birth.
2
  Following Lahey and Oxley (2018), the term "discrimination" used throughout this paper refers to "differential
treatment by demographic characteristics(s)." It does not refer solely to animus or taste-based discrimination. See
footnote 11 for discussion of the different types of discrimination.
3
  African American and Hispanic people also face significant health and socioeconomic disparities which we
summarize in the background section.


                                                          2
        Despite an increased need for general and mental health services, real or perceived

gender identity discrimination 4 by mental health care professionals may affect a TNB

individual's ability to access (or desire to seek) appropriate mental health care services and

treatment. Previous research found that approximately one-fourth of transgender individuals

opted not to seek health care when needed for fear of being mistreated due to their gender

identity. One-third of transgender individuals report having had a negative experience related to

identifying as transgender (James et al. 2016).

        Suppose mental health care providers (MHPs) behave in a manner that limits access to

mental health services for TNB individuals or discourages them from seeking treatment. In that

case, it will worsen mental health disparities in several ways. First, discrimination by MHPs

further contributes to minority stress. Second, discrimination delays treatment, negatively

impacting health and increasing treatment costs (Boudreau et al. 2004; Himelhoch et al. 2004).

Third, difficulties in securing appointments lead many patients to discontinue the search for

treatment altogether (James et al. 2016; Lambda Legal 2010). Fourth, discrimination may reduce

match quality between the MHP and patient by forcing the patient to select a therapist who is

trans-friendly but is otherwise not as suitable for the patient (e.g., less experienced in the

patient's area of concern, practices farther away from where the patient lives) (Mizock and

Lundquist 2016). Patient-MHP mismatch negatively affects care since a high-quality match is

crucial for effective care (Budge and Moradi 2018; Kantrowitz 2016).

        There is existing research on discrimination against TNB people and how it affects

mental health or access to health care. The most relevant existing studies link the mental health

4
  Small and Pager (2020) note that economics has generally focused on measurable discrimination (on differences in
wages, employment, mortgage rates, or other economic outcomes) rather than perceived discrimination, for "a
potential's victim's mental health, depression, stress, and related health outcomes, perceiving that it happened is
everything. Perceptions of discrimination can have an effect regardless of whether the perpetrator discriminated or
instead seemed to discriminate but did not actually do so." (Small and Pager 2020; 63).


                                                        3
disparities that TNB people face to self-reported measures of discrimination (Bockting et al.

2013; Clements-Nolle, Marx, and Katz 2006; Hendricks and Testa 2012; Miller and Grollman

2015; Perez-Brumer et al. 2015; Reisner et al. 2016; Tebbe and Moradi 2016; Testa et al. 2017).

Other studies are surveys that show that TNB individuals are more likely to face discrimination

in access to health care (e.g., Grant et al. 2011; James et al. 2016). While informative, these

studies do not observe actual discriminatory behavior, do not capture how often this

discrimination occurs, and do not often capture whether discrimination occurs specifically in

access to mental health care.

       We significantly improve upon this limited existing research on discrimination against

TNB people in access to health care by measure discrimination in access to mental health care

using an audit field experiment. Audit field experiments are considered the "gold standard" for

measuring discrimination (Al-Ubaydli and List 2016; Bertrand and Duflo 2017; Gaddis 2018;

Neumark 2018) because they allow researchers to study discrimination in actual behavior. They

also allow researchers to calculate an unbiased estimate of discrimination by holding all factors

other than minority status constant.

       This paper provides the first experimental evidence of gender identity discrimination in

the mental health care system. We further examine if this discrimination varies by race, ethnicity,

the intersection of gender identity and race or ethnicity, and common mental health concern. To

do this, we conduct a large-scale experimental field study of mental health care providers

throughout the United States. Specifically, we request appointments from mental health

providers, including psychologists, counselors, social workers, and psychiatrists, using a popular

online website.




                                                4
        In these requests, we randomly assign names to signal race and gender. Specifically, in

the first wave of the study, we use masculine and feminine names that signal a prospective

patient is African American, Hispanic, or white. In the text of these appointment requests, our

fictitious TNB patients disclose their gender identity by including a short statement like: "I am [a

transgender woman]/[a transgender man]/[non-binary] and am looking for a trans-friendly

therapist." 5 We also randomly assign the specific mental health concern that the individual is

seeking treatment (anxiety, stress, or depression). In our appointment requests, we provide both a

return email address and phone number.

        We record several different categories of MHP responses to our appointment inquiries,

including the offer of an appointment, a call or consultation offer, offering placement on a

waitlist, a referral to a different provider, a rejection, as well as no reply. Based on the first wave

of a multi-wave study, our key result is that African American and Hispanic TNB people,

particularly Hispanic transgender women and non-binary African Americans, face discrimination

in access to mental health care. We also find discrimination against cisgender women, compared

to cisgender men, and a preference for prospective patients that mention depression over anxiety

or stress. However, these results are not robust to all possible control variables.

        Our study will make several contributions to the existing literature on mental health care

discrimination and gender identity discrimination when complete. This is the first paper to

provide causal estimates of gender identity discrimination in the U.S. health care system.

Moreover, our audit study is also one of the few to test for gender identity discrimination in any




5
 Disclosing gender identity and inquiring about LGBTQ+-friendly providers is a common and recommended
practice for TNB individuals seeking mental health services (Kassel 2018).


                                                     5
context (Bardales 2013; Granberg, Andersson, and Ahmed 2020; Levy at al. 2017; Make the

Road New York 2010; Rainey, Imse, and Pomerantz 2015).6

         Our study also improves on the three existing audit field experiments of discrimination in

access to mental health care (Kugelmass 2016, 2019; Shin et al. 2016).7 First, with only the

preliminary data from only the first wave of our experiment ­ 1,000 observations ­ we already

have a much larger sample size than these prior studies, which had sample sizes of between 300

to 400 each. Second, our sample is nationally representative, including MHPs in every state,

proportional to their population, and including MHPs from across the state, rather than just

selecting individual cities (New York City, Kugelmass 2016) or states (an "East Coast, Mid-

Atlantic state," Shin et al. 2016). Third, we follow Kugelmass (2019) and send appointment

requests in a more externally-valid way by sending emails through a standard MHP listing and

appointment request service. 8 Fourth, we plan to leverage the detailed data in the publicly-posted

MHP profiles to understand the sources of discrimination, where and when discrimination occurs

the most, and what factors may reduce discrimination (see the final "Next Steps" section). This


6
  Unfortunately, most of these studies have small sample sizes or are not peer reviewed or intended for peer review
(they are reports or honors theses). The notable exception is Granberg, Andersson, and Ahmed (2020). There are
also a few studies that are not audit field experiments that also focus on discrimination or disparities faced by
transgender people. Van Borm and Baert (2018) conduct a vignette experiment to quantify hiring discrimination
against transgender women, compared to cisgender women, in fictional employment hiring scenarios. Van Borm et
al. (2020) explore the mechanisms of hiring discrimination against transgender men using a similar vignette study.
Reed, Franks, and Scherr (2015) conduct a small vignette study to quantify hiring discrimination against transgender
people and to what extent hiring discrimination is based on assumptions about transgender people having mental
illness. Geijtenbeek and Plug (2018) study the earnings of transgender people compared to cisgender people, and
compared to before and after their administrative gender transition. Schilt and Wiswall (2008) study how workplace
experiences change after transitioning. Drydakis (2019) discusses mental health, life satisfaction, and job
satisfaction before and after transitioning.
7
  Olin et al. (2016) is another audit field experiment of access to mental health care, but focuses on access to care for
youth in New York state and quantifies general access rates and wait times.
8
  Prior studies (Shin et al. 2016; Kugelmass 2016) left voicemails for MHPs to request an appointment, usually
intentionally calling at times when they knew the MHP would not pick up the phone to avoid the risk of the MHP
picking up the phone (e.g., "Sunday evening", Shin et al. 2016, p. 1196; "at night", Kugelmass 2016, p. 173). While
this is an experimentally valid approach, our approach, following Kugelmass (2019), is to send appointment requests
through email, through the most comprehensive and popular online therapist database. This avoids the less
externally valid approach of calling and leaving voicemails, opting to mirror one of the most common ways that
prospective patients find MHPs.


                                                           6
detailed data is not available or is not used to near this extent in virtually all other audit field

experiments.

       Lastly, to our knowledge, we are the first study to use experimental methods to examine

how race, ethnicity, and gender identity interact to moderate or exacerbate discrimination. This

adds to the limited experimental research on intersectional discrimination in general (Bourabain

and Verhaeghe 2018; Burn et al. 2020; Lahey and Oxley 2018; Lauster and Easterbrook 2011;

Pedulla 2014; Schwegman 2019). There is ample reason to believe that TNB people of color will

experience more significant discrimination than their cisgender non-white or white

transgender/non-binary peers. In the United States, anti-transgender violence, which includes

physical and sexual violence, is highly racialized (Jefferson, Neilands, and Sevelius 2013;

Lombardi et al. 2002; Stotzer 2009). For example, 61 percent of lethal anti-LGBTQ+ hate in the

U.S. during 2016 resulted in the murder of transgender women of color, rates well beyond their

proportion of the general population (Waters and Yacka-Bible 2017).

       As we proceed through the next waves of the experiment, we will expand the study and

further contribute to the literature. We discuss the details of the multiple extensions of this study

in the concluding section of this paper.

       At the time of writing this paper, our experiment is ongoing. This working paper presents

the results from the first wave of the study, where we contact 1,000 mental health care providers

(MHPs) who post their contact information on a popular online platform. We send each MHP an

appointment request from one prospective patient, with randomly assigned race or ethnicity

(white, African American, or Hispanic), gender identity (transgender, non-binary, or presumed to

be cisgender), and common mental health concern (depression, anxiety, or stress).




                                                 7
                                          Background

Mental Health Disparities among Racial, Ethnic, and Gender Minorities

       There is a complex relationship between race, ethnicity, and mental health, with

sometimes conflicting research on the direction of mental health disparities. For example,

Hispanics, African Americans, and Asian Americans report having lower current, last-year, and

lifetime rates of major depression and other psychiatric disorders than whites (Miranda et al.

2008; Williams et al. 2007; Williams 2018). However, when African Americans and Hispanics

experience a mental disorder, their mental health episode tends to be more severe, persist for

longer, and be more debilitating than whites (Breslau et al. 2005). African Americans reporting

an episode of depression are more likely to be chronically or persistently depressed, have more

severe symptoms of depression, and be less likely to receive treatment (Williams et al. 2007;

Williams 2018).

       While the relationship between race, ethnicity, and mental health is complex, there is

more clear evidence that TNB people have worse mental health, higher rates of major psychiatric

disorders, and higher substance misuse rates than the general population. TNB individuals report

higher rates of suicidal ideation and attempted suicide, as well as significantly higher rates of

clinical depression (Clements-Nolle et al. 2001; Grossman and D'Augelli 2007; Haas et al. 2011;

Hoffman 2014; Mustanski et al. 2010; Nuttbrock et al. 2010; Scanlon et al. 2010; Su et al. 2016).

       Moreover, there is broad consensus that exposure to chronic and acute stressors--such as

poverty, neighborhood violence, or discrimination--can negatively affect mental health (Pearlin

et al. 1981, 2005; Turner 2013; Vega and Rumbaut 1991). Racial and gender minorities face

higher rates of "traditional" stress than whites. Notably, they are more likely to be unemployed,




                                                8
uninsured, exposed to neighborhood violence, and involved in the criminal justice system (James

et al. 2016; Williams 2018).

       Economic precariousness, increased exposure to violence, social stigma, and explicit

discrimination creates a unique set of psychological pressures and stresses for racial and gender

minorities that is often referred to as "minority stress" (Arbona and Jimenez 2014; Hendricks and

Testa 2012; Kelleher 2009; Tebbe and Moradi 2016; Testa et al. 2017). Minority stress correlates

with worse mental health outcomes, including higher rates of distress and depression (Lewis,

Cogburn, and Williams 2015; Paradies et al. 2015; Pascoe and Richman 2009; Schulz et al.

2006; Wallace, Nazroo, and Becares 2016; Williams and Mohammed 2009).

       Specifically, explicit discrimination and other stressors can negatively affect mental

health through several different pathways. Discrimination can increase stress, which puts

pressure on the body's cardiovascular system and heightens vigilance, i.e., a state of

psychological arousal designed to monitor and protect oneself from threats (Williams, Lavizzo-

Mourey, and Warren 1994; Sawyer et al. 2012). Heightened violence is positively associated

with depressive symptoms and contributes to the African American-white disparity in depression

(LaVeist et al. 2014; Testa et al. 2012).

       Moreover, structural and institutional racism can give rise to the "stress proliferation

process" (Pearlin et al. 2005) in which an initial stressor can initiate or exacerbate stressors in

other aspects of life (Williams 2018). Previous research finds evidence of racial discrimination in

the labor market (e.g., Bertrand and Mullainathan 2004; Gaddis 2015; Pager and Shepherd

2008), the housing market (e.g., Gaddis and Ghoshal 2020; Hanson and Hawley 2011; Hanson et

al. 2016; Murchie and Pang 2018), physical and online stores or marketplaces (e.g., Bourabain

and Verhaeghe 2018; Doleac and Stein 2013), and the public sector (e.g., Bergman and McFarlin




                                                9
2020; Giulietti, Tonin, and Vlassopoulos 2019; Mujcic and Frijters 2020), among other areas and

markets.

       There is also evidence that TNB individuals face frequent discrimination in the labor

market, in secondary and postsecondary schools, when accessing health care, when accessing

housing, and in the criminal justice system (Baumle, Badgett, and Boutcher, 2020; BreakOUT!

and National Council on Crime & Delinquency 2014; Glick et al. 2019; Grant et al. 2011;

Hanssens et al. 2014; James et al. 2016; Levy et al. 2017; Mallory, Hasenbush, and Sears 2015;

Romero et al. 2016; Sears and Mallory 2014; Stotzer 2014; Stroumsa 2014). This systematic

discrimination and inequality not only causes stress, but it can both cause and contribute to

economic insecurity, which is a significant source of stress (Williams 2018).

       For TNB individuals and cisgender racial minorities facing acute psychological stressors,

counseling and therapy are effective and common strategies for helping with numerous mental

health concerns, such as stress, anxiety, depression, and substance misuse. However, suppose

providers of these mental health services discriminate against TNB individuals and racial

minorities by restricting access to these services. In that case, this discrimination may partially

cause and likely exacerbate underlying race and gender identity-related mental health disparities.

Discrimination by Mental Health Care Providers

       Mental health care providers supply and regulate access to mental health care services in

the United States. There is no universally agreed-upon definition of a "mental health care

provider," nor is there a consensus on which provider types make up the United States' mental

health workforce (Heisler 2018). Numerous licensed professionals provide mental health care

services, including primary care physicians, psychologists, psychiatrists, nurses, mental health

and substance abuse counselors, family and marriage counselors, and social workers. Specific




                                                10
education and licensure requirements can vary from state to state, whereas other licensure

requirements are more uniform across states. For example, to be a clinical psychologist requires

a doctoral degree in psychology (Ph.D. or Psy.D) and passage of a certification exam (e.g., the

Professional Practice in Psychology Exam).

       Regardless of their professional training and qualifications, mental health providers

(MHP) have a significant degree of professional autonomy. MHPs are significantly more likely

to be in solo practice than physicians or other healthcare providers. While only one in five

physicians work by themselves, almost half of all MHPs do (Kane and Emmons 2013;

Kugelmass 2016, 2019; Michalski, Mulvey, and Kohout 2009). Thus, MHPs face fewer formal

and institutional constraints on their ability to make decisions consistent with their explicit or

implicit biases.

       Previous experimental and observational studies establish that health care providers,

including MHPs, make decisions about patients that are shaped by their perceptions of a patient's

race, social class, and gender (van Ryn and Burke 2000; Kugelmass 2016, 2019). This research

primarily focuses on how race-based explicit or implicit biases affect diagnosis, treatment

recommendations, and patient management (Arber et al. 2006; Green et al. 2007; Haider et al.

2011; Kikano et al. 1996; Lutfey et al. 2008, 2010; McKinlay et al. 1997; Stepanikova 2012; van

Ryn et al. 2011). These explicit or internalized biases and prejudices result in African Americans

and other minorities receiving fewer procedures and poorer quality medical care than whites

across virtually every medical intervention (Smedley, Stith, and Nelson 2003).

       These disparities may be driven by a personal aversion or a "taste-based animus" against

working with gender and racial minorities. Health care providers were found to ascribe negative

characteristics to African American patients and lower-class patients. They often perceive




                                               11
African American patients as less cooperative and more hostile (Abreu 1999; Green et al. 2007;

van Ryn and Burke 2000).

       Few studies examine if health care providers hold explicitly negative anti-transgender or

anti-non-binary views. However, medicine and medical providers have historically treated TNB

bodies as abnormal, unhealthy, diseased, and in need of corrective treatment (Davis et al. 2015).

The American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders

considered being transgender a mental disorder from 1980 until 2012 (Heffernan 2012), and the

World Health Organization considered identifying being transgender as a mental illness until

2018 (Papenfuss 2019). Many MHPs continue to view TNB people as mentally ill, delusional, or

self-destructive because of their gender identity (Mizock and Fleming 2011).

       There is also ample evidence to suggest that MHPs seek to cultivate a group of desirable

patients by "cream-skimming," or explicitly or implicitly choosing to provide services to a

specific group of patients. That is, MHPs could choose to only provide services only to patients

based on several non-mutually exclusive characteristics, including gender or race homophily,

type of services the patient is seeking (e.g., the severity of the mental illness), or insurance status

(i.e., the likelihood of payment, amount of payment, timeliness of payment). For example, there

is evidence that therapists prefer to see YAVIS (young, attractive, verbal, intelligent, successful)

patients (Teasdale and Hill 2006; Tyron 1986). Previous experimental audit and correspondence

studies document cream-skimming based on a patient's socioeconomic status (Angerer, Waibel,

and Stummer 2019; Kugelmass 2016; Olah et al. 2013), insurance status (Bisgaier and Rhodes

2011; Olin et al. 2016; Polsky et al. 2015; Rhodes et al. 2014; Werbeck et al. 2019), race (Leech,

Irby-Shasanmi, and Mitchell 2019; Sharma et al. 2015, 2018; Wisniewski and Walker 2020), and

perceived gender (Olah et al. 2013; Sharma et al. 2015).




                                                  12
         Cream-skimming could be rooted in different sources of discrimination, such as taste-

based discrimination (i.e., MHPs are transphobic), statistical discrimination (MHPs use minority

status to make assumptions about the prospective patient), or implicit bias (unconscious bias). 9

An MHP could exhibit statistical discrimination in appointment allocation in numerous ways.

First, MHPs could assume that TNB prospective patients are more likely to have a severe mental

health issue, which requires more time and effort to treat and potentially poses greater liability. 10

Alternatively, MHP may perceive TNB individuals as less likely to be insured or being less able

to pay standard out-of-pocket rates. 11 Thus, MHPs could perceive TNB patients as less desirable,

causing MHPs to respond less favorably to appointment inquiries from TNB prospective

patients. If this cream-skimming drives MHP behavior, including elements that boost patient

desirability (e.g., ability to pay) should differentially increase positive response rates for TNB

prospective patients.

         Lastly, mental health care providers may hold implicit, unconscious biases about racial

and gender minorities (Devine 1989; Greenwald and Banaji 1995). Devine (1989) notes that it is

possible for individuals who are not explicitly prejudiced and deliberately try to avoid

stereotypes and prejudice to still make decisions based on internalized biases or stereotypes.

Numerous studies find that health care providers hold implicit biases and stereotypes about racial


9
  Economics typically conceptualizes discrimination in terms of taste-based discrimination (Becker 1971) and
statistical discrimination (Arrow 1973; Phelps 1972). Taste-based discrimination, or animus, occurs when MHPs
gain disutility from interacting with specific groups of patients (or alternatively, they gain utility from the act of
discrimination) (Lahey and Oxley 2018). Statistical discrimination occurs when minority status is used as a proxy
for missing information about the prospective patient, such as assuming that minorities have lower socio-economic
status, people of color are more likely to have Medicaid, or TNB individuals have more severe conditions.
10
   Numerous studies find that TNB individuals face more severe mental health conditions (Grossman and D'Augelli
2007; Lagos 2018; Meyer et al. 2017; Miller and Grollman 2015; Mustanski et al. 2010; Nuttbrock et al. 2010;
Scanlon et al. 2010; Streed et al. 2018; Su et al. 2016), which could lead MHPs to statisticaly discriminate against
TNB prospective patients if they prefer patients with less severe conditions.
11
   Several studies find that TNB individuals are less likely to have health insurance (Carpenter, Eppink, and
Gonzales 2020; James et al. 2016; Liszewski et al. 2018; Waters and Yacka-Bible 2017) and have lower income
(Badgett, Carpenter, and Sansone 2020; Carpenter, Eppink, and Gonzales 2020), which could lead to MHPs
statistically discriminating on this basis.


                                                          13
minorities that result in unequal treatment (Green et al. 2007; McKinlay et al. 1996). Few studies

document implicit stereotypes about gender identity. However, a recent study found that people

tend to express implicit and explicit preferences for cisgender over transgender people (Axt et al.

2020).

         Regardless of the cause of any underlying discrimination, if MHPs are less responsive to

and less helpful towards racial and gender minorities, this behavior will decrease access and

reduce the probability that these individuals receive timely and necessary medical care.

Discrimination, including based on gender identity, also violates the American Counseling

Association, the American Psychological Association, and the American Medical Association's

ethics codes (AMA Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs 2009; American Counseling

Association 2014; American Psychological Association 2016).

                                           Experimental Design

         Audit field experiments are the gold standard for detecting and measuring discrimination

(Al-Ubaydli and List 2016; Bertrand and Duflo 2017; Gaddis 2018; Neumark 2018).

Experimental studies are practically the only method for causally measuring discrimination

against groups for which there is very little administrative or survey data, e.g., TNB

individuals. 12 In this section, we outline the details of our experimental design. We discuss ethics

in audit studies in Appendix B.

Sampling Frame and Power Analysis

         We use a popular online therapist search database to collect our sample of auditable

mental health care providers. In order to be included in our sample, an MHP: (1) must not

specialize exclusively on specific types of patients who are outside of the scope of our


12
  See Badgett, Carpenter, and Sansone (2020) for a helpful overview of the (often lack of) data on LGBTQ+
individuals in socio-economic and health surveys.


                                                      14
experiment (e.g., children, adolescents, or couples therapy), (2) must not be specialized in a type

of therapy (e.g., grief, domestic violence) that would not deal with the common mental health

conditions that we signal: anxiety, depression, and stress, (3) must list an individual's profile

(e.g., it cannot be the profile of a clinic), (4) must provide an email option through a web form,

and (5) must be accepting patients (i.e., we do not contact MHPs that indicate that they are not

currently accepting patients). After accounting for these characteristics, we select MHPs

proportionately to state populations. Within states, we select MHPs proportionally to the

population of each ZIP code.

       We collect information about each MHP from their publicly-posted profile to use in

future analysis. We will use this to control for variation in MHPs' characteristics that affects

MHP responses, thus increasing the precision of our estimates of discrimination. We will also

use this data on MHP characteristics to investigate the moderators of discrimination.

Specifically, we record the MHPs state, their ZIP code, the number of years in practice, their cost

per session, and their titles, licenses, and degrees. We also note whether each MHP specializes in

anxiety, depression, and stress. Lastly, we record whether each MHP lists "transgender ally,"

"non-binary ally," "LGBT-ally," and/or a transgender specialty on their profile. We also saved

each MHP's publicly-posted profile so we can extract more data from it later. We discuss our

plans for using MHP characteristics and other factors to explore the moderators and sources of

discrimination in the final "Next Steps" section in the paper and Table 9.

Patient Profiles and Email Scripts

       If a mental health care provider meets the inclusion criteria for this experiment, we send a

message to them through an "Email Me" webform. In these inquiries, we use names to signal the

fictitious prospective patient's race, ethnicity, and gender. We randomly assign various other

aspects of the email to signal gender identity, mental health concern, and, in future waves of our


                                                15
experiment, insurance status. Figure 1 provides the general structure of our appointment inquiry

emails, and Figure 2 summarizes the randomized options that we assign to each email.

Signaling gender identity.

        We use names from two previous audit studies (Barlow and Lahey 2018; Gaddis 2017a)

to signal race and gender. We present these names in Figure 1, box 2. Each name is either

stereotypically masculine (signaling that the sender identifies as a male) or feminine (signaling

that the sender identifies as female). We assign transgender and cisgender women (men) a

feminine (masculine) first name. Non-binary prospective patients are assigned either feminine

names or masculine names, each with a 50 percent probability. 13

        Each MHP will receive one inquiry from one prospective patient who identifies either as

transgender (25 percent of the time), non-binary (25 percent of the time), or cisgender (50

percent of the time). Specifically, TNB prospective patients the following statement in their

appointment request email: "I am [a transgender woman]/[a transgender man]/[non-binary] and

I am looking for a therapist who is trans-friendly." Cisgender prospective patients do not include

any statement about gender identity and are thus presumed to be cisgender.

        We believe that signaling TNB status in this way is common and externally valid. For a

TNB individual seeking mental health services, finding a therapist who will not discriminate

against them (i.e., a "trans-friendly" therapist) or stop them from being transgender 14 is essential.

Disclosing transgender status and inquiring about trans-friendly services is common and is


13
   Many non-binary people keep their names assigned at birth, or otherwise have names that are more feminine or
masculine, especially since few names are non-gender specific. We considered including some non-gender specific
names for non-binary people but decided not to since there is no clear naming convention or way that non-binary
people select non-gender specific names. Also, including another set of names would have added another difference
between our non-binary prospective patients and our transgender and cisgender prospective patients, which may
have made it more different to compare results.
14
   Almost 1 in 10 respondents to the 2015 U.S. Transgender Survey report that at least one MHP has tried to stop
them from being TNB (James et al. 2016). Those who have experienced a professional try to stop them from being
TNB report worse mental health outcomes, including higher rates of psychological distress and attempted suicide.


                                                       16
recommended by experts who provide advice on how to find trans-affirming care (e.g., Kassel

2018).

         Signaling race and ethnicity.

         We selected names that clearly signal gender, race (African American or white), and

ethnicity (Hispanic) from studies that carefully test how names signal race, ethnicity, and

socioeconomic status (Barlow and Lahey 2018; Gaddis 2017a). 15 Figure 2 presents these names.

In the next waves of our experiment, we will add Chinese American names, as discussed in our

concluding section.

         In the first wave of the study, the results of which we present in this paper, we randomly

assign an MHP to receive an inquiry containing a white name approximately 50 percent of the

time, an inquiry containing an African American name approximately 25 percent of the time, and

an inquiry containing a Hispanic name approximately 25 percent of the time.

         Signaling mental health concern.

         We also randomly assign one of the following mental health conditions: stress, anxiety,

or depression. We use these conditions since they are the most common, virtually all MHPs are

qualified to treat them, and they do not suggest that the mental health concern is trans-specific.

We focus this study on quantifying access to mental health care for common mental health

conditions rather than quantifying access to trans-specific care, a separate research question

requiring a different research design.




15
  Using these names helps us confront the criticism that using African-American first names to signal race over-
estimate discrimination and confuses racial discrimination for socio-economic status discrimination because some
names also have negative socioeconomic status signals (Barlow and Lahey 2018; Darolia et al. 2016; Fryer and
Levitt 2004; Gaddis 2017a; 2017b; Ghoshal 2019).


                                                       17
Coding Mental Health Provider Responses

        Each appointment request email contained both the fictitious patient's email and phone

number. MHPs are thus able to respond via phone, text message, and email. We consider a (non-

automated) email, a text message, or a voicemail to be a response. 16

        We coded each MHP response into one of the following seven mutually exclusive

outcome categories: appointment offered, call or consultation offer, screening question(s),

referral, waitlist, rejection, and no response. These seven, mutually-exclusive categories 17

capture the variation in the quality of response. See Table 1 for each outcome's more detailed

definition.

        To improve power and increase our results' interpretability, we collapse these categories

into a binary variable, called "positive response," that adopts the value one if the MHP's

response was normatively positive (the sum of appointment offer and call or consultation offer)

and zero otherwise. 18 Categorizing responses as positive or not positive is a standard approach in

audit studies (e.g., Kugelmass 2019; Neumark, Burn, and Button 2019), but in future waves of

the study, we will conduct an analysis that better explores differences between frequencies in

different response categories.




16
   We record MHP's phone numbers and cross-reference those with any missed calls, but we find only perhaps one
instance of an MHP calling without leaving a voicemail.
17
   MHPs of course often provide more than one type of response, such as a referral and a consultation offer. If an
MHP's response falls into more than one category, it is coded as the best category. For example, a referral and a
consultation offer is coded as consultation offer, and a rejection and a referral is coded as a referral.
18
   This is the same binary categorization as Kugelmass (2019). Our results are generally similar if we use an
alternative binary categorization that deems screening questions and referrals to be positive responses as well. We
discuss these results in a robustness sub-section within the results section.


                                                        18
                                            Empirical Strategy

        We use regression analysis to quantify differences in outcomes. We start first by testing

for differences in our broader categories, using the binary "positive" outcome variable and a

linear probability model 19 as follows:

      = 0 + 1  + 2  + 3 
                                                                                                          [1]
                    + 4  + 5  + 

         equals one for positive responses to the appointment inquiry (appointment

offer or call or consultation offer), and  ,  , and

 are indicator variables for each randomized status, with the excluded category being

cisgender white people.  and  capture differences in the positive response

rate between those who mention depression or anxiety in their appointment request, compared to

those who just mention having stress. We also include state fixed effects and fixed effects for the

week and day of the week when we sent the appointment request in our preferred specifications.

We cluster our standard errors at the patient level since, while each MHP only gets one email,

each patient emails appointment requests to up to ten MHPs in their assigned area.

        We then extend equation [1] to explore intersectional groups, such as individuals by

gender identity (e.g., transgender wo(men) vs. cisgender wo(men) vs. non-binary people) and by

race, ethnicity, and gender identity intersectionality (e.g., TNB people of color).

        In subsequent analyses, when we have a larger sample size and have collected more data,

we will control for MHP characteristics. We anticipate that this would increase precision and

show how MHP characteristics correlate with access to appointments in general. We will also

conduct a more in-depth analysis of differences in the types of responses, such as using


19
  Our main results are similar using a probit model (see Table Appendix Table A1). We discuss the minor
differences in the robustness sub-section of the results section.


                                                       19
multinomial models to determine if there are differences within our binary categorization that

our analysis does not pick up. For example, are TNB individuals more likely to get a call or

consultation offer instead of an outright appointment? Or are TNB individuals more likely to get

referrals instead of being outright rejected? This analysis will provide a deeper understanding of

how MHPs react to prospective patients. 20

                            Results from the First Wave of the Experiment

Frequency of MHP Responses by Category

        Between January 28, 2020, and May 15, 2020, we sent appointment requests to 1,000

MHPs. Before proceeding, it is important to note that, although our sample size is small, it is

only the first wave of a multi-wave study. Thus, these results are preliminary and subject to

change based on the results of subsequent waves.

        We receive responses to 75.5 percent of our appointment request emails. This response

rate is comparable to other email correspondence audit studies (Hanson et al. 2016; Kugelmass

2019). Among these responses, 80 percent of MHPs responded via email, and the remainder left

a voicemail (or, in a few instances, a text message only).

        In Table 1, we categorize the responses into seven mutually exclusive outcome

categories. In particular, we received an appointment offer from one-third of our appointment

requests, and we received a call or consultation offer 23.3 percent of the time. We code both as

positive responses in our binary coding, so the positive response rate is 56.6 percent. For the

responses we code as negative, the most common was receiving no response (24.5 percent),

followed by a rejection (6.0 percent), the MHP asking a screening question only (6.0 percent),

the MHP offers a referral only (4.8 percent), or the MHP offering to put the prospective patient

20
  Our results, however, are similar using our alternative binary coding, which also considers screening questions
and referrals as positive outcomes. But a multinomial model would allow for a finer study of differences by response
categories.


                                                        20
on a waitlist only (2.1 percent). See Table 1 for each outcome's frequency by gender identity,

race, and ethnicity.

Differences in Positive Response Rates

       We then collapse this more detailed coding of responses into our binary positive response

coding (positive responses are appointment, call, or consultation offers) to present raw

differences in positive response rates. Table 2 presents positive response rates by gender identity,

first for the aggregated groupings of cisgender prospective patients versus TNB prospective

patients. Cisgender prospective patients received a positive response 60.6 percent of the time

while TNB prospective patients only received a positive response 52.8 percent of the time--a

statistically significant 7.8 percentage point difference (p-value = 0.013, using a two-sided t-test).

We then compare positive response rates by our more refined categorizations of gender identity.

Cisgender men have the highest positive response rate (61.6 percent), followed by cisgender

women (58.8 percent), transgender women (55.8 percent), non-binary individuals (51.9 percent),

and transgender men (50.7 percent). These more refined categorizations have less precision,

given our smaller sample size, so only the response rate difference between cisgender and

transgender men ­ where transgender men have a 10.9 percentage point lower response rate ­ is

statistically significant (p-value = 0.030).

       Table 3 presents positive response rates by race and ethnicity. White prospective patients

have the highest positive response rate (58.0 percent), followed by African Americans (55.5

percent) and Hispanics (54.8 percent). None of these differences are statistically significant in

this raw data.

       Table 4 presents positive response rates for groups by the intersection of race, ethnicity,

and gender identity. We find no statistically significant differences in raw response rates between




                                                 21
whites, African Americans, or Hispanics with the same transgender/cisgender status. However,

we find differences by race and ethnicity across transgender/cisgender status. Cisgender African

Americans have a higher positive response rate (60.7 percent) than TNB African Americans

(50.0 percent, p-value = 0.077), and cisgender whites have a higher positive response rate (61.5

percent) than TNB whites (54.2 percent, p-value = 0.096).

       However, we find the largest positive response rate differences by comparing TNB

African Americans and Hispanics to cisgender whites. TNB African Americans face the lowest

positive response rate (50.0 percent) compared to cisgender whites, who face the highest rate

(61.5 percent, p-value = 0.030). For TNB Hispanics, this response rate is 53.3 percent (p =

0.105). Thus, it appears that the discrimination against TNB prospective patients is largely

discrimination against TNB African-Americans and Hispanics.

Regression Analysis of Differences in Positive Response Rates

       Table 5 presents regression estimates of the differences in response rate by race,

ethnicity, and gender identity derived from the linear probability model specified in equation [1].

Without any control variables, the regression estimates show that prospective patients who signal

TNB status have between a 6.5 and 7.5 percentage point lower positive response rate, significant

at the 5 percent level (columns (1) and (2)). Without control variables, there is also no difference

in response rates between white, African American, and Hispanic prospective patients. These

results mirror the raw differences in positive response rates seen in Tables 2 and 3. We also find

that those who mention anxiety in their appointment request, rather than stress, have a 10.4

percentage point lower response rate.




                                                22
         Adding state fixed effects (column (3)) changes these estimates significantly. 21 With state

fixed effects, the positive response rate is only 3.3 percentage points lower and statistically

insignificant for TNB individuals compared to cisgender individuals. Adding state fixed effects

reveals discrimination against African American prospective patients, with a 10.9 percentage

point lower response rate, statistically significant at the 5 percent level. Adding state fixed effects

also removes the estimated positive response rate difference between prospective patients who

mention stress versus anxiety.

         We then add week-sent and day-of-the-week-sent fixed effects to control for random

variation from when we sent the emails (although this is random with respect to prospective

patient demography). In our preferred specification with all these controls (column (5)), we find

no evidence of differential positive response rates between cisgender and TNB prospective

patients. However, on average, we find that MHPs respond to both African American and

Hispanic patients about 13 percentage points less often than white patients (significant at the 1

percent and 5 percent levels, respectively). In this preferred specification, we also find that

prospective patients reporting depression as the primary mental health concern in an inquiry to

the MHP increases the probability of a positive response by 14.6 percentage points relative to the

prospective patient mentioning stress.

         In Table 6, we disaggregate the broader cisgender and TNB groups. We compare positive

response rates between binary transgender men and women, non-binary individuals (with either

masculine-coded or feminine-coded names), and cisgender men and women (where cisgender



21
   This is a function of our temporarily smaller sample size. Patient demographics are randomly assigned by state.
The inclusion of state fixed effects controls for between-state differences in response rates, which is a significant
source of variation in positive response rates. The inclusion of state fixed effects also means that we put more
weight onto within-state differences by patient demographics. We have less within-state variation in patient
demographics since, unlike many other audit field experiments, we do not send subjects (MHPs) more than one
email.


                                                          23
men are the comparison group). All estimates are from a regression that includes the control

variables in our preferred specification (column (5) in Table 5).

       Column (1) of Table 6 reports the coefficients from column (5) of Table 5 for

comparison. Column (2) considers binary transgender and non-binary individuals separately,

column (3) further differentiates binary transgender people to consider transgender women,

transgender men, and non-binary individuals separately. Column (4) further differentiates non-

binary individuals by if they have feminine-coded or masculine-coded first names. Regardless of

how we divide the TNB population, we do not find any differences within TNB subgroups or

between TNB subgroups and cisgender individuals. However, we find that cisgender women are

about 10.8 percentage points less likely to receive a response than cisgender men.

       Table 7 disaggregates cisgender and TNB prospective patients by race and ethnicity to

quantify any intersectional discrimination. This delves deeper into a trend we saw in the raw data

in Table 4. Column (1) of Table 7 again reports baseline estimates from our preferred

specification reported in Column (5) of Table 5. Column (2) reports differences in response rates

for specific racial and ethnic groups disaggregated by gender identity. We find that white TNB

prospective patients are about 10.0 percentage points more likely to receive a positive response

than white cisgender prospective patients, although this is only statistically significant at the 10

percent level. However, TNB prospective patients that are African American are 13.3 percentage

points less likely to receive a positive response than white cisgender prospective patients

(significant at the 5 percent level). Hispanic TNB prospective patients have a 10.3 percentage

point lower response rate, but this is not statistically significant. We do not find any differences

in positive response rates between cisgender African Americans, cisgender Hispanics, or

cisgender whites.




                                                24
        Table 8 disaggregates these results further by exploring the intersection between more

specific minority gender identities (transgender women, transgender men, non-binary

individuals) and race and ethnicity. 22 Table 8 shows that white transgender men (white

transgender women) are 21.1 (16.9) percentage points more likely to receive a positive response

than cisgender whites (both significant at the 5 percent level). However, Hispanic transgender

women are 37.0 percentage points less likely to receive a positive response (significant at the 1

percent level). African American transgender men (African American transgender women) have

positive response rates that are 12.4 (7.6) percentage points lower than cisgender whites (not

statistically significant).

        For non-binary prospective patients, there is no difference in positive response rates

between non-binary white and cisgender white prospective patients. However, African American

non-binary prospective patients have a 49.1 percentage point lower positive response rate,

significant at the 1 percent level. Hispanic non-binary individuals have a 13.8 percentage point

lower positive response rate, but this is only significant at the 10 percent level.

Robustness Checks

        We first check if our main results are different when using a probit instead of a linear

probability model. Table A5 presents Table 5 using a probit instead, with similar results. Then,

we move to our more critical robustness check to determine if our method of coding the

categorical responses (see Table 1) into binary outcomes is robust to plausible alternative binary

codings. In our default specification, we deem positive responses to be explicit appointment

offers, or call or consultation offers, the same coding as in Kugelmass (2019). However, two


22
  We also run a regression similar to what that presented in Table 8, but where we disaggregate cisgender white,
African-American, and Hispanic people by if they are cisgender women or cisgender men. However, we do not find
neither differences by gender within the same race or ethnicity, nor differences by race or ethnicity with the same
gender. There results are available from the authors upon request.


                                                        25
other possible responses are more ambiguous: screening questions and referrals, and we consider

an alternative binary coding of positive responses that includes these two as positive.

       While a screening question could indicate a barrier to access (Kugelmass 2019), such as

providers being differentially more concerned about insurance status for minorities, a screening

question does not necessarily mean that the MHP would not eventually offer an appointment.

Screening questions may also be more common for minorities if, for example, the MHP asks if

the concerns are trans-specific or if the MHP asks if the prospective patient would prefer

someone who specializes in trans/race issues. Thus, screening questions, while generally

suggestive of barriers in access to appointments, could in some situations fail to capture helpful

responses.

       Referrals are also likely to indicate a barrier to access (Kugelmass 2019), but it depends

on the intent of the referral. Many referrals are essentially appointment rejections, but a way to

moderate the negative implications of denying an appointment by providing the prospective

patient with an alternative. The question is, then, whether this alternative provider is better for

the prospective patient.

       We try to avoid these referrals by not suggesting that the common mental health concerns

are trans- or race-specific as we seek to quantify discrimination in access to general mental

health care for common mental health concerns. However, MHPs may still suggest alternative

providers under the view that the TNB prospective patients, or racial or ethnic minority

prospective patients, would do better with a specialist. While many MHPs provide these referrals

in addition to appointment, call, or consultation offers, some provide a referral only, and a subset

of these could still be considered positive outcomes.




                                                26
       After the next wave of data collection, we will start exploring the quality of these

referrals to see if the referrals are to lower or higher quality MHPs. Determining the quality of

the referred MHP is possible if they also have an online profile or website, which almost all

MHPs do. Until we can differentiate better between likely good and likely bad referrals, we test

our binary positive outcome coding's robustness by including a referral as a positive response.

       Appendix Tables A2 to A8 present all of our results with this alternative positive binary

coding, where positive responses are appointment, call, or consultation offers, screening

questions, or referrals. Since screening questions occur 6.0 percent of the time and referrals

occur 4.8 percent of the time (see Table 1), the alternative positive response rate is 67.1 percent

on average, compared to 56.6 percent for our default rate. Our results are similar across all tables

except for a few minor differences. We generally find less discrimination against non-binary

African Americans using the alternative binary coding. This suggests that non-binary African

Americans are relatively more likely to be asked screening questions or given referrals.

       With the alternative positive coding, we also find discrimination against Hispanic

transgender men when we did not find discrimination with the default positive coding. Under

this alternative coding, discrimination is similar against Hispanic transgender women and men.

In contrast, with our default positive coding, there is more frequent discrimination against

Hispanic transgender women, with no statistically significant evidence of discrimination against

Hispanic transgender men. This suggests that Hispanic transgender women (men) are

differentially more likely (less likely) to be asked screening questions or given referrals. Our

broader result ­ that discrimination is primarily against TNB African-Americans and Hispanics ­

is unchanged with this alternative binary coding.




                                                27
                                         Conclusion and Discussion

         To summarize our results from our first wave of the experiment, we generally find no

differences in positive response rates between TNB and cisgender prospective patients in our

preferred specifications. This lack of a difference occurs because positive response rates may be

higher for white transgender women and men. However, the significantly more frequent

discrimination against African American and Hispanic TNB people (mainly Hispanic

transgender women and non-binary African American people) offsets this, such that is little

evidence of a difference on average between TNB and cisgender prospective patients. Ignoring

intersectionality thus obscures this discrimination against TNB people of color and apparent

preference for white binary transgender people. This finding is a warning for other researchers

that they should consider incorporating intersectional groups.

         We find that African American and Hispanic prospective patients face discrimination on

average. However, the significant discrimination against intersectional groups, namely non-

binary African Americans and Hispanic transgender women, drives this average difference. We

do not find differences in response rates by race or ethnicity for cisgender prospective patients.

This may suggest that discrimination against African Americans and Hispanics is primarily

against African Americans and Hispanics who are transgender or non-binary only. However,

given our small sample size at this time, we cannot rule out meaningful magnitudes of

discrimination against cisgender African Americans or Hispanics, which motivates our planned

data collection going forward. 23


23
   In Table 7, column (2), the coefficient on cisgender African Americans is -0.0241, with a standard error of 0.0659.
This imprecise estimate has a 95 percent confidence interval of -0.153 to 0.105. The confidence interval is -0.164 to
0.0998 for cisgender Hispanics. These intervals clearly include meaningful magnitudes of discrimination, which
means that the most honest interpretation of our results is that it is inconclusive if cisgender African Americans or
Hispanics face discrimination in access to mental health care appointments. Our power analysis filed with our pre-
analysis plan discusses how many observations we would need in our final experiment to detect meaningful
magnitudes of discrimination.


                                                         28
          Interestingly, we also find that cisgender women face lower positive response rates than

cisgender men. We also find prospective patients mentioning depression as their mental health

concern receive higher positive response rates than prospective patients who mention anxiety or

stress. However, this difference is not entirely robust as it does not appear without state fixed

effects, which we include in our preferred specifications.

          These preliminary results motivate our continued data collection and data analysis to

understand better the ways and reasons that discrimination occurs in access to mental health care.

We hope to better understand, for example, why white binary transgender women and men may

experience higher appointment offer rates and why cisgender women may experience lower

positive response rates. Statistical discrimination based on insurance status could perhaps explain

the discrimination against cisgender women. 24 The source of the preference for white

transgender women and men is less clear, although a simple explanation is that MHPs simply

want to work with or care about these groups. We will explore if this preference appears

correlated with attitudes on transgender issues or implicit bias against transgender people to see

if this preference appears driven by taste-based discrimination in favor of (white) transgender

people.

          In the final section below, we detail the next steps in this research, including conducting

secondary analysis to explore the sources and moderators of discrimination. We also detail our

plans for follow-up studies to quantify discrimination based on other factors not explored in this

first wave of data collection.




24
  MHPs could assume that cisgender women are less likely to have private insurance or ability to pay, on average,
given that women face lower incomes and wages (Blau and Khan 2017) and slightly lower rates of private health
insurance coverage, and higher rates of Medicaid coverage (National Center for Health Statistics 2018).


                                                        29
                                           Next Steps

       We will expand this research to investigate the mechanisms behind discrimination. We

will study where and why discrimination occurs by taking equation [1] and adding interactions

between our minority status variables and moderators of discrimination. Table 9 presents these

interaction variables, what they test for, and our hypotheses. For example, we will study if MHP

race or ethnicity predicts discrimination, if transgender rights laws affect discrimination, and to

what extent discrimination may be taste-based, statistical, or based on implicit bias. We will also

explore how COVID-19 and related policies, such as shelter-in-place ordinances, affected mental

health care access and discrimination in access to mental health care.

       In addition to exploring these moderators and sources of discrimination, we will extend

this study in future waves by adding additional experimental arms as follows:

1. We will add prospective patients with Chinese names to quantify discrimination against that

  them;

2. We will randomize mention of different insurance statuses and methods of payment to

  quantify if prospective patients with Medicaid face reduced access to mental health care; and

3. We will add prospective patients who vary in sexual orientation to quantify sexual orientation

  discrimination.

We detail these plans below and welcome any feedback.

Insurance Status, Access to Mental Health Care, and Statistical Discrimination

       We will randomly disclose the prospective patient's insurance status or their preferred

payment method in the next wave. We will randomly assign insurance status so that 10 percent

of the time, the prospective patient will not mention their insurance status or payment method

(which is what we did in the first wave, presented in this paper). Prospective patients will




                                                30
disclose, with a 16 percent probability, that they will pay out-of-pocket but will not mention or

request a sliding scale payment option. With a 14 percent probability, the prospective patient will

instead disclose paying out-of-pocket but will request a sliding scale option (e.g., "do you offer a

sliding scale?"). Finally, with a 30 percent probability, the prospective patient will disclose

paying with Medicaid (private insurance).

       There is some research on how insurance status or ability to pay affects access to health

care. Several audit field experiments quantify how access to primary care varies by insurance

status (Bisgaier and Rhodes 2011; Leech, Irby-Shasanmi, and Mitchell 2019; Olin et al. 2016;

Polsky et al. 2015; Rhodes et al. 2014; Sharma, Mitra, and Stano 2015; Sharma et al. 2018).

However, only Olin et al. (2016) quantifies access to mental health care (although for

adolescents in the state of New York only). These audit studies generally find that those with

Medicaid face reduced access to health care. We expect that those with Medicaid will face

similar barriers in access to mental health care as they do for access to primary care.

       In addition to randomizing insurance status to our prospective patients to quantify access

to mental health care appointments, we can also use this to study statistical discrimination, as

detailed in Table 9. To summarize, MHPs could statistically discriminate against minorities by

assuming that they have worse insurance or worse ability to pay. We can quantify this statistical

discrimination by testing if minorities face more discrimination when insurance status is not

revealed than when it is revealed. If MHPs assume that minorities have a worse ability to pay,

then revealing the ability to pay (e.g., private insurance) will differentially boost positive

response rates for minorities.




                                                 31
Discrimination Against Chinese Prospective Patients

         In the next wave of our experiment, we include names that signal the prospective patient

is Chinese American. No study has examined if Asian Americans face discrimination in access

to mental health care services. We will disclose Chinese American status with frequent first and

last names in the U.S. Chinese community. Half the time, our Chinese American prospective

patients will have Chinese first names and last names. The other half of the time, our Chinese

American prospective patients will have gender-specific English first names and Chinese last

names.

Sexual Orientation Discrimination
         In a future wave of the experiment, we will include signals for sexual orientation, likely

using a similar approach to how we signal TNB status. That is, lesbian, gay, or bisexual

prospective patients would include a statement like "I am gay/lesbian/bisexual and am looking

for a gay-friendly therapist." This extension to study sexual orientation discrimination would be

the first audit field experiment of discrimination in access to health care for sexual minorities.

COVID-19 and Access to Mental Health Care

         Our first wave of data collection (between January 28, 2020, and May 15, 2020) occurred

during the first wave of the COVID-19 pandemic, and we plan to continue further data

collection. As of writing, cases have reached an all-time high, and there is no expectation of the

pandemic ending soon. This provides us with a natural experiment to explore how access to

mental health care varies before, during, and after the pandemic and with the pandemic's

severity.

         Why should access to MHPs change during a pandemic? Like other crises, the intensity

of the COVID-19 pandemic--as proxied by infection and mortality rates and shelter-in-place




                                                 32
ordinances--increases depression and suicidal ideation (Killgore et al. 2020; McIntyre and Lee

2020; Pfefferbaum and North 2020; Torales et al. 2020). MHPs can help treat these conditions,

but they are likely to face increased demand for appointments. Access could also change through

an inability to meet in person under normal circumstances and the movement of MHPs towards

greater use of telehealth systems (Madigan et al. 2020; Reay et al. 2020).

       We will test three hypotheses: (i) the increase in the COVID-19 intensity, measured as

either cases or deaths, reduces access to therapy appointment; (ii) shelter-in-place ordinances

reduce access to therapy appointments; and (iii) discrimination against minorities increases with

increased COVID-19 intensity and with shelter-in-place ordinances. We hypothesize that

discrimination could increase in these cases since prior research links (but not conclusively)

increased discrimination to shortages (Baert et al. 2015; Carlsson, Fumarco, and Rooth 2018;

Dahl and Knepper 2020; Kroft, Notowidigdo, and Lange 2013).

       The integration of COVID-19 data will help us explore in greater detail discrimination

against Chinese Americans. Based on surveys early during the COVID-19 pandemic, there was

an increase in anti-Asian and anti-Chinese views and events (Litam 2020; Ruiz, Horowitz, and

Tamir 2020). We will examine if MHPs are more or less responsive to Chinese Americans

throughout the COVID-19 pandemic. We will exploit both geographical and temporal variation

in the pandemic's severity to examine how this severity correlates with MHP behavior towards

Chinese Americans.




                                                33
                                          References

Abreu, José M. 1999. "Conscious and Nonconscious African American Stereotypes: Impact on
     First Impression and Diagnostic Ratings by Therapists." Journal of Consulting and Clinical
     Psychology 67 (3): 387­93.
Allport, Gordon W. 1954. The Nature of Prejudice. New York: Basic Books.
     https://doi.org/10.1037/0708-5591.35.1.11.
Al-ubaydli, Omar, and John A. List. 2016. "Field Experiments in Markets." NBER Working
     Paper 22113.
AMA Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs. 2009. "AMA Code of Medical Ethics' Opinion on
     Respect for Patient Beliefs: Opinion 9.12 ­ Patient-Physician Relationship: Respect for Law
     and Human Rights." Virtual Mentor 11(10): 766.
     https://doi.org/10.1001/virtualmentor.2009.11.10.code1-0910.
American Counseling Association. 2014. "2014 ACA Code of Ethics." Retreived November 23,
     2020 from https://www.counseling.org/Resources/aca-code-of-ethics.pdf.
American Psychological Association. 2016. "Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of
     Conduct." Retrieved November 23, 2020 from https://www.apa.org/ethics/code/ethics-code-
     2017.pdf.
Angerer, Silvia, Christian Waibel, and Harald Stummer. 2019. "Discrimination in Health Care:
     A Field Experiment on the Impact of Patients' Socioeconomic Status on Access to Care."
     American Journal of Health Economics 5 (4): 407­427.
Arber, Sara, John McKinlay, Ann Adams, Lisa D. Marceau, Carol Link, and Amy O'Donnell.
     2006. "Patient Characteristics and Inequalities in Doctors' Diagnostic and Management
     Strategies Relating to CHD: A Video-simulation Experiment." Social Science & Medicine
     62 (1): 103­15.
Arbona Consuelo, and Carolina Jimenez. 2014. "Minority stress, ethnic identity, and depression
     among Latino/a college students." Journal of Counseling Psychology 61 (1): 162-168.
Arrow, Kenneth J. 1973. "The Theory of Discrimination." In Discrimination in Labor Markets,
     edited by Orley C. Ashenfelter and Albert Rees, 3­33. Princeton: Princeton University
     Press.
Axt, Jordan R., Morgan A. Conway, Erin C. Westgate, and Nicholas R. Buttrick. 2020. "Implicit
     Transgender Attitudes Independently Predict Beliefs About Gender and Transgender
     People." Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 014616722092106.
Badgett, M.V. Lee, Christopher S. Carpenter, and Dario Sansone. 2020. "LGBTQ Economics."
     Unpublished draft.
Badgett, M. V. Lee, Brad Sears, Holning Lau, and Deborah Ho. 2009. "Bias in the workplace:
     Consistent evidence of sexual orientation and gender identity discrimination 1998-2008."
     Chicago-Kent Law Review 84: 559.
Baert, Stijn, Bart Cockx, Niels Gheyle, and Cora Vandamme. 2015. "Is There Less
     Discrimination in Occupations Where Recruitment Is Difficult?" ILR Review 68 (3): 467­
     500. https://doi.org/10.1177/0019793915570873.
Bardales, Nujavi. 2013. "Finding a Job in `a Beard and a Dress': Evaluating the Effectiveness of
     Transgender Anti-Discrimination Laws." Working Paper, 1­17.
Barlow, Rose M., and Joanna N. Lahey. 2018. "What Race Is Lacey? Intersecting Perceptions of
     Racial Minority Status and Social Class." Social Science Quarterly 99 (5): 1680­98.
     https://doi.org/10.1111/ssqu.12529.


                                              34
Baumle, Amanda K., M. V. Lee Badgett, and Steven Boutcher. 2020. "New Research on Sexual
     Orientation and Gender Identity Discrimination: Effect of State Policy on Charges Filed at
     the EEOC." Journal of Homosexuality 67 (8): 1135­44.
     https://doi.org/10.1080/00918369.2019.1603494.
Becker, Gary S. 1971. The Economics of Discrimination. Chicago: University of Chicago Press
     2nd Edition.
Bergman, Peter, and Isaac, McFarlin Jr. 2020. Education for All? A Nationwide Audit Study of
     Schools of Choice. Working Paper, New York: Columbia University.
     http://www.columbia.edu/~psb2101/BergmanMcFarlin_school_choice.pdf.
Bertrand, Marianne, and Esther Duflo. 2017. "Field Experiments on Discrimination." In
     Handbook of Economic Field Experiments, edited by Abhijit Vinayak Banerjee and Esther
     Duflo, 1st ed., 309­93. New York, NY: Elsevier.
Bertrand, Marianne, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. "Are Emily and Greg More Employable
     Than Lakisha and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination." American
     Economic Review 94 (4): 991­1013. https://doi.org/10.1257/0002828042002561.
Bisgaier, Joanna, and Karin V. Rhodes. 2011. "Auditing Access to Specialty Care for Children
     with Public Insurance." New England Journal of Medicine 364 (24): 2324­33.
     https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMsa1013285.
Blanchard, Janice, Shakti Nayar, and Nicole Lurie. 2007. "Patient-Provider and Patient-Staff
     Racial Concordance and Perceptions of Mistreatment in the Health Care Setting." Journal
     of General Internal Medicine 22 (8): 1184­89. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11606-007-0210-8.
Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn. 2017. "The Gender Wage Gap: Extent, Trends, and
     Explanations." Journal of Economic Literature 55 (3): 789­865.
     https://doi.org/10.1257/jel.20160995.
Bockting, Walter O., Michael H. Miner, Rebecca E. Swinburne Romine, Autumn Hamilton, and
     Eli Coleman. 2013. "Stigma, Mental Health, and Resilience in an Online Sample of the US
     Transgender Population." American Journal of Public Health 103 (5): 943­51.
     https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2013.301241.
Boudreau, Robert M., Colleen McNally, Edna M. Rensing, and Miriam K. Campbell. 2004.
     "Improving the Timeliness of Written Patient Notification of Mammography Results by
     Mammography Centers." Breast Journal 10 (1): 10­19. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1524-
     4741.2004.09608.x
Bourabain, Dounia, and Pieter Paul Verhaeghe. 2018. "Could You Help Me, Please?
     Intersectional Field Experiments on Everyday Discrimination in Clothing Stores." Journal
     of Ethnic and Migration Studies 45 (11): 2026­2044.
     https://doi.org/10.1080/1369183X.2018.1480360.
BreakOUT!, and the National Council on Crime & Delinquency. 2014. "We Deserve Better: A
     Report on Policing in New Orleans By and For Queer and Trans Youth of Color." The
     Equity Project, New Orleans, LA.
Breslau, Joshua, Kenneth S. Kendler, Maxwell Su, Sergio Gaxiola-Aguilar, and Ronald C.
     Kessler. 2005. "Lifetime Risk and Persistence of Psychiatric Disorders across Ethnic
     Groups in the United States." Psychological Medicine 35 (3): 317-327.
Budge, Stephanie L., and Bonnie Moradi. 2018. "Attending to Gender in Psychotherapy:
     Understanding and Incorporating Systems of Power." Journal of Clinical Psychology 74
     (11): 2014­27. https://doi.org/10.1002/jclp.22686.
Burn, Ian, Patrick Button, Theodore F. Figinski, and Joanne Song McLaughlin. 2020. "Why



                                              35
     Retirement, Social Security, and Age Discrimination Policies Need to Consider the
     Intersectional Experiences of Older Women." Public Policy & Aging Report 30 (3): 101­6.
     https://doi.org/10.1093/ppar/praa017.
Carlsson, Magnus, Luca Fumarco, and Dan-Olof Rooth. 2018. "Ethnic Discrimination in Hiring,
     Labour Market Tightness and the Business Cycle - Evidence from Field Experiments."
     Applied Economics 50 (24): 2652­63. https://doi.org/10.1080/00036846.2017.1406653.
Carpenter, Christopher S., Samuel T. Eppink, and Gilbert Gonzales. 2020. "Transgender Status,
     Gender Identity, and Socioeconomic Outcomes in the United States." ILR Review 73 (3):
     573­99. https://doi.org/10.1177/0019793920902776.
Charles, Kerwin Kofi, and Jonathan Guryan. 2008. "Prejudice and Wages: An Empirical
     Assessment of Becker's The Economics of Discrimination." Journal of Political Economy
     116 (5): 773­809.
Clements-Nolle, Kristen, Rani Marx, Robert Guzman, and Mitchell Katz. 2001. "HIV
     Prevalence, Risk Behaviors, Health Care Use, and Mental Health Status of Transgender
     Persons: Implications for Public Health Intervention." American Journal of Public Health
     91 (6): 915­21.
Cooper, Lisa A., Debra L. Roter, Rachel L. Johnson, Daniel E. Ford, Donald M. Steinwachs, and
     Neil R. Powe. 2003. "Patient-Centered Communication, Ratings of Care, and Concordance
     of Patient and Physician Race." Annals of Internal Medicine 139 (11): 907­15.
     https://doi.org/139/11/907.
Dahl, Gordon B., and Matthew M. Knepper. 2020. "Age Discrimination Across the Business
     Cycle." NBER Working Paper 27581.
Darolia, Rajeev, Cory Koedel, Paco Martorell, Katie Wilson, and Francisco Perez-Arce. 2016.
     "Race and Gender Effects on Employer Interest in Job Applicants: New Evidence from a
     Resume Field Experiment." Applied Economics Letters 23 (12): 853­56.
     https://doi.org/10.1080/13504851.2015.1114571.
Davis, Georgiann, Jodie M. Dewey, and Erin L. Murphy. 2015. "Giving Sex: Deconstructing
     Intersex and Trans Medicalization Practices." Gender and Society 30 (3): 490­514.
     https://doi.org/10.1177/0891243215602102.
Devine, Patricia G. 1989. "Stereotypes and Prejudice: Their Automatic and Controlled
     Components." Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 56 (1): 5­18.
Doleac, Jennifer L, and Luke C.D. Stein. 2013. "The Visible Hand: Race and Online Market
     Outcomes." Economic Journal 123 (572): F469-F492. https://doi.org/10.1111/ecoj.12082.
Drydakis, Nick. 2020. "Trans People, Transitioning, Mental Health, Life and Job Satisfaction."
     Handbook of Labor, Human Resources and Population Economics. Springer
Fryer, Roland G. Jr., and Steven D. Levitt. 2004. "The Causes and Consequences of
     Distinctively Black Names." Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (3): 767­805.
     https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjt005.Advance.
Gaddis, S. Michael. 2015. "Discrimination in the Credential Society: An Audit Study of Race
     and College Selectivity in the Labor Market." Social Forces 93 (4): 1451­59.
     https://doi.org/10.1093/sf/sou111.
------. 2017a. "How Black Are Lakisha and Jamal? Racial Perceptions from Names Used in
     Correspondence Audit Studies." Sociological Science 4: 469­89.
     https://doi.org/10.15195/v4.a19.
------. 2017b. "Racial/Ethnic Perceptions from Hispanic Names: Selecting Names to Test for
     Discrimination." Socius 3: 1­11. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2975829.



                                              36
------. 2018. "An Introduction to Audit Studies in the Social Sciences." In Audit Studies:
     Behind the Scenes with Theory, Method, and Nuance, edited by S. Michael Gaddis. New
     York: Springer.
Gaddis, S. Michael, and Raj Ghoshal. 2020. "Searching for a Roommate: A Correspondence
     Audit Examining Racial/Ethnic and Immigrant Discrimination among Millennials." SSRN
     Working Paper https://ssrn.com/abstract=3493750.
Glick, Jennifer L., Alex Lopez, Miranda Pollock, and Katherine P. Theall. 2019. "`Housing
     Insecurity Seems to Almost Go Hand in Hand with Being Trans': Housing Stress among
     Transgender and Gender Non-Conforming Individuals in New Orleans." Journal of Urban
     Health 96 (5): 751­59. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11524-019-00384-y.
Giulietti, Corrado, Mirco Tonin, and Michael Vlassopoulos. 2019. "Racial Discrimination in
     Local Public Services: A Field Experiment in the United States." Journal of the European
     Economic Association 17 (1): 165­204. https://doi.org/10.1093/jeea/jvx045.
Gonsalkorale, Karen, Jeffrey W. Sherman, and Karl Christoph Klauer. 2009. "Aging and
     Prejudice: Diminished Regulation of Automatic Race Bias among Older Adults." Journal of
     Experimental Social Psychology 45 (2): 410­14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2008.11.004.
Granberg, Mark, Per A. Andersson, and Ali Ahmed. 2020. "Hiring Discrimination Against
     Transgender People: Evidence from a Field Experiment." Labour Economics 65, 101860.
Grant, Jaime M., Lisa A. Mottet, Justin Tanis, Jack Harrison, Jody L. Herman, and Mara
     Keisling. 2011. "Injustice at Every Turn: A Report of the National Transgender
     Discrimination Survey." Washington National Center for Transgender Equality and the
     National Gay and Lesbian Task Force. https://www.thetaskforce.org/wp-
     content/uploads/2019/07/ntds_full.pdf.
Green, Alexander R., Dana R. Carney, Daniel J. Pallin, Long H. Ngo, Kristal L. Raymond, Lisa
     I. Iezzoni, and Mahzarin R. Banaji. 2007. "Implicit Bias among Physicians and Its
     Prediction of Thrombolysis Decisions for Black and White Patients." Journal of General
     Internal Medicine 22 (9): 1231­38.
Greenwald, Anthony G., and Mahzarin R. Banaji. 1995. "Implicit Social Cognition: Attitudes,
     Self-Esteem, and Stereotypes." Psychological Review 102 (1): 4­27.
Grohs, Stephan, Christian Adam, and Christoph Knill. 2016. "Are Some Citizens More Equal
     than Others? Evidence from a Field Experiment." Public Administration Review 76 (1):
     155-164.
Ghoshal, Raj. 2019. "Flawed Measurement of Hiring Discrimination against African
     Americans." Sociation 18(2): 37­46.
Grossman, Arnold H., and Anthony R. D'Augelli. 2007. "Transgender Youth and Life-
     Threatening Behaviors." Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior 37 (5): 527­37.
Haas, Ann P., Mickey Eliason, Vickie M. Mays, Robin M. Mathy, Susan D. Cochran, Anthony
     R. D'Augelli, Morton M. Silverman, et al. 2011. "Suicide and Suicide Risk in Lesbian, Gay,
     Bisexual, and Transgender Populations: Review and Recommendations." Journal of
     Homosexuality 58 (1): 10­51.
Haider, Adil H., Janel Sexton, Nisha Sriram, Lisa A. Cooper, David T. Efron, Sandra Swoboda,
     Cassandra V. Villegas, Elliott R. Haut, Morgan Bonds, Peter J. Pronovost, Pamela A.
     Lipsett, Julie A. Freischlag, and Edward E. Cornwell. 2011. "Association of Unconscious
     Race and Social Class Bias with Vignette-based Clinical Assessments by Medical
     Students." JAMA: The Journal of the American Medical Association 306 (9): 942­51.
Hanson, Andrew, and Zackary Hawley. 2011. "Do Landlords Discriminate in the Rental Housing



                                              37
     Market? Evidence from an Internet Field Experiment in US Cities." Journal of Urban
     Economics 70: 99­114. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jue.2011.02.003.
Hanson, Andrew, Zackary Hawley, Hal Martin, and Bo Liu. 2016. "Discrimination in Mortgage
     Lending: Evidence from a Correspondence Experiment." Journal of Urban Economics 92:
     48­65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jue.2015.12.004.
Hanssens, Catherine, Aisha C. Moodie-Mills, Andrea J. Ritchie, Dean Spade, Urvashi Vaid, and
     Sexuality Law. 2014. "A Roadmap for Change: Federal Policy Recommendations.
     Addressing the Criminalization of LGBT People and People Living with HIV." New York:
     Center for Gender and Sexuality Law at Columbia Law School.
Heffernan, Dani. 2012. "The APA Removes `Gender Identity Disorder' From Updated Mental
     Health Guide." GLAAD. GLAAD. December 3. https://www.glaad.org/blog/apa-removes-
     %20gender-identity-disorder-updated-mental-health-guide.
Heisler, Elayne J. 2018. "The Mental Health Workforce: A Primer." CRS Reports (Library of
     Congress. Congressional Research Service).
     https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/details?prodcode=R43255.
Hemker, Johannes, and Rink, Anselm. 2017. "Multiple Dimensions of Bureaucratic
     Discrimination: Evidence from German Welfare Offices." American Journal of Political
     Science 61 (4): 786-803
Hendricks, Michael L., and Rylan J. Testa. 2012. "A Conceptual Framework for Clinical Work
     with Transgender and Gender Nonconforming Clients: An Adaptation of the Minority
     Stress Model." Professional Psychology: Research and Practice 43 (5): 460­67.
     https://doi.org/10.1037/a0029597.
Himelhoch, Seth, Wendy E. Weller, Albert W. Wu, Gerard F. Anderson, and Lisa A. Cooper.
     2004. "Chronic Medical Illness, Depression, and Use of Acute Medical Services among
     Medicare Beneficiaries." Medical Care 42 (6): 512­21.
     https://doi.org/10.1097/01.mlr.0000127998.89246.ef.
Hoffman, Beth. 2014. "An Overview of Depression Among Transgender Women." Depression
     Research and Treatment vol. 2014. https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/394283.
Hughto, Jaclyn M. White, Sari L. Reisner, and John E. Pachankis. 2015. "Transgender stigma
     and health: A critical review of stigma determinants, mechanisms, and interventions."
     Social Science & Medicine 147 (2015): 222-231.
James, Sandy E., Jody L. Herman, Susan Rankin, Mara Keisling, Lisa Mottet, and Ma'ayan
     Anafi. 2016. "The Report of the U.S. Transgender Survey." Washington, DC: National
     Center for Transgender Equality. http://www.ustranssurvey.org/reports.
Jefferson, Kevin, Torsten B. Neilands, and Jae Sevelius. 2013. "Transgender Women of Color:
     Discrimination and Depression Symptoms." Ethnicity and Inequalities in Health and Social
     Care 6 (4): 121-136.
Kane, Carol K., and David W. Emmons. 2013. "New Data on Physician Practice Arrangements:
     Private Practice Remains Strong Despite Shifts toward Hospital Employment." Chicago:
     American Medical Association. https://www.ama-assn.org/sites/ama-
     assn.org/files/corp/media-browser/premium/health-policy/prp-physician-practice-
     arrangements_0.pdf.
Kantrowitz, Judy L. 2016. "Appreciation of the Importance of the Patient­Analyst `Match.'"
     Psychiatry 79: 23­28. https://doi.org/10.1080/00332747.2016.1151316.
Kassel, Gabrielle. 2018. "How to Find a Legit LGBTQ+ Therapist Who Will Actually Support
     Your Needs." WELL+GOOD, November 8, 2018, accessed October 25, 2020,



                                             38
     https://www.wellandgood.com/lgbt-therapist/.
Kelleher, Cathy. 2009. "Minority Stress and Health: Implications for Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual,
     Transgender, and Questioning (LGBTQ) Young People." Counselling Psychology
     Quarterly 22 (4): 373­79. https://doi.org/10.1080/09515070903334995.
Kikano, George E., Schiaffino, Maria A., Zyzanski, Stephen J.1996. "Medical Decision Making
     and Perceived Socioeconomic Class." Archives of Family Medicine 5 (5): 267-70.
Killgore, William D. S., Sara A. Cloonan, Emily C. Taylor, and Natalie S. Dailey. 2020.
     "Loneliness: A Signature Mental Health Concern in the Era of COVID-19." Psychiatry
     Research 290 (May). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2020.113117.
Kroft, Kory, Matthew J Notowidigdo, and Fabian Lange. 2013. "Duration Dependence and
     Labor Market Conditions: Evidence from a Field Experiment." Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 128 (3): 1123­67. https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjt015.
Kugelmass, Heather. 2016. "`Sorry, I'm Not Accepting New Patients': An Audit Study of
     Access to Mental Health Care." Journal of Health and Social Behavior 57 (2): 168­83.
     https://doi.org/10.1177/0022146516647098.
------. 2019. "`Just the Type with Whom I Like to Work': Two Correspondence Field
     Experiments in an Online Mental Health Care Market." Society and Mental Health 9 (3):
     350­65. https://doi.org/10.1177/2156869318755213.
Lahey, Joanna N., and Douglas R. Oxley. 2018. "Discrimination at the Intersection of Age, Race,
     and Gender: Evidence from a Lab-in-the-Field Experiment." NBER Working Paper 25357.
Lagos, Danya. 2018. "Looking at Population Health Beyond `Male' and `Female': Implications
     of Transgender Identity and Gender Nonconformity for Population Health." Demography
     55 (6): 2097­2117. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13524-018-0714-3.
Lambda Legal. 2010. "When Health Care Isn't Caring: Lambda Legal's Survey on
     Discrimination Against LGBT People and People Living with HIV." Washington, DC.
     www.lambdalegal.org/health-care-report.
Lauster, Nathanael, and Adam Easterbrook. 2011. "No Room for New Families? A Field
     Experiment Measuring Rental Discrimination against Same-Sex Couples and Single
     Parents." Social Problems 58 (3): 389­409. https://doi.org/10.1525/sp.2011.58.3.389.
LaVeist, Thomas A., Nicole C. Rolley, and Chamberlain Diala. 2003. "Prevalence and Patterns
     of Discrimination among U.S. Health Care Consumers." International Journal of Health
     Services 33 (2): 331­44. https://doi.org/10.2190/TCAC-P90F-ATM5-B5U0.
LaVeist, Thomas A., Roland J. Thorpe Jr, Geraldine Pierre, GiShawn A. Mance, and David R.
     Williams. 2014. "The Relationships Among Vigilant Coping Style, Race, and Depression."
     The Journal of Social Issues 70 (2): 241-255.
Leech, Tamara G.J., Amy Irby-Shasanmi, and Anne L. Mitchell. 2019. "`Are You Accepting
     New Patients?' A Pilot Field Experiment on Telephone-Based Gatekeeping and Black
     Patients' Access to Pediatric Care." Health Services Research 54 (January): 234­42.
     https://doi.org/10.1111/1475-6773.13089.
Leppel, Karen. 2020. "Labor Force Status of Transgender Individuals." In Handbook of Labor,
     Human Resources and Population Economics, edited by Klaus F. Zimmermann, 1-16.
     Springer International Publishing.
Levy, Diane K., Doug Wissoker, Claudia L. Aranda, Brent Howell, Rob Pitingolo, Sarale
     Sewell, and Rob Santos. 2017. "A Paired-Testing Pilot Study of Housing Discrimination
     against Same-Sex Couples and Transgender Individuals." The Urban Institute, Washington,
     DC. https://www.urban.org/sites/default/files/publication/91486/hds_lgt_final_report_3.pdf.



                                              39
Lewis, Tené T., Courtney D. Cogburn, and David R. Williams. 2015. "Self-reported Experiences
     of Discrimination and Health: Scientific Advances, Ongoing Controversies, and Emerging
     Issues." Annual Review of Clinical Psychology 11: 407­40.
Liszewski, Walter, J. Klint Peebles, Howa Yeung, and Sarah Arron. 2018. "Persons of
     Nonbinary Gender - Awareness, Visibility, and Health Disparities." The New England
     Journal of Medicine 379 (25): 2391-2393.
Litam, Stacey Diane A. 2020. "'Take Your Kung-Flu Back to Wuhan:' Counseling Asians,
     Asian Americans, and Pacific Islanders with Race-Based Trauma Related to COVID-19."
     Professional Counselor 10, no. 2 (2020): 144-156.
Lombardi, Emilia L., Riki Anne Wilchins, Dana Priesing, and Diana Malouf. 2002. "Gender
     Violence: Transgender Experiences with Violence and Discrimination." Journal of
     Homosexuality, 42 (1): 89-101.
Lutfey, Karen E., Stephen M. Campbell, Megan R. Renfrew, Lisa D. Marceau, Martin Roland,
     and John B. McKinlay. 2008. "How are patient characteristics relevant for physicians'
     clinical decision making in diabetes? An analysis of qualitative results from a cross-national
     factorial experiment." Social Science & Medicine 67 (9): 1391-9.
Lutfey, Karen E., Kevin W. Eva, Eric Gerstenberger, Carol L. Link, and John B. McKinlay.
     2010. "Physician Cognitive Processing as a Source of Diagnostic and Treatment Disparities
     in Coronary Heart Disease: Results of a Factorial Priming Experiment." Journal of Health
     and Social Behavior 51 (1): 16-29.
Madigan, Sheri, Nicole Racine, Jessica E. Cooke, and Daphne J. Korczak. 2020. "COVID-19
     and Telemental Health: Benefits, Challenges, and Future Directions." Forthcoming in
     Canadian Psychology/Psychologie Canadienne. https://doi.org/10.1037/cap0000259.
Make the Road New York. 2010. "Transgender Need Not Apply: A Report on Gender Identity
     Job." New York.
Mallory, Christy, Amira Hasenbush, and Brad Sears. 2015. "Discrimination and Harassment by
     Law Enforcement Officers in the LGBT Community." UCLA: The Williams Institute.
McIntyre, Roger S, and Yena Lee. 2020. "Projected Increases in Suicide in Canada as a
     Consequence of COVID-19." Psychiatry Research 290 (May): 113104.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2020.113104.
McKinlay, John B., Deborah A. Potter, and Henry A. Feldman. 1996. "Non-medical Influences
     on Medical Decision-making." Social Science & Medicine 42 (5): 769­76.
McKinlay, John. B., Risa B. Burns, Richard Durante, Henry A. Feldman, Karen M. Freund,
     Brooke S. Harrow, Julie T. Irish, Linda E. Kasten, and Mark A. Moskowitz. 1997. "Patient,
     physician and presentational influences on clinical decision making for breast cancer:
     results from a factorial experiment." Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice 3 (1): 23-57.
Meyer, Ilan H., Taylor N. T. Brown, Jody L. Herman, Sari L. Reisner, and Walter O. Bockting.
     2017. "Demographic Characteristics and Health Status of Transgender Adults in Select US
     Regions: Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System, 2014." American Journal of Public
     Health 107 (4): 582­89. https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2016.303648.
Michalski, Daniel, Tanya Mulvey, and Jessica Kohout. 2010. 2008 APA Survey of Psychology
     Health Service Providers. Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association Center
     for Workforce Studies.
Miller, Lisa R., and Eric Anthony Grollman. 2015. "The Social Costs of Gender Nonconformity
     for Transgender Adults: Implications for Discrimination and Health." Sociological Forum
     30 (3). https://doi.org/10.1111/socf.12193.



                                                40
Miranda, Jeanne, Tomas G. McGuire, David R. Williams, and Philip Wang. 2008. "Mental
     Health in the Context of Health Disparities." American Journal of Psychiatry 165 (9):
     1102­1108.
Mizock, Lauren, and Christine Lundquist. 2016. "Missteps in Psychotherapy with Transgender
     Clients: Promoting Gender Sensitivity in Counseling and Psychological Practice."
     Psychology of Sexual Orientation and Gender Diversity 3 (2): 148­55.
     https://doi.org/10.1037/sgd0000177.
Mizock, Lauren, and Michael Z. Fleming. 2011. "Transgender and Gender Variant Populations
     with Mental Illness: Implications for Clinical Care." Professional Psychology: Research
     and Practice 42 (2): 208­13. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0022522.
Mujcic, Redzo, and Paul Frijters. 2020. "The Colour of a Free Ride." Forthcoming in the
     Economic Journal, 1­30. https://doi.org/10.1093/ej/ueaa090.
Murchie, Judson, and Jindong Pang. 2018. "Rental housing discrimination across protected
     classes: Evidence from a randomized experiment." Regional Science and Urban Economics
     73: 170-179.
Mustanski, Brian S., Robert Garofalo, and Erin M. Emerson. 2010. "Mental Health Disorders,
     Psychological Distress, and Suicidality in a Diverse Sample of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and
     Transgender Youths." American Journal of Public Health 100 (12): 2426­32.
     https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2009.178319.
National Center for Health Statistics. 2018. "Table P-11a. Age-adjusted percent distributions
     (with standard errors) of type of health insurance coverage for persons under age 65 and for
     persons aged 65 and over, by selected characteristics: United States, 2018" Retrieved
     November 21, 2020 from
     http://ftp.cdc.gov/pub/Health_Statistics/NCHS/NHIS/SHS/2018_SHS_Table_P-11.pdf.
Neumark, David. 2018. "Experimental Research on Labor Market Discrimination." Journal of
     Economic Literature 56 (3): 799­866. https://doi.org/10.1257/jel.20161309.
Neumark, David, Ian Burn, and Patrick Button. 2019. "Is It Harder for Older Workers to Find
     Jobs? New and Improved Evidence from a Field Experiment." Journal of Political
     Economy 127 (2): 922­70. https://doi.org/10.1086/701029.
Nuttbrock, Larry, Sel Hwahng, Walter Bockting, Andrew Rosenblum, Mona Mason, Monica
     MacRi, and Jeffrey Becker. 2010. "Psychiatric Impact of Gender-Related Abuse across the
     Life Course of Male-to-Female Transgender Persons." Journal of Sex Research 47 (1): 12­
     23. https://doi.org/10.1080/00224490903062258.
Olah, Michelle, Gregory Gaisaino, and Stephen Hwang. 2013. "The Effect of Socioeconomic
     Status on Access to Primary Care: An Audit Study." Canadian Medical Association Journal
     185 (6): 263­70.
Olin, Su-chin Serene, Briannon C. O'Connor, Amy Storfer-Isser, Lisa J. Clark, Matthew Perkins,
     Sarah Hudson Scholle, Emma D. Whitmyre, Kimberly Hagwood, and Sarah McCue
     Horwitz. 2016. "Access to Care for Youth in a State Mental Health System: A Stimulated
     Approach." Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 55 (5):
     392­99.
Pager, Devah, and Hana Shepherd. 2008. "The Sociology of Discrimination: Racial
     Discrimination in Employment, Housing, Credit, and Consumer Markets." Annual Review
     of Sociology 34:181­209.
Papenfuss, Mary. 2019. "World Health Organization Removes Gender Nonconformity from List
     Of Mental Disorders." HuffPost. May 31. https://www.huffpost.com/entry/transgender-



                                               41
     right-world-health-organization-no-longer-mental-disorder_n_5cf0ade0e4b0e346ce7bbd93.
Paradies, Yin, Jehonathan Ben, Nida Denson, Amanuel Elias, Naomi Priest, Alex Pieterse,
     Arpana Gupta, Margaret Kelaher, and Gilbert Gee. "Racism as a determinant of health: a
     systematic review and meta-analysis." PLOS ONE 10 (9): e0138511.
     https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0138511.
Parsons, Christopher A., Johan Sulaeman, Michael C. Yates, and Daniel S. Hamermesh. 2011.
     "Strike Three: Discrimination, Incentives, and Evaluation." American Economic Review
     101 (4): 1410­35.
Pascoe, Elizabeth A., and Laura S. Richman. 2009. "Perceived Discrimination and Health: A
     Metaanalytic Review." Psychological Bulletin 135(4):531­54.
Pearlin, Leonard I., Elizabeth G. Menaghan, Morton A. Lieberman, and Joseph T. Mullan. 1981.
     "The Stress Process." Journal of Health and Social Behavior 22 (4): 337­56.
Pearlin, Leonard I., Scott Schieman, Elena M. Fazio, and Stephen C. Meersman. 2005. "Stress,
     Health, and the Life Course: Some Conceptual Perspectives." Journal of Health and Social
     Behavior 46 (2): 205­19.
Pedulla, David S. 2014. "The Positive Consequences of Negative Stereotypes: Race, Sexual
     Orientation, and the Job Application Process." Social Psychology Quarterly 77 (1): 75­94.
     https://doi.org/10.1177/0190272513506229.
Perez-Brumer, Amaya, Mark L. Hatzenbuehler, Catherine E. Oldenburg, and Walter Bockting.
     2015. "Individual- and Structural-Level Risk Factors for Suicide Attempts among
     Transgender Adults." Behavioral Medicine 41 (3): 164­71.
     https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.2451.A.
Pfefferbaum, Betty, and Carol S. North. 2020. "Mental Health and the Covid-19 Pandemic."
     New England Journal of Medicine, 1­3. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMp2008017.
Phelps, Edmund S. 1972. "The Statistical Theory of Racism and Sexism." The American
     Economic Review 62 (4): 659-61.
Polsky, Daniel, Michael Richards, Simon Basseyn, Douglas Wissoker, Genevieve M. Kenney,
     Stephen Zuckerman, and Karin V. Rhodes. 2015. "Appointment Availability after Increases
     in Medicaid Payments for Primary Care." New England Journal of Medicine 372 (6): 537­
     45. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMsa1413299.
Price, Joseph, and Justin Wolfers. 2010. "Racial Discrimination Among NBA Referees." The
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (4): 1859­87.
     https://doi.org/10.1162/qjec.2010.125.4.1859.
Rainey, Teresa, Elliot E. Imse, and Ari Pomerantz. 2015. "Qualified and transgender: A report
     on results of resume testing for employment discrimination based on gender identity" Office
     of Human Rights District of Columbia, Washington, DC.
     https://ohr.dc.gov/sites/default/files/dc/sites/ohr/publication/attachments/QualifiedAndTrans
     gender_FullReport_1.pdf
Reay, Rebecca E., Jeffrey C.L. Looi, and Philip Keightley. 2020. "Telehealth Mental Health
     Services during COVID-19: Summary of Evidence and Clinical Practice." Australasian
     Psychiatry 28 (5): 514­16. https://doi.org/10.1177/1039856220943032.
Reed, Oakleigh M., Andrew S. Franks, and Kyle C. Scherr. 2015. :Are perceptions of
     transgender individuals affected by mental illness stigma? A moderated mediation analysis
     of anti-transgender prejudice in hiring recommendations." Psychology of sexual orientation
     and gender diversity, 2(4), 463.
Reisner, Sari L., Jaclyn M. White Hughto, Kristi E. Gamarel, Alex S. Keuroghlian, Lauren



                                               42
     Mizock, and John Pachankis. 2016. "Discriminatory Experiences Associated with
     Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Symptoms among Transgender Adults Sari." Journal of
     Counseling Psychology 63 (5): 509­19.
     https://doi.org/10.1037/cou0000143.Discriminatory.
Rhodes, Karin V., Genevieve M. Kenney, Ari B. Friedman, Brendan Saloner, Charlotte C.
     Lawson, David Chearo, Douglas Wissoker, and Daniel Polsky. 2014. "Primary Care Access
     for New Patients on the Eve of Health Care Reform." JAMA Internal Medicine 174 (6):
     861­69. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamainternmed.2014.20.
Romero, Adam P., James E. Tysse, Jessica M. Weisel, and Zak Franklin. 2016. "Brief of
     Scholars Who Study the Transgender Population as Amici Curiae in Support of Plaintiffs-
     Appellants." Appeal from the United States District Court for the Middle District Of North
     Carolina. No. 1:15-cv-00236-TDS-JEP.
     https://www.aclu.org/sites/default/files/field_document/060-
     3_scholars_who_study_trans_population_2016.10.25.pdf
Ruiz, Neil. G., Juliana M. Horowitz, and Christine Tamir. 2020. "Many Black and Asian
     Americans Say They Have Experienced Discrimination Amid the Covid-19 Outbreak." Pew
     Research Center. July 1. https://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2020/07/01/many-black-and-
     asian-americans-say-they-have-experienced-discrimination-amid-the-covid-19-outbreak/
Russomanno, Jennifer, Joanne G. Patterson, and Jennifer M. Jabson. 2019. "Food Insecurity
     Among Transgender and Gender Nonconforming Individuals in the Southeast United
     States: A Qualitative Study." Transgender Health 4 (1): 89­99.
     https://doi.org/10.1089/trgh.2018.0024.
Safer Joshua D., Eli Coleman, Jamie Feldman, Robert Garofalo, Wylie Hembree, Asa Radix, and
     Jae Sevelius. 2016. "Barriers to healthcare for transgender individuals." Current Opinion in
     Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Obesity 23 (2): 168-71.
Saha, Samnath, Miriam Komaromy, Thomas D. Koepsell, and Andrew B. Bindman. 1999.
     "Patient-Physician Racial Concordance and the Perceived Quality and Use of Health Care."
     Archives of Internal Medicine 159 (9): 997­1004.
     https://doi.org/10.1001/archinte.159.9.997.
Sawyer, Pamela J., Brenda Major, Bettina J. Casad, Sarah S. M. Townsend, and Wendy Berry
     Mendes. 2012. "Discrimination and the Stress Response: Psychological and Physiological
     Consequences of Anticipating Prejudice in Interethnic Interactions." American Journal of
     Public Health 102(5):1020­26.
Scanlon, K., R. Travers, T. Coleman, G. Bauer, and M. Boyce. 2010. "Ontario's Trans
     Communities and Suicide: Transphobia Is Bad for Our Health." Trans Pulse E-Bulletin 1
     (2): 1­2.
Schulz, Amy J., Clarence C. Gravlee, David R. Williams, Barbara A. Israel, Graciela Mentz, and
     Zachary Rowe. 2006. "Discrimination, Symptoms of Depression, and Self-rated Health
     among African American Women in Detroit: Results from a Longitudinal Analysis."
     American Journal of Public Health 96 (7): 1265­70."
Schilt, Kristen, and Matthew Wiswall. 2008. "Before and after: Gender transitions, human
     capital, and workplace experiences." The BE Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 8(1):
     https://doi.org/10.2202/1935-1682.1862.
Schwegman, David. 2019. "Rental Market Discrimination Against Same-Sex Couples: Evidence
     From a Pairwise-Matched Email Correspondence Test." Housing Policy Debate 29 (2):
     250­72. https://doi.org/10.1080/10511482.2018.1512005.



                                               43
Sears, Brad, and Christy Mallory. 2014. "Employment Discrimination against LGBT People:
     Existence and Impact." In Gender Identity and Sexual Orientation Discrimination in the
     Workplace: A Practical Guide. University of California: The Williams Institute.
     http://www.escholarship.org/uc/item/9qs0n354.
Sharma, Rajiv, Arnab Mitra, and Miron Stano. 2015. "Insurance, Race/Ethnicity, and Sex in the
     Search for a New Physician." Economics Letters 137: 150­53.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.econlet.2015.11.005.
Sharma, Rajiv, Sarah Tinkler, Arnab Mitra, Sudeshna Pal, Raven Susu-Mago, and Miron Stano.
     2018. "State Medicaid Fees and Access to Primary Care Physicians." Health Economics 27
     (3): 629­36. https://doi.org/10.1002/hec.3591
Shin, Richard Q., Lance C. Smith, Jamie C. Welch, and Ijeoma Ezeofor. 2016. "Is Allison More
     Likely Than Lakisha to Receive a Callback From Counseling Professionals? A Racism
     Audit Study." The Counseling Psychologist 44 (8): 1187­1211.
     https://doi.org/10.1177/0011000016668814.
Small, Mario L., and Devah Pager. 2020. "Sociological Perspectives on Racial Discrimination."
     The Journal of Economic Perspectives 34 (2): 49-67.
Smedley, Brian D., Adrienne Y. Stith, and Alan R. Nelson. 2003. Unequal Treatment:
     Confronting Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Health Care. Washington, D.C.: National
     Academy Press.
Stepanikova, I. 2012. "Racial-ethnic biases, time pressure, and medical decisions." Journal of
     Health and Social Behavior 53 (3): 329-43.
Stewart, Brandon D., William von Hippel, and Gabriel A. Radvansky. 2009. "Age, Race, and
     Implicit Prejudice." Psychological Science 20 (2): 164­68. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-
     9280.2009.02274.x.
Stotzer, Rebecca L. 2009. "Violence against transgender people: A review of United States
     data." Aggression and Violent Behavior 14 (3): 170-179.
------. 2014. "Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Personnel Interactions with Transgender
     People in the United States: A Literature Review." Aggression and Violent Behavior 19 (3):
     263­77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.avb.2014.04.012.
Streed, Carl G., Ellen P. McCarthy, and Jennifer S. Haas. 2018. "Self-Reported Physical and
     Mental Health of Gender Nonconforming Transgender Adults in the United States." LGBT
     Health 5 (7): 443­48. https://doi.org/10.1089/lgbt.2017.0275.
Stroumsa, Daphna. 2014. "The State of Transgender Health Care: Policy, Law, and Medical
     Frameworks." American Journal of Public Health 104 (3): 31­38.
     https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2013.301789.
Su, Dejun, Jay A. Irwin, Christopher Fisher, Athena Ramos, Megan Kelley, Diana Ariss Rogel
     Mendoza, and Jason D. Coleman. 2016. "Mental Health Disparities Within the LGBT
     Population: A Comparison Between Transgender and Nontransgender Individuals."
     Transgender Health 1 (1): 12­20. https://doi.org/10.1089/trgh.2015.0001.
Teasdale, Anthony C., and Clara E. Hill. 2006. "Preference of Therapists-in-Training for Client
     Characteristics." Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, Training 43 (1): 111­18.
     https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-3204.43.1.111.
Tebbe, Elliott A., and Bonnie Moradi. 2016. "Suicide Risk in Trans Populations: An Application
     of Minority Stress Theory." Journal of Counseling Psychology 63 (5): 520­33.
     https://doi.org/10.1037/cou0000152.
Testa, Rylan J., Laura M. Sciacca, Florence Wang, Michael L. Hendricks, Peter Goldblum,



                                              44
     Judith Bradford, and Bruce Bongar. 2012. "Effects of Violence on Transgender People."
     Professional Psychology: Research and Practice 43 (5): 452­ 59.
     https://doi.org/10.1037/a0029604.
Testa, Rylan J., Matthew S. Michaels, Whitney Bliss, Megan L. Rogers, Kimberly F. Balsam,
     and Thomas Joiner. 2017. "Suicidal Ideation in Transgender People: Gender Minority
     Stress and Interpersonal Theory Factors." Journal of Abnormal Psychology 126 (1): 125­
     36. https://doi.org/10.1037/abn0000234.
Torales, Julio, Marcelo O. Higgins, João Mauricio Castaldelli-Maia, and Antonio Ventriglio.
     2020. "The Outbreak of COVID-19 Coronavirus and Its Impact on Global Mental Health."
     International Journal of Social Psychiatry, 3­6.
     https://doi.org/10.1177/0020764020915212.
Tryon, Georgiana. S. 1986. "Client and counselor characteristics and engagement in counseling."
     Journal of Counseling Psychology, 33, 471-474.
Turner, R. Jay. 2013. "Understanding Health Disparities: The Relevance of the Stress Process
     Model." Society and Mental Health 3 (3): 170­86.
Van Borm, Hannah, and Stijn Baert. 2018. "What drives hiring discrimination against
     transgenders?" International Journal of Manpower 39 (4): 581-599.
     https://doi.org/10.1108/IJM-09-2017-0233.
Van Borm, Hannah, Marlot Dhoop, Allien Van Acker, and Stijn Baert. 2020. "What does
     someone's gender identity signal to employers?" International Journal of Manpower 41 (6):
     753-777. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJM-03-2019-0164.
Van Ryn, Michelle, and Jane Burke. 2000. "The effect of patient race and socioeconomic status
     on physicians' perceptions of patients." Social Science & Medicine 50 (6): 813-828.
Van Ryn, Michelle, Diana J. Burgess, John F. Dovidio, Sean M. Phelan, Somnath Saha, Jennifer
     Malat, Joan M. Griffin, Steven S. Fu, and Sylvia Perry. 2011. "The Impact of Racism on
     Clinician Cognition, Behavior, and Clinical Decision Making." Du Bois Review 8 (1): 199­
     218.
Vega, William A., and Ruben G. Rumbaut. 1991. "Ethnic Minorities and Mental Health."
     Annual Review of Sociology 17: 351­83.
Wallace, Stephanie, James Nazroo, and Laia Bécares. 2016. "Cumulative Effect of Racial
     Discrimination on the Mental Health of Ethnic Minorities in the United Kingdom."
     American Journal of Public Health 106(7):1294­300.
Waters, Mily and Sue Yacka-Bible. 2017. "A Crisis of Hate: A Mid-Year Report on Lesbian,
     Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, and Queer Hate Violence and Homocides." Center for Victim
     Research Repository. http://avp.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/08/NCAVP-A-Crisis-of-
     Hate-Final.pdf.
Werbeck, Anna, Ansgar Wübker, and Nicolas R. Ziebarth. 2019. "Cream Skimming by Health
     Care Providers and Inequality in Health Care Access: Evidence from a Randomized Field
     Experiment." Working Paper. December: 1­42.
Williams, David R., Risa Lavizzo-Mourey, and Rueben C. Warren. 1994. "The concept of race
     and health status in America." Public Health Reports 109 (1): 26-41.
     http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=1402239.
Williams, David R., Hector M. Gonzalez, Harold Neighbors, Randolph Nesse, Jamie Abelson,
     Julie Sweetman, and James S. Jackson. 2007. "Prevalence and Distribution of Major
     Depressive Disorder in African Americans, Caribbean Blacks, and Non-Hispanic Whites:
     Results from the National Survey of American Life." Archives of General Psychiatry 64



                                              45
     (3): 305­15.
Williams, David R., and Selina A. Mohammed. 2009. "Discrimination and Racial Disparities in
     Health: Evidence and Needed Research." Journal of Behavioral Medicine 32 (1): 20­47.
Williams, David R. 2018. "Stress and the Mental Health of Populations of Color: Advancing our
     Understanding of Race-related Stressors." Journal of Health and Social Behavior 59 (4):
     466-486.
Wisniewski, Janna M., and Brigham Walker. "Association of Simulated Patient Race/Ethnicity
     With Scheduling of Primary Care Appointments." JAMA Network Open, 3(1), pp.
     e19200010-e1920010.




                                             46
                       Figure 1: Structure of the Emails to MHPs
1.) [EMAIL SUBJECT LINE] Legend: ( ): denotes motivating verbiage, not exact phrasing
Hi,/Hello,                              [ ]: denotes randomized input
       My name is 2) [NAME]. (I'm contacting you because) 3) [MENTAL HEALTH
CONCERN] (and would like to talk to a therapist). If transgender or non-binary: I am
4) [GENDER IDENTITY] and am looking for a therapist who is trans-friendly. 5)
[APPOINTMENT REQUEST].
6) [VALEDICTION]
2) [NAME]



             Figure 2: Randomized Components of the Emails to MHPs
    1) [EMAIL SUBJECT LINE]            2) [NAME]
    -Seeking therapy                                    Afr.-Am.        Hispanic           White
    -Looking for a therapist                                  Male-Coded First Names
    -Therapy inquiry                                    Darius          Alejandro          Brian
                                                        DeShawn         Luis               Kevin
    3) [MENTAL HEALTH CONCERN]
    -I've been feeling anxious lately.
                                                             Female-Coded First Names
    -I've been feeling stressed all the time.
                                                        Ebony           Mariana            Amanda
    -I think I might be depressed.
                                                        Lakeisha        Valentina          Heather
    4) [GENDER IDENTITY]
    -a transgender woman                                               Last Names
    -a transgender man                                  Washington Hernandez               Anderson
    -non-binary                                         Jefferson       Garcia            Thompson

    5) [APPOINTMENT REQUEST]
    -Can we set up an appointment?              -When could I see you?

    6) [VALEDICTION]
    -Sincerely,       -Thanks,      -Best,     -[None]
   Notes: Ethnic and race-specific first names are from Barlow and Lahey (2018), Gaddis (2017).




                                                     47
                                            Table 1: Descriptive Statistics of Outcomes
                                              Binary Coding                    Gender Identity                 Race and Ethnicity
                                                                                        Trans or                    African
  Outcome             Description             Default   Alt.    Overall    Cisgender
                                                                                       Non-Binary
                                                                                                         White
                                                                                                                  American
                                                                                                                               Hispanic

Appointment        The MHP explicitly
Offer
                   offers an
                   appointment.
                                                +       +       33.3%        33.2%         33.4%        33.4%        32.4%        34.0%

Call or            The MHP offers to
                   speak on the phone
Consultation       but does not offer           +       +       23.3%        27.3%         19.6%        24.6%        23.2%        20.5%
Offer              an appointment.
                   The MHP requests
                   additional
Screening
Question
                   information but
                   does not offer an
                                                -       +       6.0%         7.1%           5.0%         5.9%         7.0%         5.0%
                   appointment.
                   The MHP gives a
                   referral but does not
Referral           offer an                     -       +       4.8%         3.8%           5.8%         4.9%         5.9%         3.2%
                   appointment.
                   The MHP offers to
Waitlist           put the prospective
                   patient on a waitlist.
                                                -        -      2.1%         1.3%           2.9%         2.1%         0.7%         0.4%
                   The MHP rejects
                   the prospective
Rejection          patient and does not
                   offer an alternative
                                                -        -      6.0%         6.5%           5.6%         5.8%         6.6%         5.5%
                   provider.
                   No response from
No Response        the MHP within one
                   week.
                                                -        -      24.5%        20.9%         27.6%        23.0%        24.0%        28.2%

                                                        N       1,000         480            520          500          270          230
Notes: These categorizations are mutually exclusive. For example, a response is coded as an appointment offer even if a referral is also
provided. Our default binary coding treats appointment offer and call or consultation offer as the only positive outcomes, while our
alternative binary coding also considers screening questions and referrals as positive outcomes.




                                                                    48
                   Table 2. Positive Response Rates by Gender Identity
Response Rates by Trans/Cis Status:     Positive     Negative    Total
Cisgender                             60.6% (291) 39.4% (189)    480
Transgender or non-binary             52.8% (275) 47.2% (245)    520
Total                                 56.6% (566) 43.4% (434) 1,000

Test of independence, p-value                     0.013

Response Rates by Gender Identity:
Cisgender men                                 61.6% (191)        38.4% (119)        310
Cisgender women                               58.8% (100)        41.2% (70)         170
Transgender men                                50.7% (71)        49.3% (69)         140
Transgender women                              55.8% (95)        44.2% (75)         170
Non-binary                                    51.9% (109)        48.1% (101)        210

                                                                                   Trans     Trans       Non-
Tests of independence, p-values                  Cis men         Cis women
                                                                                   men       women       binary
Cisgender men                                      ...
Cisgender women                                   0.551               ...
Transgender men                                   0.030              0.151          ...
Transgender women                                 0.222              0.585         0.365       ...
Non-binary                                        0.028              0.179         0.829      0.441         ...
Notes: Responses are coded as positive if the MHP's response was an appointment offer or a call or consultation
offer. P-values come from a t-test (two-sided).




                   Table 3. Positive Response Rates by Race or Ethnicity
                                            Positive       Negative                            Total
         White                            58.0% (290)    42.0% (210)                            500
         African American                 55.5% (150)    45.5% (120)                            270
         Hispanic                         54.8% (126)    45.2% (104)                            230
         Total                            56.6% (566)    43.4% (434)                           1,000

         Tests of independence, p-values               White         African American Hispanic
         White                                          ...                 ...          ...
         African American                              0.514                ...          ...
         Hispanic                                      0.415               0.862         ...
         Notes: Responses are coded as positive if the MHP's response was an appointment offer or a
         call or consultation offer. P-values come from a t-test (two-sided).




                                                       49
 Table 4. Positive Response by Race or Ethnicity, for Cisgender and Transgender or
                             Non-Binary Patients Separately
Response rates for cisgender only:              Positive     Negative       Total
White                                         61.5% (160) 38.5% (100)       260
African American                              60.7% (85)    39.3% (55)      140
Hispanic                                      57.5% (46)    42.5% (34)       80
Total                                         60.6% (291) 39.4% (189)       480

                                                                              African
Test of independence, p-values
                                                             White           American           Hispanic
White                                                         ...               ...                ...
African American                                             0.872              ...                ...
Hispanic                                                     0.519             0.642               ...

Response rates for transgender or non-binary only:
White                                           54.2% (130)                47.8% (110)               240
African American                                50.0% (65)                  50.0% (65)               130
Hispanic                                        53.3% (80)                  46.7% (70)               150
Total                                           52.9% (275)                47.1% (245)               520

                                                                              African
Test of independence, p-values
                                                             White           American           Hispanic
White                                                         ...               ...                ...
African American                                             0.445              ...                ...
Hispanic                                                     0.873             0.579               ...

Transgender or non-binary vs. Cisgender: Tests of independence, p-values
                                                                Cisgender
                                                Cisgender        African                       Cisgender
                                                   white        American                       Hispanic
Transgender or non-binary white                    0.096           ...                            ...
Transgender or non-binary African American         0.030          0.077                           ...
Transgender or non-binary Hispanic                 0.105           ...                           0.547
Notes: Responses are coded as positive if the MHP's response was an appointment offer or a call or
consultation offer. P-values come for a t-test (two-sided).




                                                    50
   Table 5: Differences in Positive Response Rates, Results for Aggregated Groups and by
                                    Mental Health Concern
                                         (1)         (2)         (3)       (4)       (5)

Transgender or non-binary                      - .07446**       -.0657**        -.0334        -.0084         .0123
                                                  (.0317)        (.0320)       (.0429)       (.0429)        (.0426)

African American                                 - .0245          -.0226      -.1091**      -.1492**      -.1333***
                                                 (.0374)         (.0374)       (.0432)       (.0419)        (.0404)

Hispanic                                          -.0195          -.0278        -.0209      -.0911*        -.1302**
                                                 (.0398)         (.0399)       (.0526)      (.0465)         (.0495)

Depression                                          ...          - .0201        .0450       .1366**        .1459**
                                                                 (.0385)       (.0502)       (.0587)        (.0576)

Anxiety                                             ...         -.1040**        -.0011        .0139          .0111
                                                                 (.0449)       (.0524)       (.0527)        (.0527)

State fixed effects:                                                              X             X             X
Week-sent fixed effects:                                                                        X             X
Day-of-the-week-sent fixed effects:                                                                           X
N                                                1,000           1,000         1,000         1,000          1,000
Adjusted R2                                      0.0063          0.0076        0.0808        0.0986         0.1070
Notes: Regression estimates based on the linear probability model in equation (1). For comparison, the mean
positive response rate for cisgender whites with stress (the comparison group) is 61.5%. Standard errors, clustered at
the patient level, in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                          51
          Table 6: Differences in Positive Response Rates, Results by Gender Identity
                                                 (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)

        Transgender or non-binary                        .0123           ...           ...           ...
                                                        (.0426)
            ...Binary transgender                          ...         .0289           ...           ...
                                                                      (.0472)
                 ...Transgender women                      ...           ...         .0004         .0096
                                                                                    (.0624)       (.0618)
                 ...Transgender men                        ...           ...        -.0200         -.0158
                                                                                    (.0660)       (.0665)
             ...Non-binary                                 ...         -.0272       -.0607           ...
                                                                      (.0690)       (.0706)
                 ...Non-binary                             ...           ...           ...         -.0100
                 feminine first name                                                              (.0873)
                 ...Non-binary                             ...           ...           ...         -.0892
                 masculine first name                                                             (.0891)
        Cisgender women                                    ...           ...       -.1082**      -.1086**
                                                                                    (.0527)       (.0534)
        African American                               -.1333** -.1355** -.1505*** -.1459**
                                                        (.0404)  (.0399)   (.0412)  (.0422)
        Hispanic                                       -.1302** -.1309**           -.1183**      -.1262**
                                                        (.0495)  (.0509)            (.0451)       (.0454)

        N                                                1,000        1,000          1,000        1,000
        Adjusted R2                                      0.1070       0.1076        0.1096        0.1100
Notes: All regressions include the controls in column (5) of Table 5: mental health concern (depression and anxiety
relative to the excluded category of stress), state fixed effects, day-of-the-week-sent fixed effects, and week-sent
fixed effects. Column (1) repeats the results from column (5) in Table 5 for ease of interpretation. For comparison,
the mean positive response rate for the excluded group (cisgender white men) is 66.7%. Standard errors, clustered at
the patient level, in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                        52
Table 7: Differences in Positive Response Rates, Intersectional Results by Trans/Cisgender
                                 Status and Race/Ethnicity
                                                          (1)       (2)

                      Transgender or non-binary                         .0123           ...
                                                                       (.0426)
                           ...and white                                   ...        .0998*
                                                                                     (.0574)
                           ...and African American                        ...       -.1333**
                                                                                     (.0613)
                           ...and Hispanic                                ...         -.1025
                                                                                     (.0625)
                      Cisgender

                           ...and African American                        ...         -.0241
                                                                                     (.0659)
                           ...and Hispanic                                ...         -.0321
                                                                                     (.0673)
                      All African American                            -.1333**          ...
                                                                       (.0404)
                      All Hispanic                                    -.1302**          ...
                                                                       (.0495)

                      N                                                 1,000        1,000
                      Adjusted R2                                       0.1070       0.1100
Notes: All regressions include the controls in column (5) of Table 5: mental health concern (depression and anxiety
relative to the excluded category of stress), state fixed effects, day-of-the-week-sent fixed effects, and week-sent
fixed effects. Column (1) repeats the results from column (5) in Table 5 for ease of interpretation. For comparison,
the mean positive response rate for the excluded group (cisgender whites) is 61.5%. Standard errors, clustered at the
patient level, in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                         53
Table 8: Differences in Positive Response Rates, Intersectional Results by Gender Identity
                                    and Race/Ethnicity
                                                           (1)
                                Transgender women
                                   ...and white                         .1689**
                                                                         (.0743)
                                    ...and African American             -.0760
                                                                        (.0993)
                                    ...and Hispanic                    -.3701***
                                                                         (.0936)
                                Transgender men
                                   ...and white                         .2105**
                                                                         (.0962)
                                    ...and African American             -.1239
                                                                        (.0978)
                                    ...and Hispanic                     -.0819
                                                                        (.1025)
                                Non-binary
                                  ...and white                          -.0017
                                                                        (.0906)
                                    ...and African American            -.4913***
                                                                         (.1082)
                                    ...and Hispanic                     -.1380*
                                                                        (.0808)
                                Cisgender
                                   ...and African American               .0167
                                                                        (.0712)
                                    ...and Hispanic                      .0228.
                                                                        (.0709)

                                N                                         1,000
                                Adjusted R2                              0.1163
Notes: All regressions include the controls in column (5) of Table 5: mental health concern (depression and anxiety
relative to the excluded category of stress), state fixed effects, day-of-the-week-sent fixed effects, and week-sent
fixed effects. For comparison, the mean positive response rate for the excluded group (cisgender whites) is 61.5%.
Standard errors, clustered at the patient level, in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                         54
               Table 9: Testing for the Sources or Moderators of Discrimination
Interaction Variable         Tests For...          Hypothesis
MHP Characteristics:
MHP gender, race, or         MHP-patient           MHPs of a matching group discriminate
ethnicity (measured by       demographic           less often against that group
name and profile photo)      matches               Concordances ("matches") in race,
                             (homophily).          ethnicity, or gender has been shown to
                                                   reduce discrimination (Blanchard, Nayar,
                                                   and Lurie 2007; Cooper et al. 2003;
                                                   Giulietti, Tonin, and Vlassopoulos 2019;
                                                   LaVeist, Rolley, and Diala 2003; Parsons
                                                   et al. 2011; Price and Wolfers 2010; Saha
                                                   et al. 1999).
MHP age (imperfectly         Age differences in    Older MHPs, all else constant, may hold
measured through             discrimination.       more prejudice, as is the case for older
software that processes                            people in general (e.g., Gonsalkorale,
photos)                                            Sherman, and Klauer, 2009; Stewart, von
                                                   Hippel, and Radvansky, 2009).
MHP experience and           If more experienced More experienced MHPs may experience
training                     or educated MHPs      more demand or may otherwise be more
                             are more selective.   selective, which could increase
                                                   discrimination. However, additional
                                                   training or education could instead be
                                                   associated with less discrimination.
MHP specialization in        If these specialists  MHPs that specialize in particular
LGBTQ+/trans, race, of       are more likely to    demographic groups' issues will respond
ethnicity issues             accept patients from much more positively to appointment
                             their target groups.  requests from those groups.
MHP's accepted insurance If MHPs that accept MHPs that do not accept Medicaid or
types and fee for service    certain types or      have higher fees for service are more
                             amounts of payment likely to discrimination (especially
                             discriminate          statistically discriminate based on
                             differently.          assumed insurance status or ability to pay)

Geographically-measured variables:
Attitudes on              Taste-based               Discrimination will be higher in more
(LGBTQ+/Race/Ethnicity) discrimination.             bigoted areas if discrimination is taste-
by Census Tract from                                based.
General Social Survey
State transgender rights  If discrimination         Anti-(pro-)discrimination laws are
laws (e.g., anti-         laws affect               associated with less (more)
discrimination laws,      discrimination            discrimination.
religious freedom laws,   against TNB
conversion therapy bans,  individuals.
"bathroom bills")



                                               55
Interaction Variable               Tests For...                Hypothesis
COVID-19 intensity                                             COVID-19 increases demand for
measured by infection or           Increased MHPs'             appointments through adverse impacts on
mortality rates                    market power /              mental health. Shortages may result in
                                   scarcity affects            increased discrimination, as found in
COVID-19 shelter-in-               discrimination.             some of the research (Baert et al. 2015;
place ordinances                                               Carlsson, Fumarco, and Rooth 2018; Dahl
                                                               and Knepper 2020; Kroft, Notowidigdo,
                                                               and Lange 2013).
Implicit Association Test          Implicit                    Discrimination will be higher when there
Scores for Race-IAT and            discrimination.             is more implicit bias against that group in
Trans-IAT by County                                            that county.
% Race/Ethnicity by ZIP            Contact hypothesis          Discrimination is lower with exposure.
Code or % LGBTQ+ by                (Allport 1954).             So, greater contact reduces discrimination
county                                                         (Charles and Guryan 2008; Giulietti,
                                                               Tonin, and Vlassopoulos 2019).
MHPs per capita (within            If MHP shortages            Discrimination will increase during a
10 miles of the patient's          affect                      shortage (fewer MHPs per capita), as
ZIP)                               discrimination.             found in some of the literature (Baert et al.
                                                               2015; Carlsson, Fumarco, and Rooth
                                                               2018; Dahl and Knepper 2020; Kroft,
                                                               Notowidigdo, and Lange 2013).

Prospective patient characteristic:
Insurance status 25          Statistical                       (i) if MHPs assume minorities are more
                             discrimination.                   likely to have Medicaid, they will face
                                                               more discrimination when they do not
                                                               disclose insurance, as MHPs will assume
                                                               they are more likely to have Medicaid;
                                                               (ii) if MHPs assume minorities are more
                                                               likely to have Medicaid, they will face
                                                               less discrimination when disclosing
                                                               private insurance than when they do not
                                                               disclose their insurance status.




25
  In the next wave of the experiment, we will randomize on five insurance statuses: no mention of insurance status,
self-pay with no reference to a sliding scale, self-pay with a reference to paying through a sliding scale, Medicaid,
and private insurance.


                                                         56
                        Appendix A ­ Robustness Checks
  Table A1: Robustness Test--Differences in Positive Response Rates, Results for
Aggregated Groups and by Mental Health Concern (Probit Model Marginal Effects)
                                                   Linear    Probit Average
                                                Probability     Marginal
                                                   Model        Effects
                                                     (1)           (2)

                Transgender or non-binary                          .0123               .0112
                                                                  (.0426)             (.0442)

                African American                                 -.1333**           -.1417**
                                                                  (.0404)            (.0404)

                Hispanic                                         -.1302**           -.1280**
                                                                  (.0495)            (.0485)

                Depression                                        .1459**            .1515**
                                                                   (.0576)            (.0572)

                Anxiety                                            .0111               .0169
                                                                  (.0527)             (.0515)

                N                                                 1,000                1,000
                Adjusted R2                                       0.0986              0.0822
Notes. Regression estimates from the specification shown in column (5) of Table 5, where we include state, week-
sent, and day-of-the-week sent fixed effects. For comparison, the mean positive response rate for cisgender whites
with stress (the comparison group) is 61.5%. Standard errors, clustered at the patient level and average marginal
effects standard errors calculated via delta method, both in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                        57
            Table A2. Alternative Positive Response Rates by Gender Identity
Response Rates by Trans/Cis Status:   Positive      Negative    Total
Cisgender                           71.3% (342) 28.7% (138)      480
Transgender or non-binary           63.1% (328) 36.9% (192)      520
Total                               67.0% (670) 33.0% (330)     1,000

Test of independence, p-value                      0.006

Response Rates by Gender Identity:
Cisgender men                                  71.9% (223)         28.1% (87)          310
Cisgender women                                70.0% (119)         30.0% (51)          170
Transgender men                                 58.6% (82)         41.4% (58)          140
Transgender women                              67.1% (114)         32.9% (56)          170
Non-binary                                     62.9% (132)         37.1% (78)          210

                                                                                      Trans      Trans       Non-
Tests of independence, p-values                   Cis men          Cis women
                                                                                      men        women       binary
Cisgender men                                       ...
Cisgender women                                    0.655               ...
Transgender men                                    0.005              0.036            ...
Transgender women                                  0.265              0.561           0.124        ...
Non-binary                                         0.029              0.145           0.422       0.395       ...
Notes: Our alternative positive response rate codes responses as positive if the MHP's response was an appointment
offer, call or consultation offer, screening questions, or referral. P-values come from a t-test (two-sided).


             Table A3. Alternative Positive Response Rates by Race or Ethnicity
                                            Positive        Negative       Total
          White                           68.6% (343)     31.4% (157)       500
          African American                67.8% (183)     32.2% (87)        270
          Hispanic                        62.6% (144)     37.4% (86)        230
          Total                           67.0% (670)    33.0% (330)       1,000

          Tests of independence, p-values               White          African American Hispanic
          White                                          ...                  ...          ...
          African American                              0.815                 ...          ...
          Hispanic                                      0.111                0.227         ...
          Notes: Our alternative positive response rate codes responses as positive if the MHP's
          response was an appointment offer, call or consultation offer, screening questions, or referral.
          P-values come from a t-test (two-sided).




                                                         58
 Table A4. Alternative Positive Response by Race or Ethnicity, for Cisgender and
                  Transgender or Non-Binary Patients Separately
Response rates for cisgender only:            Positive     Negative       Total
White                                       72.7% (189) 27.3% (71)         260
African American                            72.9% (102) 27.1% (38)         140
Hispanic                                    63.8% (51)    36.2% (29)        80
Total                                       67.0% (670) 33.0% (330)        480

                                                                                African
Test of independence, p-values
                                                               White           American          Hispanic
White                                                           ...               ...               ...
African American                                               0.972              ...               ...
Hispanic                                                       0.126             0.159              ...

Response rates for transgender or non-binary only:
White                                          64.2% (154)                    35.8% (86)            240
African American                               62.3% (81)                     37.7% (49)            130
Hispanic                                       62.0% (93)                     38.0% (57)            150
Total                                                                                               520

                                                                                African
Test of independence, p-values
                                                               White           American          Hispanic
White                                                           ...               ...               ...
African American                                               0.724              ...               ...
Hispanic                                                       0.667             0.958              ...

Transgender or non-binary vs. Cisgender - Tests of independence, p-values
                                                              Cisgender
                                                Cisgender      African                          Cisgender
                                                  white       American                          Hispanic
Transgender or non-binary white                   0.040           ...                              ...
Transgender or non-binary African American        0.036          0.064                             ...
Transgender or non-binary Hispanic                0.024           ...                             0.795
Notes: Our alternative positive response rate codes responses as positive if the MHP's response was an
appointment offer, call or consultation offer, screening questions, or referral. P-values come from a t-test
(two-sided).




                                                     59
    Table A5: Differences in Alternative Positive Response Rates, Results for Aggregated
                           Groups and by Mental Health Concern
                                         (1)         (2)       (3)         (4)        (5)

Transgender or non-binary                       -.0764**        -.0656*        -.0378        -.0328         -.0178
                                                 (.0370)        (.0357)       (.0386)       (.0406)        (.0428)

African American                                  -.0081          -.0107      -.0617*      -.0847**       -.0753**
                                                 (.0408)         (.0404)      (.0363)       (.0366)        (.0374)

Hispanic                                          -.0467          -.0565       -.0851       -.1086*       -.1345**
                                                 (.0477)         (.0459)      (.0543)       (.0577)        (.0623)

Depression                                          ...           .0266        . 0695       .1679**        .1688**
                                                                 (.0382)      (.0487)        (.0620)        (.0636)

Anxiety                                             ...           -.0585       .0123         . 0557         .0494
                                                                 (.0530)      (.0570)       (.0605)        (.0604)

State fixed effects:                                                              X             X             X
Week-sent fixed effects:                                                                        X             X
Day-of-the-week-sent fixed effects:                                                                           X
N                                                1,000           1,000         1,000         1,000          1,000
Adjusted R2                                      0.0091          0.0143        0.0777        0.0900         0.1070
Notes: Our alternative positive response rate codes responses as positive if the MHP's response was an appointment
offer, call or consultation offer, screening questions, or referral. Regression estimates are based on the linear
probability model in equation (1). For comparison, the mean alternative positive response rate for the excluded
group (cisgender whites with stress) is 72.7%. Standard errors, clustered at the patient level, in parentheses. * p <
0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                          60
 Table A6: Differences in Alternative Positive Response Rates, Results by Gender Identity
                                                (1)      (2)       (3)       (4)

          Transgender or non-binary                           -.0178          ...          ...          ...
                                                             (.0428)
              ...Binary transgender                             ...         -.0140         ...          ...
                                                                           (.0450)
                   ...Transgender women                         ...           ...        .0381        .0485
                                                                                        (.0697)      (.0712)
                   ...Transgender men                           ...           ...       -.0797        -.0751
                                                                                        (.0610)      (.0625)
                ...Non-binary                                   ...         -.0267      -.0285          ...
                                                                           (.0812)      (.0814)
                   ...Non-binary                                ...           ...          ...        -.0594
                   feminine first name                                                               (.0982)
                   ...Non-binary                                ...           ...          ...        .0266
                   masculine first name                                                              (.1137)
          Cisgender women                                       ...           ...       -.0157        -.0186
                                                                                        (.0640)      (.0534)
          African American                                  -.0753** -.0758** -.0608                  -.0559
                                                             (.0374)  (.0368) (.0423)                (.0435)
          Hispanic                                          -.1345** -.1347** -.1046* -.1132**
                                                             (.0623)  (.0626) (.0565) (.0568)

          N                                                  1,000         1,000         1,000        1,000
          Adjusted R2                                        0.1076        0.0944       0.0964        0.0969
Notes: Our alternative positive response rate codes responses as positive if the MHP's response was an appointment
offer, call or consultation offer, screening questions, or referral. All regressions include the controls in column (5) of
Table 5: mental health concern (depression, anxiety, stress), state fixed effects, day of the week sent fixed effects,
and week sent fixed effects. Column (1) repeats the results from column (5) in Table 5a for ease of interpretation.
For comparison, the mean alternative positive response rate for the excluded group (cisgender men white) is 73.3%.
Standard errors, clustered at the patient level, in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                           61
   Table A7: Differences in Alternative Positive Response Rates, Intersectional Results by
                        Trans/Cisgender Status and Race/Ethnicity
                                                          (1)        (2)

                       Transgender or Non-binary                           -.0178          ...
                                                                          (.0428)
                           ...and white                                      ...         . 0840
                                                                                        (.0668)
                           ...and African American                           ...        -.0983*
                                                                                        (.0570)
                           ...Hispanic                                       ...       -.1500**
                                                                                        (.0748)
                       Cisgender

                           ...and African American                           ...         .0401
                                                                                        (.0706)
                           ...Hispanic                                       ...         .0007
                                                                                        (.0781)
                       All African American                              -.0753**          ...
                                                                          (.0374)
                       All Hispanic                                      -.1345**          ...
                                                                          (.0623)

                       N                                                   1,000         1,000
                       Adjusted R2                                         0.1076        0.0986
Notes: Our alternative positive response rate codes responses as positive if the MHP's response was an appointment
offer, call or consultation offer, screening questions, or referral. All regressions include the controls in column (5) of
Table 5a: mental health concern (depression, anxiety, stress), state fixed effects, day of the week sent fixed effects,
and week sent fixed effects. Column (1) repeats the results from column (5) in Table 5 for ease of interpretation. For
comparison, the mean alternative positive response rate for the excluded group (cisgender whites) is 72.7%.
Standard errors, clustered at the patient level, in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                           62
   Table A8: Differences in Alternative Positive Response Rates, Intersectional Results by
                            Gender Identity and Race/Ethnicity
                                                                             (1)
                                 Transgender Women
                                    ...and white                          .1796**
                                                                           (.0802)
                                     ...and African American               -.0901
                                                                          (.1228)
                                     ...Hispanic                          -.2362*
                                                                          (.1259)
                                 Transgender Men
                                    ...and white                           .0806
                                                                          (.1267)
                                     ...and African American               -.0802
                                                                          (.0668)
                                     ...Hispanic                         -.2360**
                                                                          (.1184)
                                 Non-binary
                                    ...and white                           -.0203
                                                                          (.1031)
                                     ...and African American             -.3426**
                                                                          (.1324)
                                     ...Hispanic                           -.1058
                                                                          (.1051)
                                 Cisgender
                                    ...and African American                .0551
                                                                          (.0788)
                                     ...Hispanic                           .0414
                                                                          (.0803)

                                 N                                         1,000
                                 Adjusted R2                               0.1047
Notes: For comparison, the mean alternative positive response rate for the excluded group (cisgender whites) is
72.7%. See notes to Table A6. Standard errors, clustered at the patient level, in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05,
*** p < 0.01.




                                                          63
                                   Appendix B: Ethical Considerations

         Compared to laboratory experiments (where there is informed consent) and studies that

use observational data, field experiments raise unique ethical concerns regarding deception and

the time costs imposed on participants. This study requires random assignment and deception to

obtain an unbiased estimate of discrimination devoid of any observational effects or social

desirability bias (Grohs, Adams, and Knill 2016). However, per our Institutional Review Board-

approved protocol, 26 we took several steps to reduce any study participants' risk.

         The primary risk to the participants is the time cost imposed on them. However,

responding to these inquiries is a normal part of their business activity. Reading and responding

to an inquiry takes between one and four minutes. Thus, this cost is minimal. We do not book

any appointments.

         Furthermore, to ensure that we minimize risks to respondents' anonymity, we only collect

information that is (1) essential to the study and (2) willingly placed online by study participants.

We do not collect the full addresses of the MHPs, instead collecting ZIP codes of the MHPs. 27

Per IRB guidelines, no identifiable individual-level information will be released. Descriptive

statistics will be aggregated at least to the ZIP code level.




26
   This project was approved by Tulane University's Institutional Review Board (Ref # 2019-1122) and it was pre-
registered at the American Economic Association's registry for randomized controlled trials (RCT ID: AEARCTR-
0006560).
27
   In Table 9 we note that we will use General Social Survey data at the Census Tract level. To merge this data into
our anonymized MHP data, while will provide ZIP codes only, we will use the ZIP code to Census Tract HUD-
crosswalk. See https://www.huduser.gov/portal/datasets/usps_crosswalk.html (accessed November.18, 2020).


                                                         64
