                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  WHY IS END-OF-LIFE SPENDING SO HIGH? EVIDENCE FROM CANCER PATIENTS

                                         Dan Zeltzer
                                         Liran Einav
                                       Amy Finkelstein
                                          Tzvi Shir
                                     Salomon M. Stemmer
                                        Ran D. Balicer

                                      Working Paper 28162
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28162


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020




We thank seminar and conference participants at Princeton University, University of
Pennsylvania, the American Society of Health Economists meeting, and the World Congress of
the Econometric Society. Dan Zeltzer acknowledges financial support from the Pinhas Sapir
Center for Development. Avichai Chasid, Michael Leshchinsky, and Joseph Rashba provided
excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Dan Zeltzer, Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, Tzvi Shir, Salomon M. Stemmer, and Ran
D. Balicer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Why is End-of-Life Spending So High? Evidence from Cancer Patients
Dan Zeltzer, Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, Tzvi Shir, Salomon M. Stemmer, and Ran D.
Balicer
NBER Working Paper No. 28162
December 2020
JEL No. I10,J17

                                         ABSTRACT

The concentration of healthcare spending at the end of life is widely documented but poorly
understood. To gain insight, we focus on patients newly diagnosed with cancer. They display the
familiar pattern: even among cancer patients with similar initial prognoses, monthly spending in
the year post diagnosis is over twice as high for those who die within the year than those who
survive. This elevated spending on decedents is almost entirely driven by higher inpatient
spending, particularly low-intensity admissions, which rise as the prognosis deteriorates.
However, even for patients with very poor prognoses at the time of admission, most low-intensity
admissions do not result in death, making it difficult to target spending reductions. We also find
that among patients with the same cancer type and initial prognosis, end-of-life spending is
substantially more elevated for younger patients compared to older patients, suggesting that
treatment decisions are not exclusively present-focused. Taken together, these results provide a
richer understanding of the sources of high end-of-life spending, without revealing any natural
"remedies."

Dan Zeltzer                                     Tzvi Shir
The Eitan Berglas School of Economics           Clalit Health Services
Tel Aviv University                             101 Arlozorov St.
P.O.Box 39040                                   Tel Aviv
Tel Aviv 6997801                                Israel
Israel                                          tzvi@agamonhealth.com
dzeltzer@tauex.tau.ac.il
                                                Salomon M. Stemmer
Liran Einav                                     Rabin Medical Center
Stanford University                             Petach Tiqwa
Department of Economics                         Israel
579 Jane Stanford Way                           shtemers@clalit.org.il
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER                                        Ran D. Balicer
leinav@stanford.edu                             Department of Epidemiology
                                                Faculty of Health Sciences
Amy Finkelstein                                 Ben Gurion University
Department of Economics, E52-442                Beersheba
MIT                                             Israel
50 Memorial Drive                               rbalicer@clalit.org.il
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
afink@mit.edu
1     Introduction

Medical spending is highly concentrated at the end of life. A widely cited fact is that, in the
United States, only 5% of Medicare beneficiaries die each year, but one-quarter of Medicare
spending occurs in the last 12 months of life (Riley and Lubitz, 2010). This is frequently
touted as indicative of obvious waste and inefficiency: we spend a large share of healthcare
dollars on individuals certain to die within a short period (e.g., Emanuel and Emanuel, 1994;
Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, 1999).
    In this paper, we ask: why is spending concentrated at the end of life? Our approach
is motivated by existing work that has already ruled out two natural hypotheses. One
is that high end-of-life spending reflects idiosyncratic inefficiencies embodied in the specific
institutional features of the US healthcare system. This is not the case. Healthcare spending
is similarly--or more--concentrated at the end of life in other OECD countries (French et
al., 2017). Another is that the focus on high end-of-life spending is misguided due to classic
hindsight bias (Fischhoff, 1975): we spend more on the sick, and the sick are more likely to
die, which together accounts for the concentration of spending on those who die. While this
qualitative statement is (naturally) true, it cannot explain the quantitative patterns: even
conditioning on initial health, spending on decedents is still over twice as high as that on
survivors (Einav et al., 2018).
    To shed light on the sources of elevated spending on decedents compared to ex-ante similar
individuals who survive, we focus our analysis on a specific set of individuals: patients newly
diagnosed with cancer. Focusing on a specific disease provides us with a relatively more
homogeneous set of conditions and treatment options, thereby allowing us to dig deeper
into the nature of spending on decedents compared to survivors, albeit on a subset of the
population. Patterns of end-of-life spending for cancer patients are broadly similar to those
in the general population: spending is elevated at the end of life across a range of OECD
countries (Bekelman et al., 2016; French et al., 2017) and, as we will show, this elevated


                                               2
end-of-life spending occurs even across patients with the same initial mortality prognosis
when the cancer is detected.
   Cancer is a particularly useful disease to focus on for several reasons. First, it is com-
mon and expensive. Cancer is the second-leading cause of death in developed countries--
accounting for over one-fifth of deaths--and treatment options are resource-intensive (Emanuel
et al., 2002; Heron, 2013; Bekelman et al., 2016). Second, cancer has a clear diagnosis date,
after which major spending decisions occur over a relatively short period. This makes it
easier to analyze the course of spending on cancer than on other diseases, such as hyperten-
sion, for which the diagnosis date and treatment period are less clearly defined. Third, the
treatment options for cancer can be classified into a few, discrete treatment options which
patients may move between (e.g. surgery, outpatient chemotherapy, radiotherapy, main-
tenance care); this allows us to examine how treatment decisions change as the mortality
prognosis evolves. Fourth, cancer unfortunately affects a wide age range, which allows us to
compare treatment patterns between younger and older individuals who have very different
residual life expectancy conditional on successful treatment.
   We analyze detailed and comprehensive longitudinal medical data covering about half of
the Israeli population from 2000-2016. The data come from Clalit Health Services, the largest
of four HMOs in Israel that provide universal, tax-funded health insurance to all residents.
The data include electronic medical records (EMR) as well as claims data. They therefore
permit a richer set of health measures than are available in the US Medicare claims data, in
which end-of-life spending has been extensively analyzed (Barnato et al., 2004; Nicholas et
al., 2011; Morden et al., 2012; Teno et al., 2013; Einav et al., 2018). In addition, the data
allow us to analyze end-of-life spending patterns over the entire age range of patients, rather
than limiting ourselves to the elderly.
   Our primary focus is on 160,000 adults (ages 25 and older) who were newly diagnosed
with cancer from 2001 through 2013. These cancer patients have a 20% annual mortality
rate, much higher than the 1.2% annual mortality rate in our overall adult population. For


                                              3
each individual in the data, we generate a prediction of the probability that they will die
in the year following their diagnosis; we refer to this as the patient's "initial prognosis."
We also generate a separate mortality prediction following each major clinical event (such
as a hospital admission or an outpatient chemotherapy spell) during the course of their
treatment in the first year post diagnosis; we refer to these predictions as the patient's
"current prognoses." To generate these prognoses, we apply standard machine learning
techniques to a rich dataset with hundreds of potential predictors, including demographics,
healthcare utilization, diagnoses, and various biomarkers in the prior 12 months. We analyze
average monthly spending and healthcare use in the 12 months post cancer diagnosis (or post
major clinical event) for ex-post survivors (i.e. those who remain alive 12 months after their
cancer diagnosis) compared to ex-post decedents (those who die within 12 months of their
cancer diagnosis), limiting attention to months in which decedents (and likewise survivors)
are alive.
   We have three main findings that together provide insight into the sources of elevated
end-of-life spending. First, elevated spending on decedents relative to survivors with the
same initial prognosis is almost entirely driven by elevated inpatient spending, particularly
low-intensity admissions with few procedures. Although inpatient spending is only 40% of
medical spending among survivors, higher spending on inpatient care accounts for 95% of
the elevated spending on decedents. Spending on all other care--including outpatient care,
radiation, and chemotherapy--is only slightly larger among decedents. Within inpatient care,
spending on low-intensity admissions accounts for only one quarter of inpatient spending
among survivors, but for about two thirds of the elevated inpatient spending on decedents.
   Second, treatment patterns are consistent with a switch to maintenance inpatient care
at the end of life. In particular, a sharp worsening of the current prognosis is associated
with an increase in low-intensity admissions. As a result, for decedents, spending on low-
intensity admissions tends to spike in what is (ex post) the last few months of life, regardless
of survival duration, while spending on chemotherapy and radiation tends to spike right


                                               4
after the initial diagnosis and tails off in the last few months, again regardless of survival
duration. Nonetheless, a large share of low-intensity admissions do not end in death within
the subsequent two months--even among patients with a poor prognosis at the time of
admission--suggesting that it is not easy to ex-ante identify what ex-post is spending at the
end of life.
    Third, we find that among patients with the same initial prognosis, the elevated spending
for decedents is particular pronounced for younger patients. This pattern also holds within
cancer type (so that we are comparing across patients for whom the available "technology" or
treatment options are broadly similar). Since a key difference across patients of different ages
is life expectancy conditional on successful cancer treatment, these age patterns suggest that
treatment decisions may not simply reflect a short-run goal of staving off near-term mortality,
but may be affected by considerations that take into account a longer-run horizon.
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents a brief conceptual framework
designed to clarify what we are able to measure relative to the fundamental objects of interest.
Section 3 describes our setting, data, and the construction and performance of our initial
prognosis algorithm. Section 4 presents the results. The last section concludes.


2     Conceptual framework

As with most work in (health) economics, we do not measure the direct objects of interest.
We therefore briefly clarify what those fundamental objects are, and how the objects of our
analysis relate to them.
    Consider a population of individuals, each denoted by i. Absent any spending (that is,
treatment), individual i is associated with a baseline death probability of i , which is drawn
from a distribution G(i ). Let f (, s) define the health production function, which maps
individual baseline death probability (pre-treatment) to what the death probability would
be when medical spending is s. By definition, i  f (i , 0). It is also natural to assume that
                                                                f
spending is (weakly) productive for all individuals (that is,   s
                                                                     0 ), and that at any level

                                               5
                                                                               f
of spending s, the order of risk across types is preserved (that is,           
                                                                                   > 0 s).
    If we were able to measure the mortality risk in the absence of treatment G(i ) and
the health production function f (, s), we would be able to determine the optimal spending
policy s(). To see this, consider for example a social objective to minimize overall mortality,
subject to a budget constraint B .1 The social planner's problem is thus to solve:


                             min     f (, s)dG() s.t.         s()dG()  B.                                 (1)
                             s()



    But, of course, these two key objects are inherently difficult to observe. The mortality risk
in the absence of treatment G(i )--the so-called "natural history" of the disease--is almost
never observed, because the sick almost always receive treatment. The health production
function f (, s) is arguably the most sought-after object in health economics, yet empirical
knowledge of it is sorely lacking.
    Since we cannot observe the objects of interest, we instead construct estimates of what
we can observe. Specifically, instead of the mortality risk in the absence of treatment G(i ),
we measure the equilibrium distribution of mortality risk, H f (, s()) . This, of course, is
endogenous to the healthcare spending policy s(). Instead of measuring this spending policy
s(), we likewise measure the relationship between spending and equilibrium mortality risk,
s f (, s()) .
    Under some assumptions, this (endogenous) object s f (, s()) can still be informative
of the deeper economic primitive of interest s(). For example, imagine that G() is a
                                                                     1
uniform distribution over [0, 1], and that f (, s) = 1 - s 2  (where s  [0, 1]), so that the
health returns to spending are increasing in baseline mortality risk.2
    Figure 1 illustrates how, under these assumptions, the objects of interest relate to the
ones we will measure. In Panel A, we consider three possible (budget-neutral) shapes to
   1
     This is of course merely an illustrative example. Naturally, one could consider alternative social objec-
tives, such as assigning different weights to individuals by age.
   2
     Again, this is merely an illustrative example. One could of course assume a different health production
function, such as one in which there were higher returns to spending for lower-mortality individuals.



                                                      6
the healthcare spending function s(): uniform spending on all types, a spending policy
that favors the sick, and a spending policy that favors the healthy. Panel B shows the
implications of these different policies for the way health improves differentially by i . Given
our assumption about the health production function, the figure makes clear that the optimal
spending policy would be for spending to be increasing in mortality risk i .
        Panel C of Figure 1 presents the implications of these different spending policies for the
relationship between spending and post-treatment mortality risk, f (, s()). It is these last
objects that are estimable and the focus of our empirical analysis. The figure illustrates that
the (endogenous) object s f (, s()) can still be informative about the deeper economic
primitives and, in particular, about the health spending policy s() (at least under strong
assumptions restricting the types of spending policies we consider).


3         Data and methods

3.1        Setting and data

Our data come from Clalit Health Services, the largest of Israel's four non-profit Health
Maintenance Organizations (HMOs) that provide universal tax-funded healthcare coverage
from birth to all Israeli residents, in accordance with the National Health Insurance Law
(1995). Under Israeli health insurance, covered services are essentially fully subsidized by
risk-adjusted capitated payments from the government.3 The coverage broadly resembles
that of U.S. Medicare Parts A, B, and D, and includes hospital admissions, outpatient
services, physician consults, drugs, and durable medical equipment.
        Clalit Health Services is an integrated provider and insurer. It provides most of the
services it finances and reimburses pre-authorized services purchased from external providers.
Its members are admitted to all of Israel's thirty general hospitals, eight of which Clalit
    3
    There are no premiums, small copays for outpatient services and emergency room visits, no copays for
admissions, and a maximum out-of-pocket cap of 800 New Israeli Shekels (NIS, or about USD 200) per
quarter.



                                                   7
directly owns and operates. It employs over 11,000 physicians and 10,000 nurses, operates
over 1,500 primary clinics across the country, and provides multiple outpatient services. By
2001, Clalit had adopted electronic medical records (EMRs) for its enrollees.
   The data cover a large and stable population. Clalit covers about half of the Israeli
population, approximately 4.5 million members of all ages. Churn is extremely low: each
year, less than 1% of Clalit enrollees switch to another HMO. Thus, most adults remain
enrolled with Clalit throughout their lifetime. Appendix A provides more detail on the
Israeli Health Insurance System and on our particular data provider, the insurer Clalit.
   The data are available longitudinally (from 2000 through 2016) across all possible care
settings. They are rich and detailed. As with the US Medicare data, they contain claim-level
data on patient encounters, diagnoses and payments, demographics, and date of death if any.
In addition, through the EMR, we also observe a rich set of lab results, screening, imaging,
and health measures that are not available in standard claims data, including, for example,
vital signs, blood tests, and body mass index.
   We supplement these data with linked data on the exact timing of the first diagnosis of
cancer from the Israel National Cancer Registry, to which reporting has been mandatory
since 1982. While this information can also be extracted from claims data, the Registry
provides an official diagnosis date. We also take advantage of EMR data from admissions,
for the subset of admissions in Clalit-owned hospitals for which such data are complete,
to characterize the types of procedures performed for different admission categories; Clalit-
owned hospitals comprise about 40% of admissions.


3.2    Sample and key variables

We focus our analysis on adults (25 and older) who had a new cancer diagnosis between
2001 and 2013. We restrict the sample to patients with at least one year of coverage prior to
their initial diagnosis and who remain with Clalit for at least 12 months after the diagnosis
date (or until death); these restrictions exclude less than 1% of patients. For the small


                                             8
fraction of patients who are associated with multiple (distinct) cancer diagnoses during the
observation period, we restrict attention to the first diagnosis. For comparative purposes,
we also present some descriptive statistics for the full population of all 2.3 million adults (25
and older) covered by Clalit as of January 1, 2013, with the (minor) sample restriction that
they are observed for at least one year prior to and one year subsequent to that date (or
until death).


Outcomes. We focus primarily on one-year mortality and average monthly healthcare
spending and healthcare use over this one year. Spending measures are obtained from the
administrative records of Clalit. We observe payments for all services detailed in encounter-
level claims data (including inpatient admissions, emergency department visits, treatments
and diagnostic services provided in outpatient clinics, both within and outside hospitals, and
prescription drug purchases).4
       Our main spending measure is adjusted average monthly spending. This measure aver-
ages spending only over months in which the patient is alive, in order to account for the
shorter survival duration of decedents. This is useful when comparing spending patterns
between decedents and survivors. Specifically, adjusted average monthly spending is defined
as:
                                                          iIyi
                                           ¯I =
                                           y                     ,                                        (2)
                                                     iI (Ti /30)

where I is a set of individuals, yi is total healthcare spending of individual i in the 12 months
following the index date, and Ti  (0, 365] is the right-censored number of days individual i
survived after the index date.
       We also construct several measures of the nature of inpatient admissions. We classify
all admissions based on whether they are unplanned (i.e. originated through the emergency
   4
    The spending measures represent actual payments made by Clalit, not list charges. Even in cases where
the hospital is owned by Clalit, it serves as a separate financial entity as Clalit hospitals also serve non-
Clalit patients and charge other insurers similar prices. We do not directly observe spending for office-based
consults provided by salaried physicians in Clalit-owned clinics. For these visits, we construct per-visit
charges that are based on customary charges by non-employed providers; these comprise about 2.8% of total
spending in our cancer sample.


                                                      9
room) or planned. We also classify them as high or low "intensity," with high versus low in-
tensity defined based on the average daily spending for different hospital wards (i.e., hospital
units). As would be expected, the high-intensity wards, such as general surgery, tend to have
a much higher share of admissions with surgical procedures than low-intensity wards, such
as oncology or internal medicine (Appendix Table A1). Finally, for the 40% of admissions in
which we can observe inpatient procedures, we measure whether the admission involved each
of six (non-mutually exclusive) different types of inpatient procedures: diagnostics (lab and
imaging), surgeries, inpatient chemotherapies, inpatient radiation therapies, maintenance
(e.g., evaluation, feeding, pain management), and all others.5


Mortality predictors. We exploit the richness of the data to code hundreds of potential
mortality predictors that we use as features that go into training our prognosis algorithms;
Appendix B.1 describes these predictors and their construction in detail. Broadly speaking,
they fall into four main categories. First, we use demographic data from administratively
sourced information on birth date, gender, social security transfers, disability, and location-
based socioeconomic status. Second, we measure monthly healthcare utilization and spend-
ing by type of service in the claims data. Third, we calculate measures of overall morbidity
based on all diagnoses documented in clinical encounters. Specifically, we use the Johns
Hopkins Adjusted Clinical Groups (ACG) system to predict resource utilization and the
probability of major health events.6 All of these measures are standard in claims data.
       Our fourth category of variables is less commonly available: the EMR data provide
additional health measures. These include BMI, vital signs measures, blood test results, and
information on drug adherence. We also measure the cancer topography (i.e. body part
type) from the national cancer registry data.
   5
     As described earlier, we only observe inpatient procedure data for patients admitted to Clalit-owned
hospitals. The characteristics of patients admitted to Clalit-owned hospitals are similar to those admitted
to other hospitals (Appendix Table A2).
   6
     This system is used by both commercial insurers and non-commercial healthcare organizations worldwide
(as well as by Clalit) to describe or predict a population's past or future healthcare utilization and costs.
For more information, see The Johns Hopkins ACG System Version 11.0 Technical Reference Guide (2014).



                                                     10
   We use these predictors to form two types of mortality predictions. First, for each patient,
we predict one-year mortality risk at the date of diagnosis; we refer to this as the "initial
prognosis." For this measure, all of the healthcare and health measures in the EMR and the
claims data are measured on or up to 12 months prior to the diagnosis date.
   Second, we generate one-year predicted mortality risk at the start of each of five major
clinical events (which cover the major broad categories of cancer care): high-intensity hospital
admission, low-intensity hospital admission, emergency room visit (which may mark an
unexpected deterioration), outpatient drug therapy spell, or outpatient radiation therapy
spell. We refer to the one-year predicted mortality rate at the start of a clinical event as the
"current prognosis." For this measure, all of the predictors are measured on or up to the 12
months prior to the clinical event. The predictors include the diagnosis (cancer topography)
itself as well as the sequence of major clinical events post diagnosis.


Summary statistics. Table 1 presents summary statistics for the 160,000 cancer patients,
with statistics for the general population also shown for comparison. Cancer patients are on
average older and sicker than the general population, even before they get diagnosed with
cancer. The one-year mortality rate for cancer patients (19.5%) is much higher than that of
the general population (1.2%); one fifth of cancer decedents (who die in the year following
their diagnosis) die within a month of diagnosis. Those cancer patients who survive a year
have a much lower mortality rate in subsequent years; only 81% of cancer patients survive a
full year, but 84% of those survive an additional two years.
   We also compare decedents (who die within a year of diagnosis) to (one-year) survivors.
Decedents are sicker and more expensive than survivors, even before a cancer diagnosis
(Table 1, bottom panel). They have more hospital admissions and spend on average more
than survivors in the 12 months prior to diagnosis. In the year leading to a cancer diagnosis,
decedents spend on average NIS 2,300 (approximately USD 575) per month; survivors spend
NIS 1,200 (approximately USD 300) per month. Decedents are also older than survivors (73



                                              11
versus 64 years old on average).7
       For some of our analyses, we analyze how prognoses and spending decisions change over
the course of treatment. To do so, we limit our sample of patient-events to those that have
at least one clinical event following the initial cancer diagnosis and analyze outcomes at
the event level. Patients remain in this sample until death or remission and will show up
multiple times if they have more than one clinical event following the initial diagnosis. This
allows us to focus on the subset of patients who remain in treatment and therefore require
further medical decision making. The resulting sample has a total of 292,484 patient-event
observations, with 2,610 distinct sequences of between one and seven clinical events.8
       Figure 2 shows the distribution of event types among all cases still in treatment, after
different (sequential) numbers of major clinical events (0 is the initial diagnosis, for all cancer
patients; 1 is the first event, for all patients who had one or more events; 2 is the second
event, for all patients with at least two events, etc.) Half of all cancer patients in our sample
had at least three major clinical events during the year after diagnosis; a quarter of patients
had at least four (Panel A). High intensity admissions (e.g., for surgical excision of solid
tumors) account for more than half of the first clinical events, and more than a quarter of
the second clinical events (Panel B). This share declines for subsequent events, giving way to
an increasing share of outpatient drug therapies and low-intensity admissions. This increase
in the share of low-intensity admissions is concentrated among patients with the deadlier
cancer types (brain, lung, and pancreas; see Appendix Figure A1).
   7
      Appendix Table A3 shows statistics further diasaggregated by type of cancer. Breast, prostate, and
colon cancer are the three most common cancers, collectively accounting for about one-third of all cancer
diagnoses. Mortality rates and spending vary substantially across types of cancer. While we pool all cancer
types to generate our main results, cancer type is always included in our mortality prediction algorithm. We
will report below on some analyses that are performed separately by cancer type.
   8
     For expositional clarity, we include only the first seven events for each patient. Less than 2% of patients
have additional events.




                                                      12
3.3    Prognosis algorithms

We apply standard machine learning techniques to the rich dataset with hundreds of potential
predictors described in the preceding section to create our one-year mortality predictions
(both "initial prognosis" and "current prognosis"). To model and estimate mortality risk,
we use Extreme Gradient Boosting (Chen and Guestrin, 2016), a popular sequential ensemble
method that iteratively and greedily constructs a series of classifiers, with each classifier being
used to fit the residuals of the previous classifier. This method can flexibly accommodate
interactions among predictors and fit an arbitrary differentiable criterion function.
   To avoid over-fitting, we follow standard practice and randomly split our original sample
into two equally sized samples: the "test sample," which we do not use as we optimize our
prediction algorithm, and the "training sample," which we use to fit our predictive model.
The training sample is used only for fitting the predictive model. We tune key parameters
by five-fold cross-validation to maximize the area under the curve (AUC) criterion. The
trained model is then used to predict mortality in the testing sample, over which the rest of
the analysis is performed. Unless otherwise noted, all exhibits are based on the test sample.
Appendix B.2 provides more detail on the construction and performance of the algorithms.
   The prognoses generated by the algorithms are the empirical analog of the equilibrium
distribution of mortality risk H f (, s()) in Section 2. In what follows, we graphically
analyze spending patterns as a function of these prognoses (i.e., s(f (, s()))).
   In addition, we also compare spending patterns for ex-post decedents and ex-post sur-
vivors with the same prognosis. To quantify outcome differences for survivors and dece-
dents with the same prognosis, we report differences in outcomes between decedents and a
reweighted distribution of survivors, reweighted so that they have the same distribution of
prognoses as decedents. Namely:


                          y
                          ¯survivor(reweighted) =    ysurvivor (µ)dµdecedent ,                 (3)



                                                    13
where ysurvivor denotes monthly survivor spending, and µdecedent is a measure of decedent
risk. In our baseline analysis, µdecedent is a two-dimensional distribution of prognosis and
months since diagnosis.9 We reweight spending by months since diagnosis in addition to
prognosis because both spending and mortality tend to be concentrated early in the year
post diagnosis. Appendix Figure A2 and Appendix Figure A3 show the raw data underlying
the reweighting procedure.


4         Results

4.1        Patterns of end-of-life spending and mortality risk

Healthcare spending for cancer patients is disproportionately concentrated on decedents.
For example, the share of spending on decedents relative to survivors is almost three times
higher than decedents' share of days lived (Appendix Figure A4).10 However, the ex-ante
differences between decedents and survivors shown in Table 1 highlight the need to adjust
for morality prognosis when discussing spending differences between decedents and survivor.
        These mortality prognoses show that it is very hard to predict who will die within the
coming year (which is consistent with similar findings for a general population (Einav et al.,
2018)). For example, the 95th percentile of the initial prognosis for cancer patients is an
annual mortality rate of only 81%, and only one quarter of those who end up dying within the
year have initial mortality prognoses greater than 80%. Moreover, individuals with very poor
initial prognoses account for only a very small share of total spending (Appendix Figure A5).
For example, less than 10% of spending on cancer patients is accounted for by individuals
with initial predicted mortality above 80%. Even among pancreatic cancer patients, who
    9
     We approximate this integral by partitioning prognoses into ten equally sized bins and partitioning the
year to 12 months. We calculate the mean survivor spending in each mortality probability-month bin. We
then average across all bins, using the number of decedents in that prognosis-month bin as weights. Note
that, by construction, s¯decedent = sdecedent (µ)dµdecedent , so we only reweight survivor spending.
  10
     Not surprisingly, spending on decedents is somewhat less concentrated in the cancer population than
for the general adult population (for whom, Appendix Figure A4 shows the decedent share of spending is
fourteen times higher than their share of days lived). This is because virtually all cancer patients receive
some non-trivial amount of medical care, while many adults in the general population receive no care.


                                                    14
have the highest annual mortality rate (two thirds), less than 5% of patients have an initial
annual mortality prognosis above 95%, and less than 55% of those who end up dying within
the year have initial mortality prognoses greater than 80% (Appendix Table A3). These
findings underscore a fundamental point: there is no sizable mass of cancer patients for
whom, at the time of initial diagnosis, death is certain or "near certain" (within the year).
   An obvious explanation for the concentration of spending at the end of life is that spend-
ing is higher among sicker patients, and sicker patients are also more likely to die. We
therefore examine spending patterns by initial prognosis (Figure 3). In the year following
diagnosis, unadjusted average monthly spending--which includes month after death when
spending is mechanically zero--shows an inverted U-shaped pattern with respect to ini-
tial prognosis. This is driven by the fact that higher mortality-risk individuals survive on
average for fewer months. This is why in the remainder of the paper we focus on adjusted av-
erage monthly spending (which averages only over months alive). Adjusted average monthly
spending is strongly increasing in initial mortality risk, presumably reflecting the fact that
spending is higher for sicker patients. However, even after conditioning on initial prognosis,
adjusted average monthly spending is elevated for decedents compared to survivors (Panel
B). This elevation of spending on decedents relative to survivors with the same initial prog-
nosis is particularly pronounced for patients with good initial prognoses (i.e. low predicted
mortality).
   The first row of Table 2 quantifies the difference in spending between decedents and
survivors. Without adjusting for differences in initial prognosis, decedents' average adjusted
monthly spending is nearly three times greater than survivors' (NIS 13,204 versus 4,671).
Reweighting survivor spending by decedent risk at the time of diagnosis (column 2), the
gross difference of NIS 8,533 drops to 5,372. In other words, differences in initial prognosis
between ex-post decedents and ex-post survivors account for almost two-fifths of the elevated
spending on decedents. The next section explores the sources of this higher spending.




                                             15
4.2     Sources of elevated spending on decedents

Types of services. Elevated spending for decedents is almost entirely driven by differences
in inpatient spending (Table 2).11 Although inpatient spending only accounts for 40% of
medical spending among survivors, higher spending on inpatient care accounts for 95% of
the elevated spending on decedents. Spending on all other care, including outpatient care,
radiation, and chemotherapy, is only 8% larger among decedents than among survivors with
a similar initial prognosis.
    Elevated inpatient spending in turn is disproportionately concentrated in low-intensity
(versus high-intensity) admissions and in unplanned (versus planned) admissions. Despite
accounting for only a quarter of inpatient spending among survivors, low-intensity admissions
account for almost two-thirds of the elevated spending on decedents. Likewise, unplanned
admissions account for only about a quarter of inpatient spending among survivors, but
about half of the elevated spending on decedents.12
    Average monthly spending on low-intensity admissions is strongly increasing with poorer
initial prognosis (Figure 4). In other words, the poorer the patient's initial prognosis, the
greater the spending on low-intensity admissions. By contrast, spending on high-intensity
admissions and spending on other services are fairly flat or declining with initial prognosis.
    Survivor-decedent differences in inpatient spending reflect differences in inpatient use
(Table 3). In the year following diagnosis, decedents are twice as likely to have a hospital
admission each month: 41.8% compared to 21.5% of survivors for the same initial progno-
sis. Moreover, conditional on having an admission in a given month, decedents have 1.9
admissions per month, compared with 1.6 for survivors. Length of stay is also longer for
  11
     We focus our discussion on the comparison of decedents to survivors reweighted to have the same
distribution of initial prognoses as decedents, so that we are comparing treatment of patients with the same
initial prognosis.
  12
     An alternative way to classify admissions is based on whether they were billed as a procedure-based
bundled episode or per-diem. Procedure-based billing is only appropriate for admissions with a major
therapeutic procedure, such as surgery or inpatient chemotherapy. As a result, procedure-based billed
admissions are more expensive than admissions billed per diem (Appendix Table A4). The concentration
of spending on decedents in relatively low-cost admissions persists when we use this alternative measure to
classify admission intensity (Appendix Table A5).


                                                    16
decedents, on average 9.3 days per admission, compared with 7.4 days for survivors. And as
with hospital spending, decedent hospital utilization is also concentrated in low-intensity ad-
missions. Every month in the year following initial diagnosis, decedents are 35% more likely
to have a high-intensity admission but nearly three times more likely to have a low-intensity
admission (31.8% of decedents compared to 12.5% for survivors). Moreover, conditional
on having any admission, decedents have 0.36 additional low-intensity admissions and 0.12
fewer high-intensity admission.


Spending patterns over the course of treatment. Treating cancer is a dynamic pro-
cess, typically consisting of a sequence of decisions, each depending on the results of earlier
stages. We examine how changes in prognosis over the first year correlate with subsequent
changes in spending and spending type. Because they are based on the sample of patients
still in treatment, these results do not directly relate to the decedent-survivor difference in
spending. Nonetheless, restricting attention to patients while they are in treatment provides
an alternative perspective on the relationship of risk and spending. It complements the
previous analyses and provides a window into the process of dying, while relying solely on
information available in real time.
    We find that a worsening of the prognosis is associated with an increase in subsequent
spending. Figure 5 examines pairs of adjacent major clinical events and shows the relation-
ship between the change in the current mortality prognosis and the change in subsequent
average monthly spending between these events.13 On average, a 5 percentage point increase
in mortality risk between events is associated with about a NIS 1,000 increase in subsequent
average monthly spending, but the relationship is concave; greater increases in risk result
in only slightly higher increases in spending (Panel A). The association between the change
in mortality prognosis and the change in spending also depends on the current level of pre-
  13
     Subsequent spending is measured over a one-year period following each event and is adjusted for survival
duration. We exclude from the measure of subsequent spending all spending associated with the current
event; including such spending makes the relationship between deteriorating prognosis and increasing spend-
ing even stronger.



                                                     17
dicted mortality risk: the worse the current prognosis, the weaker this association is (Panel
B).14 These results are consistent with treatment intensifying for complex cases that do not
respond well to previous treatments, but not without limits.
       We also examined what types of clinical events are associated with a worsening progno-
sis. The results show that low-intensity admissions--and only low-intensity admissions--are
associated with a pronounced worsening of prognosis; that is, an increase in mortality risk
(Figure 6). On average, a low-intensity admission is associated with an increase of more
than 10 percentage points in mortality risk. When such admissions start, it is not a good
sign.
       Figure 7 returns to the patient-level sample of all cancer decedents to explore these time
patterns from another perspective. In separate panels by type of service, it shows decedent
spending as a function of two different timelines: months after diagnosis (Panel A), and
months before death (Panel B). Each line shows the average monthly spending of a group
of decedents who survived the same integer number of months. To the extent that services
reflect treatment plans that are decided in advance, we would expect to see the timing
of spending aligned on a prospective time scale (top panels), regardless of eventual survival
duration. In contrast, treatment responses to unexpected deterioration may be better aligned
with the retrospective time scale (bottom panels), regardless of survival duration. The results
show that regardless of survival duration, low-intensity admissions spike in the last couple
of months before death. In contrast, spending on high-intensity admissions and on other
services (including outpatient services and drugs) spike two or three months after diagnosis
and decreases in the last month or two.
       Table 4 summarizes these patterns quantitatively. Closer to death, decedent admissions
involve fewer surgeries and more maintenance relative to both decedent admissions farther
  14
    We find similar results when instead of evaluating the heterogeneity in the association across different
ranges of current mortality prognosis, as in Panel B, we instead evaluate the heterogeneity across different
quintiles of current prognosis, where quintiles are calculated within cancer type (Appendix Figure A6). This
suggests that both absolute and relative risk levels mediate the association between the change in mortality
prognosis and the change in spending.



                                                    18
from death and survivor admissions. Overall, 27.6% of admissions for cancer patients involve
surgery. But only 9.4% of decedent admissions in the last month before death involve
surgery, compared with 11.2% of decedent admissions that occur four to 12 months before
death, and with 33.4% of survivor admissions. Admissions closer to death also involve fewer
chemotherapy procedures, more diagnostics, and more maintenance. Radiation does not
have a clear trend (possibly because there are both therapeutic and palliative radiation
therapies).
   Overall, the results paint a reasonably clear picture in which the timing of high-intensity
admissions and other services is primarily tied to the timing of cancer diagnosis, while the
timing of low-intensity admissions is closely linked to the (retrospective) timing of death.
This is consistent with initial treatment plans that fight cancer via scheduled surgeries,
outpatient radiation, and chemotherapy but change to a different type of medical treatment
if treatment has failed. This change involves an increased frequency of unplanned admissions
that may aim to monitor and maintain patients without necessarily trying to treat them.
   Of course, analyses that look back from the time of death are conducted from an ex-
post perspective. It would be a mistake to conclude that because low-intensity admissions
tend to spike close to the time of death--regardless of initial prognosis or survival time--
reducing such events would reduce spending without any harm to patients. For this to be
the case, we would need to be able to predict, at the time of the admission, that these
admissions are very likely at the end of life. Figure 8 shows that we cannot. It looks at
the fraction of low-intensity and high-intensity admissions that result in death within 60
days, as a function of current prognosis at the time of admission. Admissions that result in
near-term death rise sharply as the current prognosis worsens. However, many admissions
do not result in near-term death, even among individuals with poor current prognoses. For
example, among patients who enter a low-intensity admission with a current prognosis of
80% mortality within a year, less than half die within the next two months.




                                             19
Elevated spending on decedents, by age. Cancer is a disease that (unfortunately)
affects a wide range of ages. We can therefore examine how the elevation of spending on
decedents varies by age. Among patients with the same initial prognosis, average monthly
spending declines with age; this decline is particularly pronounced for decedents compared
to survivors (Figure 9). Table 5 summarizes these results quantitatively and shows that the
difference in average monthly spending for decedents, relative to survivors with the same
initial prognosis, decreases monotonically with age. The elevation of spending on decedents
is about NIS 9,500 for the youngest age quintile (53 years old or younger) but declines to
about NIS 4,000 for the highest age quintile (78 years old and older). This pattern persists
if we look within cancer topography (Panel B). For example, among breast cancer patients,
the difference in spending between decedents and survivors is NIS 5,500 for the youngest
age quintile and NIS 3,600 for the oldest; for stomach cancer patients, the difference for the
youngest and oldest age quintiles is NIS 5,500 and 2,500, respectively.
   To shed more light on the source of the age gradient, we examine how spending varies
by age as a function of current mortality prognosis. The results are revealing. Conditional
on current prognosis and the type of current episode, spending on that episode is similar for
the old and young (Figure 10, Panel A). By contrast, average adjusted monthly spending in
the year after the current episode is substantially more pronounced on the young (Panel B).
This suggests that the age differences in overall spending is driven not by differences in the
cost of specific episodes, but by younger patients receiving more therapies, and (as seen in
Appendix Figure A7) more intensive therapies over the course of their treatment.
   These age patterns are striking, although their interpretation is not obvious. The results
are not consistent with an explanation based on differences by age in the expensiveness of
a given treatment. One natural possibility is that appropriateness of treatments varies with
age. By conditioning on cancer type in some of the analyses we tried, to the extent possible,
to hold fixed the available "technology" or treatment options, although of course there may
be remaining differences by age.


                                             20
       These patterns suggest that treatment decisions may be made not only with respect
to their likely short term (i.e. within a year) impact, but also factoring in the longer life
expectancy of the young, conditional on successful treatment. In other words, the "return
on investment" is higher for younger patients.15 In addition, the willingness to let go or the
psychological cost of conceding defeat may well be higher for younger patients. Whatever the
underlying mechanism, these results are suggestive evidence against a narrative of patients
(and their doctors and families) making treatment decisions with an exclusive focus on near-
term survival.


5        Conclusion

We looked inside the "black box" of elevated spending at the end of life, using an extremely
rich dataset on a large population and focusing on newly diagnosed cancer patients, who
represent a relatively homogeneous set of medical conditions. We have three main findings
concerning the sources of elevated spending on decedents relative to survivors with the
same initial prognosis. The elevated spending for decedents is almost entirely driven by
inpatient spending (particularly low-intensity admissions with few procedures). A worsening
prognosis is strongly associated with an increase in low-intensity admissions--in other words,
with (expensive) inpatient maintenance care. Finally, the concentration of spending among
decedents is particularly pronounced for younger cancer patients relative to older cancer
patients.
       In addition to a "forensic accounting" exercise for end of life spending, our descriptive
analyses raise several potential implications. In contrast to the hypothesis that treatment
decisions are made from a very present-focused goal of prolonging life over the very near term,
the age-related findings are consistent with decisions being made at least partly with a longer-
term horizon in mind. In particular, the higher elevation of spending on decedents (relative
  15
     Of course, the social benefits of end-of-life spending may be greater than their individual benefits if
the use of new treatment generates positive externalities to other patients by facilitating learning about the
efficacy of such treatments.


                                                     21
to survivors with similar initial prognoses) for younger patients compared to older patients
is consistent with greater demand (among patients, their families, and their physicians) for
treating those with a higher life expectancy (conditional on surviving cancer). These patterns
may also point to a role for preferences--perhaps a greater reluctance to "let go" among the
young--to influence end-of-life spending patterns. Such reluctant may also explain prior
evidence that healthcare spending on pets spikes at the end of life as well (Einav et al.,
2017).
   Another important implication of our findings arises from what we didn't find: the dog
that didn't bark. Specifically, our results repeatedly stop short of identifying any clear cat-
egories of spending that could be reduced without concern about potential patient harm.
Even among low-intensity admissions for patients with very poor current prognoses, a sub-
stantial share of admissions do not result in near-term death. This underscores the perennial
challenge of identifying "obvious" ways to reduce large amounts of healthcare spending. A
more fruitful (although also more laborious) path to identifying waste in healthcare systems
may lie in credibly documenting the many specific, smaller sources of spending that could be
eliminated with little or no harm to patients, as recent research has started to do (Abaluck
et al., 2016; Einav et al., 2019; Cooper et al., 2019).

References
Abaluck, Jason, Leila Agha, Chris Kabrhel, Ali Raja, and Arjun Venkatesh,
 "The determinants of productivity in medical testing: Intensity and allocation of care,"
 American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (12), 3730­64.

Barnato, Amber E, Mark B McClellan, Christopher R Kagay, and Alan M Gar-
 ber, "Trends in inpatient treatment intensity among Medicare beneficiaries at the end of
 life," Health Services Research, 2004, 39 (2), 363­376.

Bekelman, Justin E, Scott D Halpern, Carl Rudolf Blankart, Julie P Bynum,
 Joachim Cohen, Robert Fowler, Stein Kaasa, Lukas Kwietniewski, Hans Olav
 Melberg, Bregje Onwuteaka-Philipsen et al., "Comparison of site of death, health
 care utilization, and hospital expenditures for patients dying with cancer in 7 developed
 countries," JAMA, 2016, 315 (3), 272­283.



                                               22
Chen, Tianqi and Carlos Guestrin, "Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system," in
 "Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery
 and data mining" ACM 2016, pp. 785­794.

Cooper, Zack, Fiona Scott Morton, and Nathan Shekita, "Surprise! Out-of-network
 Billing for Emergency Care in the United States," NBER Working Paper No. 23623, 2019.

DeSalvo, Karen B, Vincent S Fan, Mary B McDonell, and Stephan D Fihn,
 "Predicting Mortality and Healthcare Utilization with a Single Question," Health Services
 Research, 2005, 40 (4), 1234­1246.

Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Atul Gupta, "Is American pet health care (also)
  uniquely inefficient?," American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (5), 491­95.

  , , and Neale Mahoney, "Long-Term Care Hospitals: A Case Study in Waste," NBER
  Working Paper No. 24946, 2019.

  , , Sendhil Mullainathan, and Ziad Obermeyer, "Predictive modeling of US health
  care spending in late life," Science, 2018, 360 (6396), 1462­1465.

Emanuel, Ezekiel J and Linda L Emanuel, "The economics of dying--the illusion of
 cost savings at the end of life," New England Journal of Medicine, 1994, 330 (8), 540­544.

  , Arlene Ash, Wei Yu, Gail Gazelle, Norman G Levinsky, Olga Saynina, Mark
  McClellan, and Mark Moskowitz, "Managed care, hospice use, site of death, and
  medical expenditures in the last year of life," Archives of Internal Medicine, 2002, 162
  (15), 1722­1728.

Fischhoff, Baruch, "Hindsight is not equal to foresight: The effect of outcome knowledge
  on judgment under uncertainty.," Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human perception
  and performance, 1975, 1 (3), 288.

French, Eric B, Jeremy McCauley, Maria Aragon, Pieter Bakx, Martin Chalkley,
  Stacey H Chen, Bent J Christensen, Hongwei Chuang, Aurelie C^                ot´
                                                                                 e-Sergent,
  Mariacristina De Nardi et al., "End-of-life medical spending in last twelve months of
  life is lower than previously reported," Health Affairs, 2017, 36 (7), 1211­1217.

Genev`es, Pierre, Thomas Calmant, Nabil Laya¨        ida, Marion Lepelley, Svetlana
 Artemova, and Jean-Luc Bosson, "Predicting At-Risk Patient Profiles from Big Pre-
 scription Data," ffhal-01517087v4f [Reprint], 2017.

Heron, Melonie, "Deaths: Leading causes for 2010," National Vital Statistics Reports,
 National Center for Health Statistics, Center for Disease Control and Prevention, 2013,
 62 (6), 1­96.

Makar, Maggie, Marzyeh Ghassemi, David M Cutler, and Ziad Obermeyer,
 "Short-term mortality prediction for elderly patients using Medicare claims data," In-
 ternational Journal of Machine Learning and Computing, 2015, 5 (3), 192.


                                            23
Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, "Report to the congress: Improving care at
 the end of life," Technical Report 1999.

Morden, Nancy E, Chiang-Hua Chang, Joseph O Jacobson, Ethan M Berke,
 Julie PW Bynum, Kimberly M Murray, and David C Goodman, "End-of-life
 care for Medicare beneficiaries with cancer is highly intensive overall and varies widely,"
 Health Affairs, 2012, 31 (4), 786­796.

Nicholas, Lauren Hersch, Kenneth M Langa, Theodore J Iwashyna, and David R
 Weir, "Regional variation in the association between advance directives and end-of-life
 Medicare expenditures," JAMA, 2011, 306 (13), 1447­1453.

Riley, Gerald F and James D Lubitz, "Long-term trends in Medicare payments in the
 last year of life," Health Services Research, 2010, 45 (2), 565­576.

Teno, Joan M, Pedro L Gozalo, Julie PW Bynum, Natalie E Leland, Susan C
  Miller, Nancy E Morden, Thomas Scupp, David C Goodman, and Vincent
  Mor, "Change in end-of-life care for Medicare beneficiaries: site of death, place of care,
  and health care transitions in 2000, 2005, and 2009," JAMA, 2013, 309 (5), 470­477.

Zeltzer, Dan, Ran D Balicer, Tzvi Shir, Natalie Flaks-Manov, Liran Einav, and
  Efrat Shadmi, "Prediction Accuracy with Electronic Medical Records Versus Adminis-
  trative Claims," Medical Care, 2019, 57 (7), 551­559.




                                            24
                                                                            1.0




                                                With Current Spending (f)
                                                     Mortality Risk
Spending (s)




                                                                                                               Spending (s)
                                                                            0.5




                                                                            0.0
         0.0              0.5             1.0                                 0.0              0.5       1.0
                    Mortality Risk                                                     Mortality Risk                   0.0    0.5   1.0
               Without Any Treatment ()                                           Without Any Treatment ()                     f, 
                        (A)                                                              (B)                                  (C)

                                Figure 1: Illustration of the Conceptual Framework
Notes: Figure shows an illustration of the conceptual framework discussed in Section 2. The panels
show statistics for three different spending policies. The policies, marked by different colors, are:
spending concentrated on the healthy (black), spending concentrated on the sick (light gray), and
uniform spending (dark gray). Panel A shows spending, s, as a function of (unobserved) individual
type , which is defined by death probability in the absence of treatment. Panel B shows actual
mortality with treatment, f (, s()), as a function of type . The dashed line in this panel is the
identity (45-degree) line. Panel C shows spending as a function of observed actual mortality with
treatment, f , in solid lines, along with the underlying policies from Panel A, which are unobserved,
repeated in dashed lines. Spending is normalized to have a 0­1 range and has no units. See Section 2
for details of the calculations.




                                                                                         25
                        80000
      Number of Cases




                        60000
                                                                                           Event Type
                                                                                             Admission-High
                                                                                             Admission-Low
                        40000                                                                Drug Therapy
                                                                                             Radiation Therapy
                                                                                             ED Visit
                                                                                             Initial Diagnosis
                        20000



                               0
                                       0       1       2      3     4          5   6   7
                                                           Event Number
                                                                        (A)

                        1.00



                        0.75
      Share of Cases




                                                                                           Event Type
                                                                                             Admission-High
                                                                                             Admission-Low
                        0.50                                                                 Drug Therapy
                                                                                             Radiation Therapy
                                                                                             ED Visit
                                                                                             Initial Diagnosis
                        0.25



                        0.00
                                   0       1       2         3     4          5    6   7
                                                           Event Number
                                                                        (B)

Figure 2: Distribution of Number of Cases by Type and Number of Major Clinical Events
Notes: Figure shows, for the sample of major clinical events of cancer cases (N=292,484 patient-events),
the number (Panel A) and share (Panel B) of cases still in treatment and their most recent major event,
as a function of the sequential number of this event. Colors denote the type of the most recent event.
Admission-High and Admission-Low denote high- and low-intensity admissions. Drug Therapy is a
spell of either chemotherapy or biological drug treatment. Radiation Therapy denotes a spell of such
therapy. ED visit is emergency department visit that did not result in an admission to a hospital.
Initial Diagnosis denotes initial cancer diagnosis.




                                                                          26
                                 15,000                                                                                       20,000
Average Monthly Spending (NIS)




                                                                                             Average Monthly Spending (NIS)
                                 11,250                                                                                       15,000
                                                                                                                                                         Decedent
                                                           Adjusted


                                  7,500                                                                                       10,000
                                                         Unadjusted
                                                                                                                                                         Survivor




                                  3,750                                                                                        5,000



                                                                                                                                                                  Scaled Density
                                                        Scaled Density                                                                                  (Dark = Survivor / Light = Decedent)
                                     0                                                                                            0

                                          0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9                                                      0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
                                          Initial Prognosis (One-Year Mortality Risk)                                                  Initial Prognosis (One-Year Mortality Risk)

                                                  (A) All Patients                                                               (B) Grouped by Mortality Outcome

                                                               Figure 3: Spending by Predicted Mortality
Notes: Figures show the distribution of initial prognosis (one-year mortality risk) and average adjusted
monthly spending in the 12 months post initial cancer diagnosis as a function of initial prognosis. N
= 83,181 patients. Scaled Density (in gray) is the kernel density estimate of the probability density
function of the mortality prognosis (which integrates to one), scaled to fit the plot height. Panel A
shows data for all patients combined. Unadjusted spending (dashed line) is average monthly spending,
calculated over the entire year following a cancer diagnosis, including months after death with zero
spending. Adjusted spending (solid line) is the average spending over the period each patient was alive
during the first year after the cancer diagnosis (see equation (2)). Panel B shows adjusted average
monthly spending, separately for Survivors (solid line), defined as those patients who survived for at
least one year from the index date and Decedents (dashed line), defined as those who did not. Decedent
spending is adjusted for survival duration (see equation (2)). The shaded areas show scaled densities of
predicted mortality for each of these groups (in light gray for decedents and in dark gray for survivors).
All spending measures are in current New Israeli Shekels (NIS).




                                                                                        27
                                                           All                       Decedent                        Survivor
                                  8,000


                                                                                              Inpatient :
                                                                                             Low Intensity
 Average Monthly Spending (NIS)




                                  6,000



                                                                                               All Other
                                                  All Other                                                             All Other
                                                                                               Services
                                  4,000           Services                                                              Services



                                                 Inpatient :
                                                High Intensity                                                          Inpatient :
                                                                                               Inpatient :
                                                                                                                      High Intensity
                                                                                             High Intensity
                                  2,000

                                                 Inpatient :
                                                Low Intensity                                                          Inpatient :
                                                                                                                      Low Intensity


                                     0

                                          0.0   0.2      0.4     0.6   0.8 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 0.0 0.2                0.4      0.6     0.8
                                                                       Initial Prognosis (One-Year Mortality Risk)

                                          Figure 4: Average Monthly Spending, by Type of Service and Intensity
Notes: The figure shows average monthly spending (in the 12 months post diagnosis) as a function
of initial prognosis (one-year mortality risk), separately for low-intensity admissions, high-intensity
admissions, and all other services. Panels show results separately for all patients (left), decedents
(middle), and survivors (right). Decedent spending is adjusted for survival duration (see equation (2)).
All spending measures are in current New Israeli Shekels (NIS). N = 83,181 patients.




                                                                                      28
                                                      2000




               Change in Average Monthly Spending,    1000
                    One-Year Forward (NIS)




                                                             0




                                                     -1000




                                                     -2000

                                                                                  -0.2                 -0.1                   0.0                   0.1                  0.2
                                                                                          Change in Current One-Year Mortality Prognosis

                                                                                                              (A) Overall

                                                             Range of current prognosis
                                                                        (0,0.2]                   (0.2,0.4]                (0.4,0.6]                (0.6,0.8]                (0.8,1]
               Change in Average Monthly Spending,




                                                      2000
                    One Year Forward (NIS)




                                                         0




                                                     -2000




                                                                 -0.2     0.0       0.2    -0.2      0.0      0.2   -0.2      0.0      0.2   -0.2      0.0      0.2   -0.2     0.0     0.2
                                                                                          Change in Current One-Year Mortality Prognosis

                                                                                                  (B) by Current Prognosis

Figure 5: Relationship between Change in Prognosis and Change in Subsequent Spending

Notes: Figure shows, for the sample of 207,607 clinical histories of cancer patients in our sample with
one more clinical events after initial diagnosis, the relationship between the change in current prognosis
and the change in forward spending, overall (Panel A) and by level of current mortality prognosis
(Panel B). Each observation in the underlying data is a pair of consecutive clinical events. The x-axis
shows the change in mortality prognosis between the start of the most recent and the start of the
current clinical event. The y-axis shows the change in one-year forward spending between the two
events. Linear fit is shown on Panel B.



                                                                                                                    29
                                         1.00
   Prognosis (One-Year Mortality Risk)




                                         0.75
       at the Start of Current Event




                                                                                                Current
                                                                                                Event
                                                                                                   Admission-High
                                         0.50                                                      Admission-Low
                                                                                                   Drug Therapy
                                                                                                   ED Visit
                                                                                                   Radiation Therapy



                                         0.25




                                         0.00
                                            0.00   0.25           0.50            0.75   1.00
                                                   Prognosis (One-Year Mortality Risk)
                                                      at the Start of Previous Event

Figure 6: Change in Current Prognosis between Previous and Current Clinical Events, by
Current Event Type
 Notes: Figure shows, for the sample of 207,607 clinical histories of cancer patients in our sample with
 one more clinical events after initial diagnosis, the relationship between mortality prognosis at the
 start of the current clinical event over the mortality prognosis at the start of the previous event. Each
 observation in the underlying data represents a pair of consecutive clinical events, for patients with the
 same cancer type who had the same prior sequence of events. The x-axis and y-axis show the predicted
 mortality prognosis at the start of the previous and the current clinical event, respectively. Shape and
 color denote current event type. The data are binned by deciles of the previous mortality prognosis,
 separately for each (current) event type. Linear fit is shown for each risk group separately. The dashed
 line is the identity (45-degree) line. The underlying sample sizes, by current event type, are as follows:
 69,745 high-intensity admissions, 43,897 low-intensity admissions, 48,089 drug therapy events, 12,631
 radiation therapy events, and 33,245 ED visits.




                                                                         30
                                                             Inpatient -            Inpatient -
                                                                                                               All Other Services
                                                            Low Intensity          High Intensity



              Average Monthly Spending (NIS)
                                               9,000




                                               6,000




                                               3,000




                                                  0
                                                       1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
                                                                            Month From Initial Diagnosis

                                                                        Full Months Survived
                                                                                               1   3   5   7   9 11

                                                                                     (A)


                                                             Inpatient -            Inpatient -
                                                                                                               All Other Services
                                                            Low Intensity          High Intensity
              Average Monthly Spending (NIS)




                                               9,000




                                               6,000




                                               3,000




                                                  0
                                                       11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
                                                                              Month From Death Date

                                                                        Full Months Survived
                                                                                               1   3   5   7   9 11

                                                                                     (B)

        Figure 7: Decedent Spending by Time Before Death and After Diagnosis
Notes: Panels show average monthly spending data for the sample of cancer decedents (N=16,289).
In both panels, each line represents average spending for a group of decedents who survived the same
integer number of months, excluding partial months' spending, with darker lines representing longer
survival. However, in Panel A, the horizontal axis counts the number of months from the index date,
whereas in Panel B, the horizontal axis counts the number of months before death. In both cases, we
show results separately for low-intensity inpatient admissions, high-intensity inpatient admissions, and
all other services. All spending measures are in current New Israeli Shekels (NIS).



                                                                                        31
                                                                      1.00
              Fraction of Admissions Ending in Death Within 60 Days




                                                                      0.75




                                                                      0.50



                                                                                                             Low Intensity
                                                                                                                              High Intensity
                                                                      0.25



                                                                                                                    Low Intensity
                                                                                                                    High Intensity
                                                                      0.00

                                                                             0.0   0.1     0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9                     1.0
                                                                                         Current Prognosis (One-Year Mortality Risk)

Figure 8: Fraction of Admissions Ending in Death Within 60 Days, by Current Predicted
Mortality
 Notes: Figure shows the fraction of admissions ending in death within 60 days of admission, as a
 function of current prognosis (one-year mortality risk), as predicted at the first day of the admission.
 Results are shown separately for high-intensity and low-intensity admissions. Shaded areas are scaled
 densities of the current prognosis for high- and low-intensity admissions. The sample includes all
 admissions of cancer patients in the first year after diagnosis.




                                                                                                        32
                                           Age Group

                                               [25,53]                       (53,63]                       (63,71]                       (71,78]                      (78,100]
 Average Monthly Spending (NIS)




                                  20,000


                                  15,000


                                  10,000


                                   5,000


                                      0
                                             0.2
                                                   0.4
                                                         0.6
                                                               0.8
                                                                     1.0
                                                                           0.2
                                                                                 0.4
                                                                                       0.6
                                                                                             0.8
                                                                                                   1.0
                                                                                                         0.2
                                                                                                               0.4
                                                                                                                     0.6
                                                                                                                           0.8
                                                                                                                                 1.0
                                                                                                                                       0.2
                                                                                                                                             0.4
                                                                                                                                                   0.6
                                                                                                                                                         0.8
                                                                                                                                                               1.0
                                                                                                                                                                     0.2
                                                                                                                                                                           0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                 0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                       0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                             1.0
                                                                                 Initial Prognosis (One-Year Mortality Risk)

                                                                                                    Decedent                     Survivor




                                  Figure 9: Spending and Mortality of Decedents and Survivors, by Age Quintiles
Notes: Figure shows, separately by age quintiles, average monthly spending on all services by initial
prognosis (one-year mortality risk). Decedent spending is adjusted for survival duration (see equa-
tion (2)). The top quintile is top-coded at 100 years of age. All spending measures are in current New
Israeli Shekels (NIS). N = 83,181 patients.




                                                                                                         33
                                          Admission-High    Admission-Low     Drug Therapy         Radiation         ED Visit         (all)

                                  25000
 Average Monthly Spending (NIS)




                                  20000



                                  15000                                                                                                       Patient
                                                                                                                                              Age
                                                                                                                                                 Young
                                  10000                                                                                                          Old



                                   5000



                                      0

                                      0.0       0.5        0.0      0.5     0.0    0.5       0.0        0.5    0.0      0.5     0.0     0.5
                                                                    Current Prognosis (One-Year Mortality Risk)

                                                                 (A) Spending One Year Forward (or Until Death)

                                          Admission-High    Admission-Low     Drug Therapy         Radiation         ED Visit         (all)

                                  25000
 Average Monthly Spending (NIS)




                                  20000



                                  15000                                                                                                       Patient
                                                                                                                                              Age
                                                                                                                                                 Young
                                  10000                                                                                                          Old



                                   5000



                                      0

                                      0.0       0.5        0.0      0.5     0.0    0.5       0.0        0.5    0.0      0.5     0.0     0.5
                                                                    Current Prognosis (One-Year Mortality Risk)

                                                                          (B) Spending on Current Event

                           Figure 10: Spending on Current and Future Events, by Current Prognosis and Age
Notes: Figure shows, using the sample for which we predict current mortality based on major clinical
events (N = 292,284 patient-events), the average current and future spending over current mortal-
ity prognosis, by age. Old (Young) denotes patients whose age at the time of cancer diagnosis is
older (younger) than the median for their cancer type. Current prognosis (one-year mortality risk) is
predicted at the start of the current event. Facets show data separately by current event type; the
rightmost facet shows data for all event types combined. Panel A shows spending on the current event.
Panel B shows spending one-year forward, excluding the current event. Both current and forward
spending is measured as a monthly average (adjusted for survival duration based on Equation (2)), so
results presented in the two panels are comparable. See Section 3 for detailed definitions.




                                                                                                   34
                           Table 1: Demographics, Cost, and Mortality

                                                    Cancer Sample               General Population Sample
                                                All   Decedent Survivor           All     Decedent Survivor
                                                  (1)       (2)     (3)               (4)      (5)       (6)

 Characteristics
  Age (mean)                                       65            73        64          50       78          50
  Female (%)                                     52.1          44.8      53.9        52.4     52.1        52.4
  High SES Zip-Code(%)                           23.4          18.7      24.5        21.4     18.8        21.5
  Supplementary Insurancea (%)                   70.1          54.7      73.9        74.8     59.8        75.0
 Mortality Rate
  1 month (%)                                     3.7          19.0         ­         0.1     10.1           ­
  1 year (%)                                     19.5         100.0       0.0         1.2    100.0         0.0
  3 years (%)                                    32.4             ­      16.0         3.5        ­         2.4
 Utilization
 12 Months Before Index Date
  Average Monthly Spending (NIS)                1,406         2,290     1,192         484    3,648         446
  Any admission (%)                              53.3          75.7      47.9        12.1     55.0        11.6
 12 Months After Index Date
  Average Monthly Spending (Unadjusted NIS)     4,730         4,987     4,668         556    4,178         514
  Average Monthly Spending (Adjusted NIS)b      5,380        13,139     4,668         560    8,638         514
  Any admission (%)                              73.0          87.8      69.5        12.8     78.8        12.0
 Number of Beneficiaries                      166,839        32,518   134,321   2,372,582   27,673   2,344,909


Notes: Table shows descriptive statistics for our main sample - the adult population diagnosed with
cancer (columns 1­3), and for comparison, the overall adult population (columns 4-6). This table (and
Appendix Figure A4) describe the full sample, which we later split into training and test sets. All
other exhibits are based on the test set. Columns 1 and 4 show statistics for all patients; columns 2
and 5 show statistics for ex-post decedents, i.e., those who died within 12 months after the index date;
columns 3 and 6 show statistics for ex-post survivors, i.e., those who remain alive after 12 months. The
index event is defined as the date of initial diagnosis for cancer patients, and January 1, 2018 for the
general population. By definition, the mortality rate within one year of the initial prognosis is 100 for
decedents and 0 for survivors. Utilization measures are shown for the periods of 12 months before and
12 months after the index date. All spending measures are in current New Israeli Shekels (NIS); during
our study period the exchange rate was about 4 NIS per USD.
a
  See Appendix A for more details.
b
  Adjustment is based on equation (2). See text for more details.




                                                        35
                               Table 2: Average Monthly Spending

                                Survivor                  Decedent              Difference
                                                                        Decedent -
                                     Reweighted by                                      Percent of
      Category          Unweighted                                       Survivor
                                     Decedent Risk                                    Total Difference
                                                                       (Reweighted)
                           (1)            (2)               (3)             (4)             (5)
  Total                     4,671            7,833          13,204            5,372               100.0
  All Inpatient:             1,735          4,070             9,152           5,083                94.6
   Planned                   1,326          2,904             5,133           2,229               41.5
   Unplanned                   409          1,166             4,019           2,854               53.1
   Low Intensity             1,549          2,874             6,458           3,584               66.7
   High Intensity            3,122          4,958             6,746           1,788               33.3
  Other Services:            2,936          3,763             4,052             289                 5.4
   Drugs                     1,119          1,562             1,733             172                3.2
   Outpatient                1,239          1,491             1,566              75                1.4
   Imaging                     191            253               222             -31               -0.6
   Other                       387            456               530              74                1.4
Notes: Table shows average monthly spending in the 12 months post cancer diagnosis. Columns show
results separately for decedents and survivors. Decedent spending is adjusted for survival duration (see
equation (2)). Survivor spending in column 2 is reweighted by decedent risk and month-from-diagnosis
(see equation (3)). Decedent-Survivor is the difference between Decedent and Survivor (Reweighted)
spending. All spending measures are in current New Israeli Shekels (NIS). First row shows total
healthcare spending, and subsequent rows show various partitions. All Inpatient refers to spending
on all services that are delivered during hospital admissions, and Other Services refers to spending
on all services that are not part of an admission. Within inpatient, we partition into low intensity
versus high intensity, and unplanned versus planned. Low intensity refers to admissions into one of
four wards: Internal Medicine, Oncology, Rehabilitation, and Geriatric, which Appendix Table A1
shows involve the lowest average daily admission and few surgeries; High intensity is admission to
all other wards. Unplanned refers to admissions through the emergency department; Planned refers
to all other admissions. Within Other Services we partition into Outpatient, Drugs, Imaging, and
Other. Outpatient, Drugs, and Imaging refer to hospital outpatient services, prescription drugs, (except
those administered during admissions), and diagnostic radiology services not during an admission,
respectively. N = 83,181 patients.




                                                     36
                             Table 3: Monthly Admission Statistics

                                                  Survivor                Decedent      Difference
                                                                                         Decedent -
                                                         Reweighted by
                                       Unweighted        Decedent Risk
                                                                                          Survivor
                                                                                        (Reweighted
                                            (1)              (2)            (3)             (4)
  A. Any admission
   All                                            11.4             21.5        41.8               20.3
   Low Intensity                                   4.2             12.5        31.8               19.3
   High Intensity                                  7.9             11.0        14.8                3.8
  B. Admissions per Month
    (if Any During the Month)
   All                                             1.5              1.6           1.9              0.2
    Low Intensity                                  0.6              1.0           1.4              0.4
    High Intensity                                 0.9              0.6           0.5             -0.1
  C. Length of Stay (Days)
   All                                             6.0              7.4         9.3                1.8
    Low Intensity                                  6.4              7.1         8.8                1.7
    High Intensity                                 5.7              7.9        10.5                2.6

Notes: Table shows monthly admission statistics in the 12 months post cancer diagnosis. Columns
show results separately for survivors and decedents. Survivor statistics in column 2 are reweighted
by decedent risk and month-from-diagnosis (see equation (3)). Decedent-Survivor is the difference
between Decedent and Survivor (Reweighted) outcomes. In Panel A, any admission shows the fraction
of patients with an admission during each month over the period during which each patient was still
alive during the first year after initial diagnosis. In Panel B, admissions per month shows the average
number of admissions for months during which the patient had at least one admission. In Panel C,
length of stay is the average duration of stay over all admissions. Within each panel, we partition
admissions into low-intensity and high-intensity admissions, as described in the text. N = 83,181
patients.




                                                    37
              Table 4: Inpatient Procedures by Admission Time Before Death

                       Procedure Type, Admission With Any (%)
             Maintenance Diagnostics Surgery Radiation Chemotherapy Other           N of Admissions
                  (1)        (2)       (3)     (4)         (5)       (6)                  (7)
 Last month 11.5                 98.7   10.0       4.0           5.1   0.7                     5,219
 1-3 months 11.9                 96.0   12.0       6.5           9.5   0.9                     3,864
 4-12 months 11.0                94.0   16.3       6.6         16.7    1.5                     4,989
 Survivors   9.2                 90.2   34.0       2.9           7.7   1.1                    36,596
 All         9.8                 91.9   28.1       3.7           8.4   1.1                    50,668

Notes: The fraction of sampled admissions that included procedures of different types. Sampled admis-
sions include Clalit-owned-hospital admissions that started and ended during the year after diagnosis.
Appendix Table A6 shows data separately for unplanned and planned admissions and for high- and
low-intensity admissions.




                                                  38
                    Table 5: Average Monthly Spending, by Age Quintile

                                                    Survivor              Decedent     Difference
                                                                                        Decedent -
                                                         Reweighted by
                           Age Quintile   Unweighted                                     Survivor
                                                         Decedent Risk
                                                                                       (Reweighted)
                                (1)           (2)              (3)           (4)           (5)


 A. All Cancer Types
                           [25,53]              5,308            10,943       20,484          9,541
                           (53,63]              5,141            10,010       16,760          6,750
                           (63,71]              4,754             8,964       14,297          5,333
                           (71,78]              4,256             7,044       12,252          5,208
                           (78,100]             3,311             5,354        9,384          4,030
 B. By Cancer Type
 Breast                    [25,53]              6,793             7,073       12,561          5,487
                           (78,100]             2,441             2,834        6,486          3,651
 Prostate                  (53,63]*             2,713             2,954       10,629          7,675
                           (78,100]             2,603             2,662        6,891          4,229
 Colon                     [25,53]              6,152             8,880       18,269          9,389
                           (78,100]             3,679             5,675        9,393          3,718
 Bronchus and Lung         [25,53]              7,748            11,244       14,686          3,442
                           (78,100]             4,680             5,874        9,228          3,355
 Skin                      (53,63]*             1,475             1,604       16,525         14,921
                           (78,100]             1,690             2,461        6,988          4,527
 Bladder                   (53,63]*             2,376             3,622       14,419         10,798
                           (78,100]             2,565             3,411       10,181          6,770
 Hematopoietic System      [25,53]             15,038            22,025       47,886         25,861
                           (78,100]             3,762             5,113        9,843          4,731
 Lymph Nodes               [25,53]              9,363            13,913       31,017         17,104
                           (78,100]             6,938            10,216       12,870          2,654
 Stomach                   [25,53]              6,496            11,451       17,033          5,582
                           (78,100]             4,533             6,608        9,071          2,463

Notes: Table shows average monthly spending in the 12 months post cancer diagnosis for different age
groups, by quintiles of patient age at the time of cancer diagnosis. Column 1 shows the age range,
with square brackets and parentheses denoting included and excluded endpoints, respectively. Columns
2­4 show results separately for decedents and survivors. Decedent spending is adjusted for survival
duration (see equation (2)). Survivor spending in column 2 is reweighted by decedent risk and month-
from-diagnosis (see equation (3)). Decedent-Survivor (column 5) is the difference between Decedent
and Survivor (Reweighted) spending. All spending measures are in current New Israeli Shekels (NIS).
Panel A shows results for all cancer types, by patient age quintile. Panel B shows results for youngest
and oldest age quintiles, for the most common cancer types in our sample. For cases marked by  , the
youngest age group [25,53] did not have sufficiently many decedents in all bins for reweighting, so the
second-youngest age group (53,63] is shown instead. N = 83,181 patients.



                                                    39
Appendix A               Israeli Health Insurance System and our
                         Data Provider
In accordance with the 1995 National Healthcare Law, four HMOs provide universal, tax-
funded health insurance coverage to all Israeli residents from birth. Coverage has two tiers.
    The first tier is a "basic," universal tier that covers hospital, outpatient, office consults,
preventive medicine and immunization, diagnostic tests, imaging, drugs, and durable medical
equipment (the types of services covered by this universal tier are similar to Medicare Parts
A, B, and D). For the universal tier, HMOs receive risk-adjusted capitated payments from the
government; premiums are fully subsidized. Patients pay copays for outpatient, emergency,
imaging services, and drugs (oncological drugs are exempt from copays). There are no
copays for inpatient services. Chronic patients have a maximum out-of-pocket cap of NIS
800 (approximately USD 200) per quarter. The set of services covered under the universal
tier (known as the "basket") is reviewed and expanded every year by a professional committee
that ranks new technologies to match a predetermined budget increase. Enrollees can switch
HMOs every other month and maintain their universal coverage, but the annual switching
rate is very low, less than 1%. Clalit therefore continuously collects data on a relatively
stable population of enrollees.
    The second coverage tier is a supplementary insurance tier that provides lower copays
and additional services, such as enhanced prenatal testing, alternative medicine, and a choice
of surgeon for elective surgeries. The supplementary tier is elective (80% of members choose
it) and funded by insurance premiums paid by enrollees. Other than by age, premium rates
do not vary across individuals. They range from approximately NIS 400 (approximately
USD 100) per year for 25-year old enrollees to approximately NIS 1,800 (approximately
USD 450) for elderly enrollees (aged 70 or older). Supplementary coverage can be added
or dropped every month. To prevent selection, there are service-specific waiting periods for
supplementary benefits (e.g., the waiting period is three months for alternative medicine
services and 12 months for oncology benefits not covered by the basic tier, which include
second opinion consults, psychotherapy and dietary consults, cost of travel to treatments,
and home nursing). For patients with limited ability to support themselves, home care in
Israel is subsidized by the social security agency, based on Activities of Daily Life measures.
    Clalit Health Services has an integrated delivery system. Most of its physicians are
salaried. Until 2008, hospitals were reimbursed per diem. Since 2008, for a set of conditions
(such as surgeries), hospital reimbursement is based on a procedure-related grouping of ser-
vices. Patients can also utilize services from external providers, which in non-emergent cases
require preauthorization. Our data include detailed claims information for these services.


Appendix B               Construction and Performance of Predic-
                         tion Algorithms
B.1     Mortality Predictors
For training our algorithms that predict mortality at different points in time, we use adminis-
trative patients records. These records are maintained by Clalit Health Services and include

                                               40
patient demographic information and zip code location sourced directly from the Ministry of
the Interior, detailed claims and EMR data for Clalit Health Services members, and cancer
diagnosis information form the national cancer registry. Appendix Table A7 shows summary
statistics for a small subset of predictors, showing that they are extremely balanced across
the train and test data sets, as expected thanks to the large sample size. The rest of this
section describes the set of predictors we use. With the exception of cancer diagnostic data,
which is recorded at the day of initial diagnosis, all other data are from the year prior to the
initial diagnosis date.

Demographic Data
Demographic data include the following predictors: patient age in years, patient sex, patient
ethnicity, patient primary care clinic, socioeconomic status (calculated by the Israeli Central
Bureau of Statistics based on residential location), a dummy for whether the patient place of
birth is Israel, year of immigration (obtained from government administrative records), and
district code. In addition, we also include the following binary (dummy) flags for whether
the patient lives at home or is institutionalized, whether the patient is receiving nursing
care at home, whether the patient level of income is exempt from national social security
payments, and whether the patient has supplementary insurance coverage (described in
Appendix Section A). There are 13 predictors in this group.

Administrative Claims Data
Our first set of claims-based predictors are cost and utilization measures, defined as the total
annual cost and event count for each of the following service categories: hospital admissions
(planned and unplanned, defined based on whether the admission was through the emergency
room); prescription drugs; diagnostic outpatient services; nonsurgical outpatient procedures;
surgical outpatient procedures; emergency department visits; primary care visits; specialist
consults; laboratory tests; mental health services; imaging; immunization; nursing clinics;
dental; rehabilitation; para-medical procedures; alternative-medicine; and durable medical
equipment. There are 46 predictors in this group.
    Our second set of claims-based predictors are flags for the following chronic conditions
or patient health behaviors: Chronic condition flags: Anxiety, Arrhythmia, Arthropathy,
Asthma, Blindness, CHF, COPD, CRF, CVA, Deafness, Depression, Diabetes, Disability,
Drug, Gastritis, Glaucoma, Hyperlipidemia, Hypertension, Hypothyroidism, IHD, Kidney,
Prior malignancy (ever; actively treated in the past five years), Neurological, Neuroses,
Osteoporosis, Peptic Ulcer, Prostatic, Valvular Cardiac, and Other. There are 33 predictors
in this group.
    Our fourth set of claims-based predictors includes information on prescription drugs. We
consider ATC1-level dispensing events in the previous year. For each of the ACT1 groups,
we calculate the following statistics: flag for whether the patient had any event, the number
of prescription events, and the number of days since the first and the last prescription event
and flags for ten types of controlled substance prescriptions. There are 108 predictors in this
group.



                                              41
Electronic Medical Records Data
EMR data are sourced from patient records that are maintained by EMR systems of Clalit
Health Services. These include: Body Mass Index (BMI), Vital signs (value and days since
last measurement), reported alcohol use, substance abuse, and smoking status and days since
last status evaluation by a physician.
    In addition, we use laboratory test results for the 50 most common tests. For each
laboratory test, we include a flag for whether it was performed, days since the test was
performed, and the most recent result.16 There are 200 predictors in this group.
    We also use EMR information on ATC1-level prescriptions. Prescription events are
recorded in EMR and are distinct from dispensing information recorded in insurance claims,
as EMR records include unfilled prescriptions. We record the number of prescriptions made
in the previous year, a flag for whether there were any prescriptions made, and the number
of days since the first and last prescription of each type. Based on the difference between
prescription and dispensing events, we calculate the following drug adherence measures:
Medication Possession Ratio (MPR) and Proportion of Days Covered (PDC) during the
previous year.

Cancer Diagnostic Data
For each initial cancer diagnosis, we observe the following: cancer type (hierarchically
grouped, based on topography), morphology, ICD9 code, stage, and grade. There are nine
categorical predictors in this group. One limitation of the national cancer registry data is
that stage and grade reporting is not mandatory, and therefore partial. Whenever available,
we include stage and grade data in training the prediction algorithm. For the rest of the
analysis, we categorize cancer cases based on topography.

Clinical Events
For training the algorithm that predicts current one-year mortality prognosis at the start of
major clinical events, we record, for each patient, the sequence of the following major clinical
events that the patient has underwent during the year since initial diagnosis: low-intensity
  16
     We include the following tests: Abnormal lymphocytes (ALY) - absolute, Abnormal lymphocytes (ALY)
- percent, Anisocytosis - percent, Band form neutrophils (STAB) - absolute, Band form neutrophils (STAB)
- percent, Basophils (BASO) - absolute, Basophils (BASO) - percent, Blasts - percent, Eosinophils (EOS) -
absolute, Eosinophils (EOS) - percent, Eosinophils (EOSINOP) - percent, Eosinophils (EOSINOPH) - abso-
lute, Hematocrit (HCT), Hematocrit/Hemoglobin ratio, Hemoglobin (HB), Hemoglobin distribution width
(HDW), Hypochromia (HYPO) - percent, Immature cells - absolute, Immature cells - percent, large unstained
cells (LUC) - absolute, large unstained cells (LUC) - percent, Leukocytes Left Shift (L-shift), Lymphocytes
(LI), Lymphocytes (LY) - absolute, Lymphocytes (LY) - percent, Lymphocytes (LYM) - absolute, Lym-
phocytes (LYMP) - percent, macrocytic (MACRO) - percent, Mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH), Mean
corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC), Mean corpuscular volume (MCV), Mean myeloperoxidase
index (MPXI), Mean platelet volume (MPV), Microcytes (MICR) - percent, Microcytes (MICRO) - percent,
Monocyte (MON) - absolute, Monocyte (MONO) - percent, Monocyte (MONOCYT) - absolute, Monocyte
(MONOCYT) - percent, Neutrophils (NEU) - absolute, Neutrophils (NEU) - percent, Neutrophils (NEUT)
- absolute, Neutrophils (NEUT) - percent, Neutrophils hypersegmented (HYPER) - percent, Platelet (PLT),
Platelet distribution width (PDW), Procalcitonin (PCT), Red blood cells (RBC), Red Cell Distribution
Width (RDW), White blood cell (WBC).


                                                    42
and high-intensity admissions (Low- and High-Admission), chemotherapy or biological drug
treatment (Drug Therapy), emergency department visit that did not result in an admission
(ED Visit), and radiation therapies (Radiation Therapy). For each clinical event, we record
the number of the event (0 is the initial diagnosis, which in some case does not coincide with
any of the above event types but is nonetheless included as a baseline, for completeness of
the sample, 1 is the first clinical event of one of the above types, 2 is the second clinical
event, up to 7, denoting the seventh clinical event; for expositional clarity, we include only
the first seven events for each patient. Less than 2% of cases have additional events). Based
on EMR data, we record spells of drug or radiation therapies that are recorded as a single
treatment plan as one event, even if they were performed over the course of multiple visits.
In the training of the current prognosis algorithm, which is described in detail in Section B.3,
we use as additional predictors the type and sequential order of previous events, the total
number of previous events, and the start time of each event, denoted both in terms of days
since initial diagnosis and in terms of days before the index event for which current prognosis
is predicted.

B.2     Construction of the Initial Prognosis Algorithm
We predict one-year mortality from the date of initial cancer diagnosis. The timing is
illustrated below. We refer to this predicted one-year mortality risk as the patient's "initial
prognosis."

                           initial prognosis                       one-year
                            (cancer diagnosed)                      mark

                  patient history                     spending

                                       actual survival
                                                    decedent           survivor

   To predict one-year mortality, we used Extreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost), a se-
quential ensemble prediction algorithm from Chen and Guestrin (2016). In each step, the
algorithm fits residuals of the previous step. Initializing the vector of predicted outcomes to
be constant, each iteration greedily improves the prediction by following the steps:

  1. Greedily grow a tree to y (k) , minimizing a loss (criterion) function

  2. Grow a new tree to the residuals e(k) = y - y
                                                 ^(k) and obtaining e
                                                                    ^(k)

                                                             ^(k+1) = y
  3. Add the predicted residuals to the previous prediction: y        ^(1) + e
                                                                             ^(k) , where 
     is a learning-rate parameter.

To avoid overfitting, the criterion function penalizes model complexity. Hyper-parameters,
including the penalty weight, the learning rate, the number of trees, and the tree maxi-
mal depth were tuned using Bayesian optimization. The method was implemented using


                                                 43
the XGBoost package in R, which is available at The Comprehensive R Archive Network
(CRAN).
   Because mortality is a relatively low-probability event, a decent overall fit can be obtained
by predicting that the outcome never occurs. To avoid this problem, we follow the common
practice and "down-sample" the survivor share in the training sample. We consider the
subsample of the training sample consisting of all decedents and an equal number of randomly
sampled survivors. This yields a balanced sample with a mortality rate of 50%. Predicted
mortality scores are then adjusted using Bayes' rule, as follows:

                                               P r[D]P r[Balanced|D]
        P r[D|Balanced] =                                                            ,                     (A1)
                                P r[D]P r[Balanced|D] + (1 - P r[D])P r[Balanced|S ]

where D and S denote the events of dying and surviving and Balanced denotes the event
of being sampled to the balanced sample (conditioning on individual characteristics, X is
                                                                                        µD
omitted for brevity). By construction, P r[Balanced|D] = 1 and P r[Balanced|S ] = 1-     µD
                                                                                            ,
where µD is the overall mortality rate (in the training sample).
    To avoid overfitting, we use cross validation. Namely, we randomly split our original
sample into two equally sized training and test samples. To make sure the split is repro-
ducible, we sample individuals based on the division remainder of an MD5 cryptographic
hash function applied to their national ID number. Such sampling procedure is commonly
used in large databases. Its advantage over using a random seed is that it determines the as-
signment of each individual independently of the assignment of others while being randomly
distributed in the population. Appendix Table A7 shows that the random split yields bal-
anced training and test samples. The training sample is used only for fitting the predictive
model. The trained model is then used to predict mortality in the test sample, which is kept
untouched during the training phase, and over which the rest of the analysis is performed.
All results are shown for the test sample.

Performance
The algorithm appears to perform well. Appendix Figure A8 shows the model calibration,
overall and by age group. The test AUC (area under the receiver operating characteristic
curve) is above 91.1 for the prediction of initial prognosis, which reflects high precision
and recall.17 It is only slightly lower than the train AUC (which is 92.8). The algorithm
performance matches or improves on other attempts to predict mortality. Using self-reported
health status of veterans to predict mortality, DeSalvo et al. (2005) obtain an AUC of 0.74.
Using administrative prescription data, Genev`  es et al. (2017) obtain an AUC of 0.81. Using
Medicare Claims data and an ensemble of classifiers, Makar et al. (2015) obtain an AUC of
0.82 and Einav et al. (2018) obtain an AUC of 0.87. for admitted patients in Israel, and
Zeltzer et al. (2019) obtain an AUC of 0.91.
  17
    A receiver operating characteristic curve, or ROC curve, is a plot that quantifies the diagnostic ability of
a binary classifier system as its discrimination threshold is varied. It is created by plotting the true positive
rate (sensitivity) against the false positive rate (one minus specificify) at various threshold settings. The
area under this curve is a widely used measure of classification performance. It reflects the probability that
given two randomly sampled patients, one who died and one who survived, the model will assign a higher
probability of death to the former.


                                                       44
    To quantify the relative contribution of different predictors to predictive performance,
we calculate the gain of different predictors. Gain is a measure of the increase in prediction
accuracy after each predictor is added to the model and normalized so that the overall
contribution of all predictors is 100% (for details, see Chen and Guestrin, 2016). Higher
gain implies a predictor is more important for generating a prediction. For the prediction of
initial one-year mortality prognosis, the most important features, as measured by gain, are
cancer type, patient age, number of unplanned admissions days the year prior to the initial
diagnosis of cancer, and whether the patient had prior malignancy in the five years prior to
the initial cancer diagnosis.

B.3     Construction of Current Prognosis Algorithm
For studying the joint evolution of mortality prognosis and spending for patients during the
course of treatment, we also predict each patient's one-year mortality risk at the start of
major clinical events. We refer to these predictions as the patient's "current prognosis."
    We train a prognosis algorithm to predict one-year mortality on the first day of each of the
following types of clinical events: high-intensity hospital admissions, low-intensity hospital
admissions, drug therapy, radiation therapy, and emergency room visit. We also include the
initial diagnosis as event "zero" for each patient. We use the same train-test split and basic
architecture as our initial prognosis algorithm, discussed in Section B.2. We sample at the
patient (not event) level, so all events for a given patient are included in either the train or
the test sample. The train sample consists of 292,487 patient-event observations.
    For training the algorithm, we use the same predictive model and types of predictors
as we used to generate the predictor of initial mortality risk, but we include, in addition,
all interim information that is available at the time of prediction, including events that
occurred after the initial diagnosis date, and the nature and sequential order of previous
major clinical events. These predictors are discussed in detail in Section B.1. We obtain
comparable levels of accuracy (train AUC 91.4; test AUC 90.2). For the prediction of current
mortality prognosis at the start of clinical events, the most important features, as measured
by gain, are cancer type, number of unplanned admissions in the year prior to the start of
the current event and the total length of such admission, number of scheduled narcotic drug
prescriptions in the prior 90 day period leading to the current event, patient age, the current
event type being a low intensity admission, and, separately, the previous event type being a
low intensity admission.
    The trained model is then used to predict mortality in the test sample, which is kept
untouched during the training phase, and over which the rest of the analysis is performed.
All results are shown for the test sample. Our test sample consists of 292,284 patient-events.
Overall, it contains 2,610 non-empty distinct patient histories, each defined by the patient's
cancer type and an ordered list of between zero and seven clinical events. For the analysis of
the change in current prognosis, we calculate one-year forward spending from the beginning
of each event, which is the overall spending over the one-year period from the start of the
event (or until death). When calculating spending one-year forward, we exclude spending
on the current event and adjust spending for survival duration.




                                              45
B.4      Construction of Monthly Mortality Prognosis
Our analyses rely almost exclusively on the initial or current mortality prognosis. However,
we also briefly evaluated the sensitivity of the reweighting method of survivor spending by
decedent mortality prognosis, discussed in Section 3.3, to an alternative construction of the
initial mortality prognosis.
    The sensitivity analysis consists of two steps. First, we retrain our algorithm to predict
the prognosis at the beginning of every month since initial diagnosis (we refer to this as
the monthly mortality prognosis). Second, we use the monthly mortality prognoses as an
alternative measure of patient risk with which we reweight survivor monthly spending. This
section briefly describes this sensitivity analysis and the results.

Construction and Performance of the Monthly Prognosis Algorithm
We train a prognosis algorithm to predict one-year mortality for patients still alive on the
first day of each month, beginning with the initial diagnosis. We use the same train-test
split and basic architecture as our original (initial-diagnosis) algorithm. But we retrain the
algorithm on 11 separate data sets, each including all patients still alive on the first day of
the month, and use as predictors all available information up to month t from diagnosis,
for months 1, 2, 3, and up to 11 (for month 0, the time of diagnosis, we reuse the initial
prognosis algorithm).18 We train our prognosis algorithm separately for each of the months.
    In these predictions, we use the same predictive model and types of predictors as we used
to generate the predictor of initial mortality risk, but we include all interim information
that is available at the time of prediction, including events that occurred after the initial
diagnosis date. We obtain comparable levels of accuracy (train AUC between 92.4­98.5; test
AUC between 90.3­91.3). Appendix Figure A9 shows boxplots of the distribution of one-year
mortality risk as predicted at different number of months after the index date. Over time,
the composition of those still alive changes, so the mean decreases. However, all distributions
have a thick right tail. We then associate each individual in the test sample with a history
of predicted mortality scores, (^  p0 , p
                                        ^1 , p            ^l ), where l  11 for decedents and l = 11 for
                                             ^2 , . . . , p
survivors.
    In the second step, we calculate average adjusted monthly spending as a function of
predicted interim risk, as follows. For each individual i, we calculate the sequence of monthly
spending, {yil }, and the number of days survived each month, Tit  (1, 30]. We then bin all
person-months by partitioning their predicted mortality scores to 20 equally sized bins and by
month-from-diagnosis. Denote this partition, which has 240 bins, by . Let µI for I  {D, S }
be the weights of decedent- and survivor-months in each bin. µI ( ) = #{(i,t                )|p
                                                                                              ^it ,iI }
                                                                                           #{i|iI }
                                                                                                        , so
         I
     µ ( ) = 1 for I  {D, S }. The top panel of Appendix Figure A2 shows the distribution
of cell sizes in these partitions, for survivors, decedents, and for both groups combined. For
  18
    A month here refers to a 30-day period. For example, a patient who is sampled to be included in the
training set and who died 100 days after the initial diagnosis will be included in the training samples for
predicting current prognosis on months 0, 1, 2, and 3, each time using all available data up to that point
in time, with the mortality outcome coded as (one-year) "decedent" in all of them; a patient who died
400 days after initial diagnosis will be included in all monthly prediction training sets, with the one-year
mortality outcome coded as "survivor" on months 0 and 1, and "decedent" on months 2 and above (since
400 - 60 < 365).


                                                    46
each bin   , we calculate the average adjusted monthly spending, separately for survivors
and decedents:
                                                   yit
                              ¯I ( ) =
                              y                          .                          (A2)
                                                 Tit /30
                                                  {i,t:^
                                                       pit ,iI }

Finally, we reweight survivor spending by decedent interim risk:
                                     reweighted
                                ¯S
                                y                 =        ¯S ( )µD ( ).
                                                           y                             (A3)
                                                       


Reweighting Survivor Spending Using Decedent Monthly Prognosis
Appendix Table A8 shows the results of reproducing Table 2 using the monthly mortality
prognosis instead of the initial mortality prognosis. Comparing different reweighting schemes,
two points become clear. First, accounting for monthly risk helps explain a greater share of
the difference between decedent and survivor spending. However, 40% of the raw difference
between decedent and survivor average spending (which is 13,204 minus 4,671) remains
unexplained even when accounting for monthly prognosis. In addition, an even greater share
of the unexplained difference between decedent and survivor spending is now concentrated
in admissions, particularly low-intensity admissions.




                                                      47
                                   Breast              Prostate                Colon
                    1.00


                    0.75


                    0.50


                    0.25
                                                                                           Event Type
   Share of Cases




                    0.00                                                                      Admission-High
                                                                                              Admission-Low
                                   Brain                  Lung             Pancreas           Drug Therapy
                    1.00                                                                      Radiation Therapy
                                                                                              ED Visit
                                                                                              Initial Diagnosis
                    0.75


                    0.50


                    0.25


                    0.00
                           0   2      4     6   0     2     4     6    0   2      4    6
                                                    Event Number

 Appendix Figure A1: Share of Cases Receiving Different Major Clinical Events by Event
Sequential Number, by Cancer Type
 Notes: Figure shows, for the sample of major clinical events of cancer cases of each type, the share of
 cases still in treatment and their most recent major event, as a function of the (sequential) number of
 the treatment event. Colors denote the type of the most recent event. The three top panels show data
 for the three most common cancer types (Breast, Prostate, and Colon, which together account for a
 third of all cases and have mortality rates of 4.0, 4.8, and 18.6 percent, respectively); the three bottom
 panels show data for the three cancer types for with the highest one-year mortality rate (Brain, Lung,
 and Pancreas, which together account for 11.5 percent of cases and have mortality rates of 47.3, 52.5,
 and 67.8 percent, respectively). The last data point for Pancreas is empty: no patient diagnosed with
 Pancreatic cancer in our sample had more than six clinical events in the year following initial diagnosis.
 N=156,391 patient-events (across all six cancer types).




                                                                  48
                                                       All                                  Decedent                           Survivor
                                12
                                11
                                10
                                 9
                                 8




                                                                                                                                                       Current
                                 7
                                 6
 Month from Initial Diagnosis




                                 5
                                 4
                                 3
                                 2
                                 1
                                 0

                                12
                                11
                                10
                                 9
                                 8
                                 7




                                                                                                                                                       Initial
                                 6
                                 5
                                 4
                                 3
                                 2
                                 1
                                 0
                                     0.0   0.2   0.4         0.6   0.8   1.0 0.0    0.2     0.4    0.6   0.8   1.0 0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
                                                                         Prognosis (One-Year Mortality Risk)

                                                 Number of Cases                   10-100         100-1000     1000-10000       10000-



Appendix Figure A2: Number of Cases by Mortality Prognosis and Time Since Diagnosis
Notes: Each facet shows a heat-map plot of sample size as a function of risk and time since diagnosis.
The x-axis shows initial mortality prognosis, the y-axis shows time since initial cancer diagnosis, and
color shades denote the number of cases in our sample. Column panels show data for different sub-
samples: all cancer patients (left), cancer decedent (middle), and cancer survivor (right). Row panels
show data using two different measures of mortality risk: initial mortality risk (bottom) and current
mortality risk (top). N = 83,181 patients.




                                                                                             49
                                                        All                               Decedent                              Survivor
                                 12
                                 11
                                 10
                                  9
                                  8




                                                                                                                                                        Current
                                  7
                                  6
  Month from Initial Diagnosis




                                  5
                                  4
                                  3
                                  2
                                  1
                                  0
                                 12
                                 11
                                 10
                                  9
                                  8
                                  7




                                                                                                                                                        Initial
                                  6
                                  5
                                  4
                                  3
                                  2
                                  1
                                  0
                                      0.0   0.2   0.4         0.6   0.8   1.0 0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6     0.8   1.0 0.0     0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
                                                                          Prognosis (One-Year Mortality Risk)


                                                                Average Monthly Spending
                                                                                                      5000    10000     15000


 Appendix Figure A3: Average Monthly Spending by Predicted Mortality Risk and Time
Since Diagnosis
 Notes: Each facet shows a heat-map plot of average monthly spending as a function of risk and time
 since diagnosis. The x-axis shows initial mortality prognosis, the y-axis shows time since initial cancer
 diagnosis, and color shades denote average monthly spending. Column panels show data for different
 subsamples: all cancer patients (left), cancer decedent (middle), and cancer survivor (right). Row
 panels show data using two different measures of mortality risk: initial mortality risk (bottom) and
 current mortality risk (top). Cells appearing in white contain 10 patients or fewer; data for these cells
 are not reported. N = 83,181 patients.




                                                                                           50
                                                                                    20.6%
    20.0%                                                        19.5%




    15.0%




    10.0%
                                            8.8%                            8.4%


     5.0%


                        1.2%
                                  0.6%
     0.0%
                           General Population                         Cancer Sample
                               Sample


                                             Decedent Share of Population
                                             Decedent Share of Days Lived
                                             Decedent Share of Spending


         Appendix Figure A4: Spending Concentration, Different Subpopulations
Notes: For the general population, all outcomes are measured from January 1; for the cancer sample,
they are measured from the date of diagnosis; we refer to these dates as the "index date." Decedent
Share of Population is the share of patients in each sample who died within one year of the index
date. Decedent Share of Days Lived is the share of the overall number of days survived by those who
eventually die within the year, out of all days survived by patients in the sample (truncated at 365
days for survivors). Decedent Share of Spending is decedent share of overall spending in the 12 months
from the index date, not adjusted for differences in survival duration. This figure is based on the full
sample (N = 2.3 million for the General Population Sample; N = 166, 839 for the Cancer Sample),
which we later randomly split into training and test sets. Sample definitions are discussed in Section 3.




                                                   51
                                                         1.0
   Share of Spending Accounted for by Individuals with
     Initial Prognosis Greater than the X-Axis Value




                                                         0.8



                                                         0.6



                                                         0.4



                                                         0.2



                                                         0.0

                                                               0.0   0.1   0.2        0.3     0.4     0.5    0.6      0.7    0.8   0.9   1.0
                                                                                 Initial Prognosis (One-Year Mortality Risk)

                                                                                             Decedent       Survivor


Appendix Figure A5: The Share of Average Monthly Spending Accounted for by Individuals
with Different Prognoses
 Notes: For each prognosis--predicted one-year mortality risk at the time of initial cancer diagnosis--
 the figure shows the fraction of spending during the 12 months following the initial diagnosis that is
 accounted for by decedents and survivors whose predicted mortality probability is greater than each
 value. The dark shaded bars show the share of Decedent spending. The light shaded bars show the
 share of Survivor spending. Bars are stacked. Decedent spending is adjusted for survival duration (see
 equation (2)). N = 83,181 patients.




                                                                                                52
                                                Within-cancer-type quintile of current prognosis
                                                       1 (low)                2                  3                  4                  5 (high)
  Change in Average Monthly Spending,




                                         2000
       One Year Forward (NIS)




                                            0




                                        -2000




                                                -0.2     0.0     0.2   -0.2   0.0   0.2   -0.2   0.0   0.2   -0.2   0.0   0.2   -0.2     0.0      0.2
                                                                        Change in Current One-Year Mortality Prognosis

 Appendix Figure A6: Change in Future Spending Over Change in Current Prognosis, by
Current Prognosis Relative to Cancer Type
 Notes: Figure shows, for the sample of 207,607 clinical histories of cancer patients in our sample with
 one more clinical events after initial diagnosis, the relationship between change in current prognosis
 and change in forward spending, by quintile of current prognosis. Quintiles are calculated within cancer
 type. Each observation in the underlying data is a pair of consecutive clinical events. The x-axis shows
 the change in predicted mortality prognosis between the start of the most recent and the start of the
 current clinical events. The y-axis shows the change in one-year forward spending between the two
 events. Linear fit is shown in each panel.




                                                                                           53
                                  Young                            Old

                   1.00




                   0.75


                                                                                     Event Type
  Share of Cases




                                                                                         Admission-High
                                                                                         Admission-Low
                   0.50                                                                  Drug Therapy
                                                                                         Radiation
                                                                                         ED Visit
                                                                                         Initial Diagnosis


                   0.25




                   0.00

                          0   2      4    6           0        2         4   6
                                              Event Number

 Appendix Figure A7: Distribution of Number of Cases by Type and Number of Major
Clinical Events and Patient Age Group
 Notes: Figure shows, using the sample for which we predict current mortality based on major clinical
 events (N = 292,284 patient-events), which we use for the prediction of current mortality risk at the
 start of major clinical events, the share of cases still in treatment and their most recent major event,
 as a function of the number of events performed. Colors denote the type of the most recent event.
 Admission-High and Admission-Low denote high- and low-intensity admissions. Drug Therapy is a
 spell of either chemotherapy or biological drug treatment. Radiation Therapy denotes a spell of such
 therapy. ED visit is emergency department visit that did not result in an admission to a hospital.
 Initial Diagnosis denotes initial cancer diagnosis. Facets show data separately for patients older than
 the median for their cancer type ("Old") and younger than this median ("Young").




                                                          54
                                                               (53,63]                             (63,71]                             (71,78]
                                           1.0
                                                                               q                                   q                                   q
                                           0.8                                                                                                     q
                                                                           q                                   q
          Actual One-Year Mortality Rate




                                           0.6                         q                                   q                                   q
                                                                                                       q                                   q
                                                                   q
                                           0.4                 q                                   q                                   q
                                                           q                                   q                                   q
                                           0.2         q                                   q                                   q
                                                      q                                   q                                   q
                                                    qq                                  qq                                   q
                                                   qq                                  qq                                  qq
                                                                                                                            q
                                                  q
                                                  qq                                  q
                                                                                      qq                                  q
                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                          qq
                                           0.0    q                                   q                                   q


                                                               (78,100]                            [25,53]                                 All
                                           1.0
                                                                               q                                                                       q
                                                                                                                   q
                                           0.8                             q                                                                       q
                                                                                                               q
                                           0.6                         q                                   q                                   q

                                                                   q                                   q                                   q
                                           0.4                                                     q                                   q
                                                               q
                                                           q                                   q                                   q
                                           0.2         q                                   q                                   q
                                                     qq                                   q                                   q
                                                    q                                   qq                                  qq
                                                  qq
                                                   qq                                  qq                                  qq
                                                  q                                   q
                                                                                      qq                                  qq
                                           0.0    q
                                                  q                                   q
                                                                                      q                                   q
                                                                                                                          q

                                                 0.0               0.5             1.00.0               0.5            1.00.0              0.5             1.0
                                                 Average Initial Prognosis (Predicted One-Year Mortality Risk)
                                                                                                                                                       20 bins



                                                   Appendix Figure A8: Model Calibration, by Age Group
Notes: Figure shows our final predictions from a model trained on the training sample on the horizontal
axis against the actual mortality rate on the vertical axis for bins of beneficiaries in the test sample.
To construct this figure, we sorted all individuals within each age quintile by their predicted one-year
mortality risk at the initial cancer diagnosis and divided them into 20 equally sized bins. Within each
bin we compute the average predicted mortality (horizontal axis) and the mortality share (vertical
axis). The range of ages included in each sample is shown in the panel header. The model seems to be
well calibrated for all age groups. N = 83,181 patients.




                                                                                                   55
                                               1.0
 Current Prognosis (One-Year Mortality Risk)




                                               0.9

                                               0.8

                                               0.7

                                               0.6

                                               0.5

                                               0.4

                                               0.3

                                               0.2

                                               0.1



                                                     0   1   2   3    4     5    6     7     8   9   10   11
                                                                     Month After Diagnosis

                            Appendix Figure A9: One-Year Mortality Risk Distribution, Predicted Over Time
Notes: Figure shows box and whisker plots of the distribution of individual prognosis--predicted one-
year mortality risk based on data available at different times after the initial diagnosis of cancer.
The prediction model and data used are described in Appendix B. The horizontal line is the median
prognosis. The lower and upper hinges correspond to the first and third prognosis quartiles (the 25th
and 75th percentiles). The upper whisker extends from the hinge to the largest value, no further than
1.5 * IQR from the hinge (where IQR is the inter-quartile range, or distance between the first and third
quartiles). The lower whisker extends from the hinge to the smallest value, no further than 1.5 * IQR
from the hinge. Outliers--data points beyond the end of the whiskers--are not shown. The sample
includes all 83,181 patients (month 0) and the subset who are alive on the first day of each subsequent
month.




                                                                            56
                     Appendix Table A1: Admission Intensity, by Ward

                                              Average      Share With
                                                                            Share of   Share of
      Intensity            Ward                Daily         Surgical
                                                                           Admission    Days
                                             Cost (NIS)     Procedure
                                                 (1)           (2)            (3)        (4)

      High         Gastroenterology           6,020.96           30.0           3.4        2.6
                   Neurology                  5,259.96            5.2           1.4        1.5
                   Orthopedic Surgery         3,788.69           32.9           1.7        1.9
                   General Surgery            3,215.90           48.3          23.1       16.8
                   Other                      2,827.37           42.2          18.9       14.3
                   ICU                        2,427.11           16.0           0.1        0.2
                   Urology                    2,068.50           24.9           7.4        5.4


      Low          Oncology                   1,560.34               5.6       11.0       16.5
                   Internal Medicine          1,444.29               5.8       29.4       25.9
                   Geriatry                     816.60               6.5        2.0        5.6
                   Rehabilitation               670.37               1.1        1.8        9.2
Notes: Table shows measures of intensity by ward of admission and our associated classification of
admissions into low and high intensity. Average Cost Per Day is the average of negotiated payments
for all billed services associated with each admission divided by the length of stay, in current New
Israeli Shekels (NIS). Share of Admissions is the share of admission to each ward out of all sampled
admissions; Share of Days is the same share weighted by the length of admission. Appendix Table A9
shows the same statistics for decedents and survivors separately. Columns 1, 3, and 4 in this table
and in Appendix Table A9 are based on the subsample of 137,374 admissions in which the patient
visited exactly one ward, excluding 14% of admissions with multiple wards. This was done to avoid the
need to impute how overall charges are assigned across different wards. Column 2 in this table and in
Appendix Table A9 are based on the 53,952 admissions that are to Clalit-owned hospitals, for which
we have detailed procedure data. The rest of the analysis uses all 159,653 admissions, including those
with multiple wards.




                                                  57
          Appendix Table A2: Admission Characteristics by Hospital Ownership

                                                                   Hospital Owner
                                                                   Clalit    Non Clalit
                                                                    (1)         (2)
                Age (mean, minimum = 25)                             65.8            65.1
                Sex (% Female)                                       50.5            49.4
                Number of Chronic Conditions (mean)                   4.8             4.6
                One-year Mortality (%)                               27.6            30.0
                ACG Score (%)
                  Healthy or Low                                     17.7            17.6
                  Moderate                                           54.2            55.2
                  High or Very High                                  28.1            27.1
                High Intensity Admissions (%)                        57.6            56.1
                Number of Admissions                               63,422          96,231
                Number of Unique Patients                          30,324          39,048

Notes: Table shows characteristics of admissions of cancer patients to Clalit and non-Clalit­owned
hospitals. Section 3.1 discusses the institutional setting. One-year mortality is the fraction of admissions
ending in death within a year from the time of admission. ACG Score is the Johns Hopkins University
Adjusted Clinical Groups (ACG) Resource Utilization Band, which is a summary score for predicted
healthcare utilization. Admission intensity is defined based on the ward of admissions, see Appendix
Table A1 for details.




                                                     58
                                                     Appendix Table A3: Additional Descriptive Statistics
                                                                                                                                                 Decedent
                                                                           One-Year              Average Monthly             Percentiles of
                                                        Sample Size                     Age                                                      with Pred.
                                                                           Mortality              Spending (NIS)          Predicted Mortality
                                                                                                                                                 Mort.  80
                                                                Percent                                       Adjusted
                                                        N                   Percent    Median   Unadjusted for Survival   80th 95th     99th       Percent
                                                               of Sample
                                                       (1)         (2)        (3)       (4)         (5)         (6)       (7)    (8)    (9)         (10)

                   A. All Cancer Types
                     All                              83,181       100.0        19.6       67         4,757      5,411    37.8   81.1     94.1             24.0
                     Age>65                           44,620        53.6        27.0       75         4,110      4,962    54.4   87.4     95.5             27.4
                     Age>85                            4,697         5.6        47.8       88         2,649      3,902    80.2   94.5     98.1             38.0
                   B. By Cancer Type
                      Breast                          13,379        16.1         4.0       61         5,250      5,374     4.3   18.6     51.5              2 .2
                      Prostate Gland                   8,164         9.8         4.8       70         3,291      3,374     5.8   25.7     54.9              2 .0
                      Colon                            8,015         9.6        18.6       72         4,763      5,404    31.4   63.9     82.7              6 .8
                      Bronchus and Lung                6,278         7.5        52.5       69         5,584      8,241    79.9   91.6     95.6             32.7
                      Skin                             5,297         6.4         5.3       64         1,696      1,744     7.2   24.1     57.0              1 .1
                      Bladder                          4,938         5.9        11.9       71         2,857      3,051    17.1   49.3     76.3              3 .7
                      Hemato. and Reticul. Systems     4,428         5.3        23.9       70         8,453      9,855    41.5   72.9     89.7             10.2




59
                      Lymph Nodes                      2,910         3.5        19.0       64         8,759      9,954    34.8   65.4     84.1              7 .4
                      Stomach                          2,851         3.4        44.9       71         5,674      7,847    69.3   86.3     92.9             19.0
                      Rectum                           2,321         2.8        15.9       68         6,733      7,399    24.5   58.6     82.0              7 .0
                      Corpus Uteri                     2,173         2.6         8.0       64         3,402      3,546    11.2   31.4     57.2              1 .7
                      Thyroid Gland                    2,127         2.6         4.1       53         2,102      2,159     2.6   11.5     71.5             17.2
                      Pancreas                         2,047         2.5        67.8       72         4,925      8,641    89.8   95.9     97.9             51.4
                      Kidney                           2,000         2.4        12.4       66         2,732      2,955    19.9   55.2     82.0              7 .3
                      Cervix Uteri                     1,934         2.3         4.7       41         2,617      2,676     4.4   21.9     60.6              4 .4
                      Meninges                         1,528         1.8         9.8       64         3,314      3,530    13.3   37.4     58.8              0 .7
                      Brain                            1,225         1.5        47.3       62         7,554     10,538    71.5   88.3     94.3             22.1
                      Ovary                            1,194         1.4        16.2       62         3,782      4,172    25.2   61.0     80.7              6 .2
                      Rectosigmoid Junction              908         1.1        11.0       69         5,578      5,946    21.9   54.4     75.7              5 .0
                      Other                            7,518         9.0        26.3       66         5,760      6,862    48.3   80.7     92.8             17.5
                      Unknown Primary Site             1,946         2.3        75.2       73         4,062      9,253    94.0   97.4     98.8             69.9

     Notes: Table shows descriptive statistics for different subsamples. Column 3 shows actual mortality in the 12 months following the index date,
     which is January 1 for the general population samples and initial cancer diagnosis for the cancer samples. Columns 5 and 6 show spending
     in current New Israeli Shekels (NIS) over the same period with and without adjustment for survival duration (see equation (2)). Columns
     7­9 show different quantiles of the predicted mortality risk, using our prognosis algorithm. Column 10 shows the fraction of decedents with a
     predicted one-year mortality risk greater or equal to 80%. N = 83,181 patients.
                Appendix Table A4: Admission Intensity, by Billing Method

                                      Average Cost        Avg Length
                 Billing Method                                            Share of Admissions
                                      Per Day (NIS)         of Stay
                                           (1)                (2)                    (3)
  All      Procedure Based                       3,895               4.5                      32.8
           Per Diem                              1,406               7.7                      67.2
  Decedent Procedure Based                       3,366               7.8                      14.6
           Per Diem                              1,354               9.5                      85.4
  Survivor Procedure Based                       4,048               4.0                      40.2
           Per Diem                              1,450               6.6                      59.8

Notes: Table shows alternative classification of admissions, based on whether it was billed using
procedure-based bundled episode billing or per-diem. Average Cost Per Day is the average of ne-
gotiated payments for all billed services associated with each admission divided by the length of stay,
in current New Israeli Shekels (NIS). Avg Length of Stay is the average admission length, in days.
Share of Admissions is the share of each class out of all sampled admissions. N = 159,653 admissions.




                                                  60
Appendix Table A5: Average Monthly Spending with Alternative Admission Grouping

                                               Survivor                 Decedent             Difference
                                                                                     Decedent -
                                                    Reweighted by                                    Percent of
                 Category            Unweighted                                       Survivor
                                                    Decedent Risk                                  Total Difference
                                                                                    (Reweighted)
                                        (1)               (2)             (3)           (4)               (5)
       All Inpatient                      1,735                 4,172       9,152          4,980                100.0
       A. By Ward
        Low Intensity                       482                 1,800       5,302          3,502                 70.3
           Internal Medicine                200                   697       2,429          1,732                 34.8
           Oncology                         207                   784       2,220          1,436                 28.8
           Geriatry                          28                   160         358            198                  4.0
           Rehabilitation                    46                   159         295            136                  2.7
        High Intensity                    1,254                 2,372       3,850          1,479                 29.7
           General Surgery                  474                 1,037       1,405            368                  7.4
           ICU                               14                    39         202            163                  3.3
           Neurology                         64                   143         271            129                  2.6
           Urology                          107                   101         199             97                  2.0
           Orthopedic Surgery                67                   164         205             41                  0.8
           Gastroenterology                 145                   300         256            -44                 -0.9
           Other                            383                   589       1,314            725                 14.6
       B. By Planned Status
         Unplanned                          409                 1,194       4,019          2,825                 56.7
         Planned                          1,326                 2,978       5,133          2,156                 43.3
       C. By Billing Method
         Per diem                             792               2,383       6,643          4,260                 85.5
         Procedure Based                      943               1,789       2,509            720                 14.5
       D. By Main Procedure
        All Clalit Owned Inpatient            588               1,269       2,628          1,359                100.0
           Maintenance                        259                 587       1,492            905                 66.6
           Surgery                            274                 465         653            188                 13.8
           Chemotherapy                        46                 177         347            170                 12.5
           Radiation                            9                  41         137             96                  7.1

Notes: Table summarizes the results of using alternative classification of inpatient admission spending
in the comparison of decedent and survivor spending. Panel A shows our baseline classification of
admissions (used in Table 2) into high and low intensity admissions, based on the average spending in
the ward to which the patient was admitted. In addition, this panels shows the contribution of each
of the top ten wards separately. Panel B shows a classification based on whether the admission was
planned or unplanned (namely, whether it was scheduled or originated from an emergency department
visit). Panel C shows a classification based on whether billing was procedure-based bundled episode
or per-diem. Panel D shows an alternative classification based on the main therapeutic procedures
coded in the internal hospital records of the admission (based on the sample of admissions to Clalit-
owned hospital, for which procedure codes are available and which are further described in Appendix
Table A11). N = 83,181 patients.




                                                           61
Appendix Table A6: Procedures in Planned and Unplanned Inpatient, by Admission Time
Before Death

                                      Procedure Type, Admission With Any (%)
                            Maintenance Diagnostics Surgery Radiation Chemotherapy   Other   N of Admissions
                                (1)         (2)       (3)     (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)
  A. Planned Admissions
   Last month               11.2              97.9    11.8       4.4           6.6     0.5             2,201
   1-3 months               11.8              95.3    14.6       7.1          12.5     0.9             1,755
   4-12 months              10.5              94.5    19.0       6.7          20.5     1.1             2,434
   Survivors                9.7               91.3    41.9       3.2           8.3     1.2            20,501
   All Planned              10.0              92.4    35.6       3.9           9.5     1.1            26,891
  B. Unplanned Admissions
   Last month               11.8              99.2     8.6       3.8           3.9     0.9             3,018
   1-3 months               11.9              96.6     9.8       6.1           7.1     0.9             2,109
   4-12 months              11.5              93.5    13.7       6.4          13.0     1.8             2,555
   Survivors                8.5               88.8    24.0       2.6           6.9     1.0            16,095
   All Unplanned            9.6               91.3    19.7       3.5           7.2     1.1            23,777
  C. Low Intensity
   Last month               8.7               98.6     5.2       4.9           4.8     0.4             4,264
   1-3 months               8.9               96.1     6.0       8.9          10.7     0.5             2,791
   4-12 months              7.8               93.6     7.1       9.5          21.5     1.1             3,059
   Survivors                5.6               93.8     5.4       7.1          15.4     1.1            11,944
   All Low Intensity        6.9               95.0     5.7       7.3          13.6     0.9            22,058
  D. High Intensity
   Last month               18.1              98.9    20.9       0.9           3.9     1.4             1,582
   1-3 months               17.6              95.9    22.8       1.4           5.6     1.4             1,315
   4-12 months              15.2              94.7    26.7       2.2           7.8     1.8             2,277
   Survivors                10.9              88.8    45.0       0.9           3.7     1.1            26,404
   All High Intensity       11.8              90.1    41.6       1.1           4.1     1.1            31,578

 Notes: Table shows results parallel to those shown in Table 4, separately for planned and unplanned
 admissions (Panels A and B) and for low- and high-intensity admissions (Panels C and D). Unplanned
 admissions are those originated through the emergency room; planned admissions are all other admis-
 sions. The intensity of admissions is defined based on the average daily spending for different wards.
 See Appendix Table A1 for details. Sampled admissions include Clalit-owned-hospital admissions that
 started and ended during the year after diagnosis.




                                                     62
                                  Appendix Table A7: Select Predictors
                                                                             Train Set          Test Set
                                                                                (1)               (2)
            Sample Size
             Number of Beneficiaries                                                 83,658            83,181
            Outcomes
             1-Year All-Cause Mortality (%)                                            19.4              19.6
            Demographics
             Age (mean) (minimum = 25) (y)                                               65                65
             Sex (% Female)                                                            52.3              52.0
             Ethnicity (% Arabs)                                                        8.8               8.7
             Supplementary Insurance (%)                                               70.3              70.0
             Disability (%)                                                             3.8               3.7
            Chronic Conditions, %
             Hyperlipidemia                                                            47.9              47.9
             Hypertension                                                                48                48
             Arthropathy                                                               27.6              27.3
             Diabetes                                                                  22.1              22.0
             IHD                                                                       21.5              21.6
             Arrhythmia                                                                 9.5               9.6
             Neurological                                                               7.9               7.9
             Kidney                                                                     7.9               8.0
             Gastritis                                                                  9.7               9.6
             CRF                                                                        6.2               6.1
             Osteoporosis                                                              10.6              10.4
             CVA                                                                        7.6               7.5
             Depression                                                                 7.2               7.1
             Valvular Cardiac                                                           5.8               5.7
             CHF                                                                        5.5               5.5
             COPD                                                                       6.9               7.0
            Prior Utilization, mean 1yr count (% non zero)
             Prescription Drugs                                               1493 (97.2) 1470.9 (97.3)
             Laboratory Tests                                                 36.1 (85.1)   35.8 (84.9)
             Imaging Events                                                    2.2 (71.1)    2.2 (70.8)
             Ambulatory Encounters                                           154.6 (66.6) 150.6 (66.5)
             Emergency Room Visits                                               0.5 (32)    0.5 (32.3)
             Hospital Visits                                                       2 (73)        2 (73)
            Prior Utilization, mean 1yr cost (% non zero)
             Total Spending (NIS)                                           16,881 (99.8)     16,873 (99.7)
            ACG Score,*
             Healthy or Low                                                            18.6              18.9
             Moderate                                                                  56.1              56.8
             High or Very High                                                         25.2              24.4
            Clinical Measurements, last measurement, mean (% non missing)
             BMI                                                                28   (54.2)       28   (54.2)
             Diastolic Blood Pressure (mm Hg)                                 75.1   (66.4)     75.3   (66.5)
             Systolic Blood Pressure (mm Hg)                                 129.1   (66.4)    129.2   (66.5)
             Hemoglobin (g/dL)                                                12.9   (85.7)     12.9   (85.7)
             Hematocrit, (%)                                                     3   (10.3)        3   (10.3)
             Red Blood Cells                                                   4.5   (85.6)      4.5   (85.5)
             Platelets (1000/uL)                                             261.8   (85.7)    261.1   (85.7)
             Neutrophiles                                                      5.3   (84.5)      5.3   (84.4)
             Lymphocytes                                                       2.1   (84.4)      2.1   (84.4)

Notes: Table shows descriptive statistics for select predictors used in the training of the initial prognosis
algorithm, separately for the training and testing subsamples. See Appendix B.1 for detailed variable
definitions and a comprehensive list of predictors used. Numbers in parentheses show the fraction of
nonmissing observations. Missing measurements for each predictor were coded as a separate category.


                                                        63
  Appendix Table A8: Average Monthly Spending, Reweighted by Monthly Prognosis

                                Survivor                   Decedent              Difference
                                                                         Decedent -
                                      Reweighted by                                      Percent of
      Category          Unweighted                                        Survivor
                                      Decedent Risk                                    Total Difference
                                                                        (Reweighted)
                            (1)           (2)                (3)             (4)             (5)
  Total                      4,671           9,649           13,204            3,555               100.0
  All Inpatient:             1,735           5,053             9,152           4,099               115.3
   Planned                   1,326           3,543             5,133           1,590                44.7
   Unplanned                    409          1,510             4,019           2,509                70.6
   Low Intensity                482          2,436             5,302           2,866                80.6
   High Intensity            1,254           2,618             3,850           1,233                34.7
  Other Services:            2,936           4,596             4,052            -544               -15.3
   Drugs                     1,119           2,012             1,733            -279                -7.8
   Outpatient                1,239           1,809             1,566            -243                -6.8
   Imaging                      191            267               222             -45                -1.3
   Other                        387            508               530              23                 0.6
Notes: Table shows average monthly spending in the 12 months post cancer diagnosis. Columns show
results separately for decedents and survivors. Results in this table are parallel to those shown in
Table 2, but with survivor spending being reweighted (in columns 2) by month (since-diagnosis) and
monthly prognosis instead of by month and initial prognosis. Monthly prognosis is calculated every
month, starting from each patient's initial prognosis, for all patients still alive. Appendix B provides
additional details on this risk measure and the reweighting based on it. Decedent spending is adjusted
for survival duration (see equation (2)). Decedent-Survivor is the difference between Decedent and
Survivor (Reweighted) spending. Percent of Total Difference is the difference in column 4, expressed
as a fraction of the total difference, NIS 3,555, with negative differences keeping their negative sign.
First row shows total healthcare spending, and subsequent rows show various partition. All Inpatient
refers to spending on all services that are delivered during hospital admissions and Other Services
refers to spending on all services that are not part of an admission. Within inpatient, we partition into
low intensity versus high intensity, and unplanned versus planned. Low intensity refers to admissions
into one of four wards: Internal Medicine, Oncology, Rehabilitation, and Geriatric, which Appendix
Table A1 shows involve the lowest average daily cost and few surgeries; High Intensity is admission to
all other wards. Unplanned refers to admissions through the emergency department; Planned refers
to all other admissions. Within Other Services we partition into Outpatient, Drugs, Imaging and
Other. Outpatient, Drugs, and Imaging refer to hospital outpatient services, prescription drugs, (except
those administered during admissions), and diagnostic radiology services not during an admission,
respectively. All spending measures are in current New Israeli Shekels (NIS). N = 83,181 patients.




                                                      64
         Appendix Table A9: Admission Intensity, by Ward and Mortality Status

                                                   Average     Share With
                                                                                Share of   Share of
    Intensity                    Ward               Daily        Surgical
                                                                               Admission    Days
                                                  Cost (NIS)    Procedure
                                                        (1)        (2)            (3)        (4)
    A. Decedent
       High              Gastroenterology           4,982.37          22.2          1.5        1.0
                         Neurology                  4,401.93           8.2          1.2        1.2
                         Orthopedic Surgery         3,840.70          35.2          1.0        0.9
                         ICU                        2,544.43          15.9          0.3        0.3
                         General Surgery            2,372.18          22.2         11.9       11.0
                         Other                      2,036.29          25.2         12.0       10.1
                         Urology                    1,929.81          34.4          2.5        1.9


         Low             Oncology                   1,456.86             6.1       16.4       21.9
                         Internal Medicine          1,444.66             6.1       46.3       34.0
                         Geriatry                     791.76             6.3        3.9        8.1
                         Rehabilitation               584.21             0.0        2.9        9.5
    B. Survivor
       High              Gastroenterology           6,222.13         100.0          4.2        3.7
                         Neurology                  5,694.37           3.8          1.4        1.6
                         Orthopedic Surgery         3,776.52          32.1          2.0        2.6
                         General Surgery            3,519.27          53.0         27.7       20.8
                         Other                      3,144.64          45.7         21.7       17.2
                         ICU                        2,152.78          16.1          0.0        0.1
                         Urology                    2,092.08          23.7          9.4        7.7


         Low             Oncology                   1,679.62             5.1        8.7       12.9
                         Internal Medicine          1,443.88             5.6       22.3       20.4
                         Geriatry                     851.87             6.7        1.2        3.9
                         Rehabilitation               732.75             1.8        1.3        9.0
Notes: Table shows measures of intensity by ward of admission and our associated classification of
admissions into low and high intensity. Results parallel to those shown in Appendix Table A1, but
shown here separately for decedents and survivors. Average Daily Cost is the average of negotiated
payments (in current New Israeli Shekels) for all billed services associated with each admission divided
by the length of stay. Share of Admissions is the share of admissions to each ward out of all sampled
admissions; Share of Days is the same share weighted by the length of admission. This table and
Appendix Table A1 are based on the subsample of 137,374 admissions in which the patient visited
exactly one ward, excluding 14% of admissions with multiple wards. This was done to avoid the need
to impute how overall charges are assigned across different wards. The rest of the analysis uses all
159,653 admissions, including those with multiple wards.


                                                   65
Appendix Table A10: Spending and Mortality Risk by Number of Event and Patient Age
Group

                       No. of   Cases       Current Mortality Risk         Avg Monthly Spending
  Event Number           Old    Young         Old           Young            Old         Young
                         (1)       (2)        (3)              (4)           (5)            (6)
  0                   40,689    42,492      0.255            0.132         6,010          6,559
  1                   35,571    36,182      0.272            0.155         6,161          7,304
  2                   28,364    28,560      0.293            0.187         6,449          8,316
  3                   18,532    19,459      0.298            0.208         6,423          8,738
  4                    8,406     9,466      0.257            0.187         6,175          7,924
  5                    3,097     4,098      0.210            0.186         4,799          8,086
  6                    1,134     1,896      0.247            0.232         5,365          8,228
  7                      332       986      0.381            0.341         7,509         10,796
 Notes: Table shows summary statistics for the sample for which we predict current mortality based
 on major clinical events (N = 292,284 patient-events). Event number refers to the number of major
 clinical events since initial cancer diagnosis. Old and Young refer to patients whose age at diagnosis is
 above and below the median age of patients with the same cancer type.




                                                    66
        Appendix Table A11: Admission Intensity, by Main Therapeutic Procedure

                                      Average Cost        Avg Length
                Main Procedure                                             Share of Admissions
                                      Per Day (NIS)         of Stay
                                           (1)                (2)                     (3)
  All      Maintenance                           1,679               6.1                       61.7
           Surgery                               3,363               5.6                       28.1
           Chemotherapy                          2,214               7.2                        7.8
           Radiation                             1,592               8.8                        2.5
  Decedent Maintenance                           1,452               7.4                       73.7
           Surgery                               2,342              11.7                       12.8
           Chemotherapy                          2,073               9.4                        9.5
           Radiation                             1,556              11.8                        4.0
  Survivor Maintenance                           1,833               5.4                       57.0
           Surgery                               3,726               4.7                       34.0
           Chemotherapy                          2,327               6.1                        7.1
           Radiation                             1,646               6.4                        1.9

Notes: Table shows alternative classification of admissions, based on the main procedure performed
during the admission. Average Cost Per Day is the average of negotiated payments for all billed services
associated with each admission divided by the length of stay, in current New Israeli Shekels (NIS). Avg
Length of Stay is the average admission length, in days. Share of Admissions is the share of each class
out of all sampled admissions. Sample is based on the 53,952 admissions to Clalit-owned hospitals, for
which we have detailed procedure data.




                                                   67
