                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         AGGREGATE ADVERTISING EXPENDITURE IN THE U.S. ECONOMY:
                        WHAT'S UP? IS IT REAL?

                                          Alvin Silk
                                        Ernst R. Berndt

                                      Working Paper 28161
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28161


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020




This paper is dedicated to the memory of Robert J. Coen, Senior Vice-President, Interpublic
Group. Mr. Coen was acknowledged to be Madison Avenue's "Chief Forecaster" and admired as
the dedicated curator of McCann-Erickson's historical database on U.S. advertising expenditures.
Mr. Coen passed away on November 18, 2016. This research was supported by the Division of
Research, Harvard Business School and the MIT Sloan School of Management, but has not been
otherwise sponsored. We thank Michael Leszega and Vincent Letang for assistance in accessing
Magna Global's data. We also acknowledge very useful and constructive communications with
Professors W. Erwin Diewert (University of British Columbia) and Kevin J. Fox (University of
New South Wales), and with Kathleen Frawley and Sarah Eian of the U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics, Producer Price Index program. However, the authors are responsible for any errors and
omissions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Alvin Silk and Ernst R. Berndt. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Aggregate Advertising Expenditure in the U.S. Economy: What's Up? Is It Real?
Alvin Silk and Ernst R. Berndt
NBER Working Paper No. 28161
December 2020
JEL No. L16,L86,M37

                                         ABSTRACT

The two components of the advertising industry ­ the creative sector that develops and produces
messages, and the communications sector that transmits messages via various media ­ have each
been greatly affected by advances in creative design and communications technologies. As the
media composition of advertising has changed in the last century for both local and national
advertising ­ from newspapers, outdoor and radio advertising to network and cable television,
and most recently to internet and digital media ­ so too has been transformed the very concept of
advertising, its functionality and its measurement.

We compare four sources of annual nominal U.S. aggregate advertising expenditure data ­ from
the public sector Internal Revenue Service and the U.S. Census Bureau Survey of Service
Industries, and the private sector McCann Erickson and Magna Global advertising agencies­ that
are available over various time periods. In nominal terms, we estimate the elasticity of
advertising expenditures with respect to Gross Domestic Product, and find that this elasticity
appears to have increased substantially beginning in the late 1990s ­ from about 1.4 to 1.9. The
timing of this structural break coincides roughly with the decline of print, radio and network and
cable television, and the dramatic increase in digital and internet-based advertising.

To understand the forces underlying this structural break in nominal advertising expenditures,
data on media-specific advertising prices are needed, thereby converting nominal to real
advertising. However, currently annual U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics Producer Price Index data
on digital and many other advertising media prices are only available beginning in 2010. The
availability of media-specific quality-constant price indexes would not only enable researchers to
trace more completely the recent impact of digital and internet advertising, but would also
facilitate contemporary and longstanding issues to be addressed surrounding the measurement of
advertising effects, including how variations in the durability of response to advertising across
media are related to inter-media price differentials, and why heterogeneity among firms and
industries may arise with respect to the procyclicality of advertising policies.


Alvin Silk
Graduate School of Business Administration
Harvard University
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
asilk@hbs.edu

Ernst R. Berndt
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-533
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
eberndt@mit.edu
                                           I. Introduction

    Appearing at an Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB) conference in 2005, Bill Gates
reportedly was asked "Why is online advertising growing so fast?" In his oft-quoted response, he
proclaimed that "Well, when you think about it, the future of the advertising is the Internet." 1
Gates proved to be prescient in the sense that post-2005, total outlays for digital advertising in
the U.S. continued to rise at double digit growth rates, with the exception of 2009, the year of
the Great Recession. Paradoxically, early in 2014 an article appearing in Bloomberg News
proclaimed that "Looking at data since the 1920's, the U.S. advertising industry has always been
about 1 percent of U.S.GDP". The article further maintained that history revealed that new
media (radio, television, and the Internet) followed a "predictable" growth pattern: five years of
"rapid (but declining) growth rates," after which "growth rates steadied," "matching" that of the
U.S. economy. Hence, the U.S. advertising is an industry where "the pie is not growing...The
easiest way to make more money is to steal larger slices of the pie."2

    By 2016, digital advertising had supplanted television as the medium with the largest share
of U.S. total advertising receipts earned by media suppliers. 3 Nonetheless, later in that same
year a report emanating from a Wall St. brokerage firm presented data indicating that total U.S.
advertising as a percentage of GDP was declining. 4 More recently, in 2019 it was reported that
the "growth in the U.S. advertising market has been unable to maintain its historical trend of
growing in lockstep with gross domestic product, equating to approximately 2% of GDP". 5
Relating the dramatic growth in digital's market share to growth in the size of the total
advertising market, Wieser recently observed that "Deceleration was always inevitable for one
core reason: there is only so much growth to be had." 6

    Together, these periodic reports and observations suggest that the rapid growth of digital
advertising has occurred over a period during which the share of U.S. economic activity (as
measured by GDP) represented by total advertising expenditures has been in decline, a
development that, if substantiated, would represent a striking departure from what previously


1
  See Phillipson [2016].
2
  Chemi [2014]. Italics added.
3
  Letang and Leszega [2017], Magna Global [2015].
4
  Juenger et al. [2016].
5
  Baine [2019], p. 4. Italics added.
6
  Wieser [2019], p. 1. Italics added.

                                                                                            Page 1
had been regarded a stable long-term proportion (Telser [1968]). It bears noting that over the
period since the launch of digital media in 1996 through 2018 7, the U.S. economy has
experienced two full business cycles, one of eight months in 2001 and the Great Recession of 18
months in 2008-09. 8 Moreover, the digital transformation has not only led to an extensive
overhaul of the methods used to measure aggregate advertising industry spending, but also to
an ongoing program of research and revision of the measurement of GDP, including the
treatment of advertising in the U.S. system of national accounts and its representation/inclusion
in GDP. 9

    The U.S. advertising industry is in the throes of change as it seeks to adapt to the far-
reaching, but still unfolding effects of the digital disruption that has already transformed not
only the media habits (Coyle and Nakamura [2019]) and purchasing behavior of consumers
(Goldfarb and Tucker [2019]) but also the distribution and advertising strategies firms pursue
and how those activities are organized and managed (Burton [2008], Evans [2008],[2009]).

    In light of these considerations, the fundamental question to be addressed here is: Does the
U.S. advertising industry have a growth problem, a measurement problem, or both? 10 The paper
is organized as follows. We begin in Section II with some historical background on the vertical
structure of the U.S. advertising industry. Then in Section III we describe a patchwork of four
time series we have assembled that measure nominal aggregate advertising spending by
advertisers and the related revenues of two sectors who function as service providers to
advertisers -- advertising agencies and media firms. In Section IV we set forth the analytic
framework we employ relating nominal aggregate advertising expenditures to Gross Domestic
Product. In Section V we describe the time series and econometric methods used to analyze the
four times series covering different but overlapping time periods between 1960 and 2018. In
Section VI we detail our results and in Section VII we follow with a discussion of several
implications of our findings. In Section VIII we briefly summarize our main conclusions.




7
  As noted in Internet Advertising Bureau [2019], p. 11.
8
  National Bureau of Economic Research [2016], p. 1.
9
  On this, see, for example, W. Erwin Diewert and Kevin J. Fox [2020].
10
   This framing of the issue was suggested by the title of the paper by Byrne, Fernald and Reinsdorf [2016].

                                                                                                   Page 2
                                     II. Historical Background

         Estimates of the economic value or volume of advertising activity in the U.S. have long
been recognized as vital information that not only serves as a basic indicator of the performance
of an important sector of the domestic economy, but also represents a key input widely utilized
by business, government, and academic organizations to support policy analysis, planning, and
forecasting. Given the dynamics of the U.S. economy and the adaptive nature of advertising and
marketing practices, the history of advertising is one of recurring life cycles of growth and
decline coinciding with the introduction of a "new" medium that substitutes for (and/or
complements) elements in the prior mix of media available to advertisers. 11 Thus changing
media technologies have led to discontinuities in existing time series that are revised or
replaced by successor measures that may differ markedly from their predecessors in concept
(e.g., how advertising is defined, by what methods and metrics its economic value is measured,
and by the nature and sources of data collected), as well as with respect to the mix of media
types and vehicles that advertisers employ in practice. 12

         In the course of formulating a program of research on the contribution of service
industries to the U.S. economy, Griliches observed that: "To measure the output of any industry
we need to know its total receipts and have adequate information to construct an appropriate
price index for it". He further suggested that: "Rather than discussing definitions, it may be more
useful to take an operational approach and to examine what are actually called services in the
national accounts and related statistical sources." 13 Interestingly, "advertising" was among the
service industries he identified as deserving attention. In that same spirit and for the purposes
at hand we turn to the operational definition of "advertising" that Borden [1944] proposed in his
seminal study of the economics of advertising:


               "Advertising includes those activities by which visual or oral messages are
               addressed to the public for the purposes of informing and influencing them to


11
   On the history of these developments, see Sherman [1900], Blank [1963], Borden [1944, Chapter III],
Yang [1962, Chapter 1], Simon [1970, Appendix D] and the references cited therein.
12
   See Schultz [2016] for a recent discussion of the problems arising from "the lack of an acceptable
definition of the `field' of advertising". As Arrow et al. [1990] lamented in a different context, "It is very
difficult to determine where to draw the line between advertising and other forms of selling and
promotion" and "Even if one defines advertising narrowly as, say, media advertising it is still a
heterogeneous commodity" (p.7).
13
   Griliches, "Introduction" in Griliches et al. [1992], p. 6. Italics added.

                                                                                                        Page 3
                 either buy merchandise or services or to act or be inclined favorably toward ideas,
                 institutions, or persons featured." 14

Borden went on to distinguish "advertising" from "publicity and other forms of propaganda" in
two important respects: (i) advertising messages are identified with the advertiser either by
"signature or oral statement"; and (ii) "advertising is a commercial transaction involving pay to
publishers or broadcasters and others whose media are involved." 15

           Taking Borden's definition as our point of departure, we posit that the total amount a
firm expends on advertising is the sum of the costs incurred by engaging in two fundamental but
distinct activities essential to an advertising campaign: the costs of developing and producing
messages, plus the costs of delivering those commercial messages to the audiences of media
vehicles that include members of the advertiser's target market segments.
           As we discuss below, the structure of the U.S. advertising industry distinguishes these
two distinct activities, although that structure has evolved over time.


III. The U.S. Advertising Industry: Vertical Structure and Aggregate Measures of Spending

III.1 Vertical Relations

            Figure 1 depicts the vertical structure of the advertising industry as consisting of
advertisers and audience connected through two intermediary sectors: (i) independent firms
who provide an array of advertising and marketing services (A&MS) related to the development
and production of marketing communication campaigns, and (ii) suppliers of media space/time

                    {Insert Figure 1 Somewhere Near Here)

by which advertising campaigns are displayed to target audiences. Solid vertical lines connecting
the three adjacent layers or sectors reflect the traditional (and still dominant) structure
featuring intermediaries (e.g., full-service advertising agencies and media suppliers). In addition,
the existence of two modes of vertical integration is recognized: (i) forward integration by
advertisers who internalize one or more advertising and marketing services (Silk and Stiglin
[2016]) and (ii) backward integration by media suppliers who internalize one or more advertising




14
     Borden [1944], p. 17.
15
     Id.

                                                                                               Page 4
and marketing services (Gupta and David [2019]). Each mode is represented by a dashed line
connecting advertising and media suppliers.

           For each of the three levels, one or more time series data sources are listed within the
box corresponding to that level: Firm Advertising Expenditures (IRS, MCE); A&MS Service
Provider Revenues (SAS8) ; and Media Supplier Advertising Revenue (MG8), which we now
describe.

III.2 Measures

           We analyze alternative time series as indicators of the economic value of the
advertising-related activities associated with each of the three top levels of the structure
represented in Figure 1: (a) the aggregate amounts firms expend on advertising campaigns (IRS
and MCE) and the distribution of such outlays among downstream intermediaries in the form of
revenues captured by suppliers of (b) advertising and marketing services for developing and
producing advertising campaigns (SAS8) and of (c) media supplier revenues (MG8) from
sales of time and space to display advertisers' campaigns to reach target audiences.


III.2.1 Internal Revenue Service Reports of Corporate Advertising Expenses (IRS)
           The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) reports estimates of advertising expenditures
corporations claim in filing federal tax returns. To illustrate, for the tax year 2012, the IRS
estimated that advertising spending by U.S. corporations amounted to $274.504 billion. 16 That
estimate was based on a stratified sample of more than 110,004 unaudited returns selected
from 5.841 million tax returns filed by active corporations for the tax year 2012. Note that "tax
years" can differ from "calendar years," i.e., the Tax Year 2012 includes accounting periods
ending July 2012 through June 2013. The IRS data have been widely used in advertising and
economic research dating back to the seminal work of Yang [1962] and Telser [1964].
           Certain limitations of the IRS data bear noting. First, the nature and composition of what
are reported as "advertising" expenses may vary among corporations and is likely to include
elements of consumer and trade promotion as well as media advertising. 17 The IRS provides the
following guidance as to what constitutes "advertising" according to the tax code: "This
deduction for promotional activities, directed toward the sale of goods and services in the

16
     Internal Revenue Service [2012], Table 2, p. 35.
17
     Rogers and Tokle [1995].

                                                                                               Page 5
course of the business activity, is separately identified on the corporate income tax form. The
statistics for this deduction for corporations also include amounts reported as cost of sales for
corporations." 18
         A second ambiguity was recognized by Comanor and Wilson19 who suggested that in the
case of firms that fully or partially internalize advertising services, the cost of such operations
are unlikely be included as "advertising expense" in corporate tax returns. Third, by definition,
advertising expenditures by unincorporated business are excluded.
         Given the size and scope of firms filing Federal tax returns, the length of the time series
of annual estimates of aggregate advertising expenditures, and its public availability, the IRS
data may serve as a standard of comparison for other measures. In some cases, it may
approximate a lower limit on the total U.S. advertising spending, for several reasons. Estimates
of advertising spending are frequently based on samples of the "leading" or "top" advertisers
and thus underestimate total expenditures by excluding the fraction of the population of
advertisers that falls short of the cutoff size ranking. A quite different selection bias affects
advertising expenditure data that rely on public archival sources such as 10K reports filed with
the Securities and Exchange Commission by U.S. corporations. It has been noted that "a majority
of publicly traded firms are excluded from published studies of marketing's value relevance
because those firms do not disclose their advertising expenditures" 20 .
         Finally, as will be discussed further below, the IRS advertising time series can be used in
making assessments akin to psychometric concepts of "convergent" and "discriminant" validity
of alternative measures of aggregate advertising expenditures. 21


III.2.2 McCann-Erickson Estimates of Expenditures for Media Advertising (MCE)
         For more than five decades, the time series produced by McCann-Erickson (forerunner
of the holding company, Interpublic Group -- IPG) on advertising expenditures has been
recognized as the advertising industry's authoritative source of data on aggregate advertising
spending in the U.S. economy. These data were published annually in Advertising Age and the



18
   Internal Revenue Service, [1962], Statistics of Income 1960-61: U.S. Business Tax Returns, Washington
DC: U.S. Treasury Department, Internal Revenue Service, Publication No. 438 (6-620, p. 6.
19
   Comanor and Wilson [1974], p. 5.
20
   McCallister et al. [2016], p. 208. See Shi et al. [2017] for an analysis of a 1994 reporting rule that made
   disclosure of advertising expenditures by public firms voluntary in the U.S.
21
   On this, see Campbell and Fiske [1959].

                                                                                                      Page 6
Statistical Abstract of the United States. The data series encompassed a broad set of eleven
"measured media" (e.g., direct mail, newspapers, magazines, out-of-home, radio, broadcast
television, cable television, yellow pages, business publications, internet, and "miscellaneous").
Each medium was further classified as "national" vs. "local," in order to capture differences in
the geographical scope of the audience reached by available media options. Whereas three
media (business magazines, direct mail, and the internet) were treated as exclusively "national,"
in each of the other eight media both "national" and" local" sub-categories were recognized.

           The amount expended in a medium can be envisaged as the product of a volume or
quantity (measured in units of "exposures" that reflect the size of the cumulative audience
reached over time by a series of ads appearing in a media vehicle) and the price per unit of
exposure in that vehicle. Both exposure levels and unit prices may differ not only among
vehicles within a given medium and across media, but may also vary over time.

           The MCE estimates of media advertising expenditures were developed from an eclectic
body of "volume" data obtained from media monitoring services, trade associations, and
proprietary sources. The resulting series represented estimates of media "billings" (expenditures
in current dollars), typically based on information about current "list" prices (such as those
stated on media vendors' "rate cards") rather than actual "transaction" prices that reflected
volume and other discounts negotiated by media buyers and sellers.

           For much of the post-World War period in the U.S., agencies were compensated for
supplying clients with a bundle of services by a fixed rate of commissions (typically 15 percent)
on the amount clients were billed for media services purchased by an advertising agency on
their behalf. Over time and in response to client demands, agencies gradually adopted a policy
of unbundling their services, with agency compensation shifting from reliance on media
commissions to fee-for-service arrangements based on labor charges for agency personnel
assigned to the client's account. 22 As a result of those developments, the extent to which
estimates of media billings captured the actual amounts client paid to agencies and other
intermediaries for creating and producing messages, as distinct from payments to media
suppliers to purchase time and space, became an issue of concern throughout the industry.




22
     For discussion, see Arzaghi et al. [2012].

                                                                                            Page 7
With "bundling" so prevalent, it was challenging for ad agencies to separate the two revenue
sources. 23

         A major changeover occurred in 2009 when the Interpublic Group (IPG) announced it
was discontinuing compiling and publishing the McCann-Ericson advertising media spending
series. Through its media services unit, Magna Global, it launched a new set of media spending
estimates designed to more accurately capture shifts in media spending by advertisers,
especially those related to the rapid growth of digital media. 24

III.2.3 Magna Global Estimates of Media Supplier Advertising Revenues (MG8)
         The new Magna Global measures represented a fundamental departure for the
McCann-Ericson series it replaced with respect to scope and granularity of media included, the
nature and sources of primary data, as well as the estimation methodology. To facilitate
understanding of the new measurement system, Magna Global released a detailed description
of the structure of the measures and how they were constructed, as well as going back in time
and calculating estimates using the new methodology for the period 1980 onward. 25 Whereas
the McCann-Erickson measures were described as the product of a "bottoms up" approach,
Magna Global adopted instead a "top down" orientation in developing a new set of measures
that focused on assembling data on the revenues from advertising reported by media
suppliers. 26
        Magna Global developed an elaborate classification scheme that it employs in reporting
estimates of advertising revenues earned by media suppliers. Figure 2a shows the post-2009
hierarchical structure of Magna Global's media typology. Media are first classified as "Direct,"
"National" or "Local." Within each of those three basic media domains are a set of sub-
categories that includes seven "core" media (Digital, Directories, Magazines, Newspapers. Radio,
Television, and Out-of-Home) plus direct mail that together comprise the total, which hereafter
we designate as MG8$.
                  (Insert Figures 2a and 2b Somewhere Near Here)




23
   See Silk [2012] and Silk and King [2013] for details.
24
   For details, see Mandese [2007], [2009a,b].
25
   Magna Global [2015].
26
   Mandese [2009a].

                                                                                           Page 8
           Of particular significance was the introduction of the "Digital" category utilizing the
Internet Advertising Bureau format typology.27 Moreover, Magna Glob al further sub-divided
each format according to the device where the advertising appeared: desktop vs. mobile. The
resulting hierarchical structure in presented in Figure 2b.

           The structure depicted in Figure 2a reflects factors similar to those that Silk, Klein, and
Berndt [2001] identified as being related to patterns of intermedia substitutability and
complementarity observable from analyses of traditional media prices and expenditure data:
"addressability," "contractual flexibility," and "audience control." Goldfarb [2014] has argued
that the capacity for precise targeting is the principal advantage digital advertising holds over
advertising in traditional media. Digital advertising is further advantaged with respect to
facilitating greater audience control over exposure by virtue of being interactive and
conveniently available as demanded. Finally, digital media buying is a highly automated process
that offers advertisers considerable contractual flexibility as indicated by the recent IAB report
that programmatic buying now accounts for 80% of all display advertising. 28

III.2.4 Census Bureau Services Annual Survey Estimate of Advertising and Marketing Service
Supplier Receipts (SAS8)
           Over time, an ever-expanding array of services have become available to support the
development and production of advertising programs. Silk and King [2013] introduced a set of
nine sectors that collectively represented a useful operational definition of the advertising and
marketing services (A&MS) industry. Each of the nine sectors was identified in the North
American Industrial Classification System (NAICS) adopted by the Census Bureau in 1997. Sector
definitions and their corresponding NAICS codes are presented in Table A1 in the Appendix. For
the first eight sectors listed there (Advertising Agencies, Public Relations Agencies, Media
Buying, Outdoor Advertising, Direct Mail Advertising, Advertising Materials, Other Services
Distribution, and Marketing Research and Public Opinion Polling) annual estimates of receipts
are available from the Census Bureau's Service Annual Surveys (SAS8). In the case of the ninth
sector, Marketing Consulting, revenue data are available only for the years when the Census
Bureau conducts its quinquennial Economic Census (e.g., 1992, 1997,...,2012, 2017).




27
     Internet Advertising Bureau [2019].
28
     Internet Advertising Bureau [2020], p. 6.

                                                                                                Page 9
           III.3 Trends in Sector Revenues and the Advertising Share of GDP
           Summary statistics for the three alternative time series of output of the U.S. advertising
industry discussed above along with those for nominal GDP are presented in Appendix Tables 2a
and 2b. In order to highlight certain trends and phenomena that we address in the econometric
analyses that follows, below and in the Appendix we present several graphs that facilitate
comparisons among the four measures of advertising output and GDP over time, measured in
billions of dollars: IRS$BN, MCE$BN, MG8$BN, and Census Service Annual Surveys, SAS8$BN.
           We begin with Figure 3 that traces the level of total outlays for our four output
measures over the period 1960-2018. Several trends are particularly noteworthy. First, it is
evident that the IRS$BN and MCE$BN series that purport to measure total advertising spending
by firms (the top two series in Figure 3) are highly correlated over the period 1960-2007
(r=0.998). Second, the gap between the levels of media suppliers' advertising revenues
(MG8$BN) and MCE$BN (from which it was derived) grew over time from 1980, the first
                                 (Insert Figure 3 Somewhere Near Here)
period for which MG8$BN was estimated, through the peak in 2007. Following the trough of the
Great Recession in 2009, it appears that the absolute differential between media suppliers'
receipts (MG8$BN) and total advertising outlays firms (as measured by the IRS$BN series) ­ the
two middle series in Figure 3 -- remained relatively constant. Finally, over the 2001-2018 period
for which revenues for both the media supplier sector (MG8$BN) and advertising agency and
related services sectors (SAS8$BN) are available, the former (SAS8$BN) grew in relation to the
latter (MG8$BN); the ratio of SAS8$BN to MG8$BN rose from about 0.40 in 2001 to 0.57 in
2018. To place these advertising expenditures in the context of nominal GDP, in Appendix
Figure 1 we plot the three advertising expenditure series as a share of nominal GDP for 1960-
2018.
           In Appendix Figure 2 we compare the nominal annual growth rates (percent changes) of
IRS$BN, MCE$BN and MG8$BN with that for nominal GDP (RGDPNG) over the period 1961-
2018. Overall, it is apparent that the peaks and troughs of the three advertising series mirror
the National Bureau of Economic Research dating of U.S. business cycle expansions and
contractions. 29 As well, the movements of the three advertising series also tend to coincide with
the cyclical changes in nominal GDP. Of particular interest is that the annual growth rates



29
     National Bureau of Economic Research [2016].

                                                                                               Page 10
appear to have risen from 1961 to the mid-1970's, followed by a period of slow/stable growth
rates. We examine this pattern further below in our analyses of the advertising share in GDP.
        Figures 4 and 5 plot 1980-2018 changes in the shares of each of the eight media
comprising Magna Global's measure (MG8$BN) of the total receipts media suppliers generate
from sales of time and space purchased to display ad messages. Comparable time series
measures of advertising receipts are not available for MCE8$BN, IRS$BN, and SAS8$BN. The
three striking trends in these two figures from MG8$BN involve the remarkable increase in the
Digital share ZSHDG since 1996 (Figure 4), the coincident dramatic decline in the Newspaper
share ZSHNWP (Figure 5), and the initial increase in the Television share ZSHTV that peaked in
2014, and then fell sharply (Figure 4). Figure 4 plots shares for four media based on MG8$BN,
labelled (somewhat arbitrarily as "Major"). The digital time series ZSHDG begins in 1996 and
within only two decades supplanted Television (ZSHTV) as the dominant medium in 2016.
Interestingly, whereas Digital's ZSHDIR share reached almost 48 percent in 2018, TV's ZSHTV
                (Insert Figure 4 Somewhere Near Here)
share was 28 per cent at the time of Digital's entry in 1996, reached its peak share of almost 35
per cent in 2014 and since then has declined to 28 per cent in 2018. Direct Mail ZSHDM has lost
a third of the 12 per cent share it realized in 1980, while Directories' ZSHDIR share has
plummeted from a peak of almost nine per cent in 1991 to less than one per cent in 2018.
        Turning to "minor" media in Figure 5, we observe that the Newspaper share (ZSHNWP)
has undergone the most dramatic decline, falling from 37 per cent in 1980 to just four per cent
                (Insert Figure 5 Somewhere Near Here)
in 2018. The Magazine share (ZSHMAG) also dropped precipitously from 12 to three per cent.
Radio's 2018 ZSHRD share of six per cent was only roughly half of its peak share of 12 per cent in
2002. In contrast, Out-of-Home's ZSHOH share has gained roughly a share point over the 1980-
2018 period. Note that these advertising media shares are all based on MG8$BN data on media
receipts, and that comparable time series receipts data are not available for MCE8$BN, IRS$BN
and SAS8$BN.
        Lastly, in Appendix Figures 1 and 3 we plot the nominal advertising shares in total
nominal GDP (Appendix Figure 1)) and in Private Sector nominal GDP (Appendix Figure 3). In his
recent analyses of advertising and the business cycle, Hall ([2012], [2014]) has focused on the
advertising share in private sector GDP, noting that public sector spending on advertising is



                                                                                            Page 11
limited. 30 A comparison of Appendix Figure 1 and Appendix Figure 3 indicates that advertising's
share of nominal private sector GDP is greater than that for nominal total GDP, but the pattern
of cyclical variations is similar. Our 1960-2007 time series for IRS$BN and MCE$BN shares of
total GDP both begin in 1960, the peak year of an eight month recession and encompasses
several subsequent cycles. The series both peak in in 2000 (shares of 2.3 percent and 2.4
percent for MCE$BN and IRS$BN in total GDP, respectively), the year prior to the onslaught of
the Great Recession. However, in the ensuing periods which our time series covers (through
2007 and 2014 for MCE$BN and IRS$BN, respectively), the nominal advertising share of total
GDP continues to decrease, in each case dropping below two per cent. A similar pattern appears
to hold for MG8$BN for the more abbreviated 1980-2018 time series. The question that
naturally arises is: Is this pattern real or illusionary? What phenomena can explain the apparent
downturn?
        To this point, we have examined nominal measures of advertising spending and
receipts, by media type and in the aggregate, and trends in the aggregate advertising/GDP ratio
over time (Appendix Figure 1). As we have seen, the most striking compositional phenomena
are the remarkable increase in the digital advertising share since 1996, the coincident dramatic
decline in the newspaper advertising share, and the alternating increase and then decrease in
the television advertising share (Figures 4 and 5). To what extent have these compositional
changes affected the aggregate advertising to GDP ratio, and more fundamentally, what are the
factors driving media composition changes? Are media-specific prices, and the price of an
advertising aggregate, impacting aggregate advertising spending and its composition?.
Unfortunately, as we shall now see, research on these issues is currently severely handicapped
by the absence of any publicly available data on digital and internet advertising prices and
volumes, particularly in the first fifteen years following the launch of digital and internet
advertising in 1996.


        III.4 Advertising Cost Indices

        The digital era is not the first time in modern advertising history when the historic and
future growth and structure of the industry has been questioned. Such a set of circumstances
arose in the late 1950's when Myers ([1958],[1962]) observed that U.S. advertising expenditures


30
  Kosar [2014] estimated that in fiscal year 2014, $893.5 million was expended on advertising by the
federal government.

                                                                                                Page 12
as a share of National Income had declined from a peak of more than four percent in the 1920's
to 1.5 per cent in 1945, then recovered in the post WWII era to just under three percent in 1957,
still shy of the pre-Great Depression peak. Myers went on to point out that, among other
things, "improved media efficiency permitted the 1977 advertising expenditure to purchase at
least two-and-a-half times the exposure to advertising `space and time' as did the 1929's
expenditure" [1958, p. 370]. Blank [1963] claimed that advertising professionals and academics
both subscribed to the view that "advertising expenditures have never regained the levels of
relative importance that they achieved prior to 1930" ("the golden age of advertising"). He
proceeded to suggest the possibility that this "anomaly" might be explained by "some error or
bias in the underlying data" from which the conclusions had been drawn. 31

         In terms of private sector historical data availability, for many years the McCann
Erickson "Media Cost Indices" were the only comprehensive set of measures available for
tracking year-to-year changes in the costs of reaching audiences (CPMs or cost per millions of
readers/listeners/viewers) in different media. Annually, McCann/Interpublic reported cost
indices for a set of media along with two "composite" indices; one "included all National and
Local budgets" (CNTCPM) and the other, "National budgets only" (CNLCPM). 32 Those indices
were apparently discontinued in 2007, at the same time McCann Erickson introduced the Magna
Global measures of aggregate advertising spending based on the advertising receipts of media
suppliers. 33

         In Figure 6 we plot the pair of MCE Composite Price Indices (CNLCPM and CNTCPM)
along with the BLS' Producer Price Index for Finished Goods (PPIFGA) and the Bureau of
Economic Analysis' (BEA's) GDP Implicit Price Deflator (RGDPIPD), all for the 47-year period
1960-2006. 34 As may be seen from Figure 6, up through the early 1980s, the four series tracked
                         (Insert Figure 6 Somewhere Near Here)

31
   Blank [1963], p. 33.
32
   For example, an unpublished report of "Universal McCann Media Cost Indices", dated August 2005,
presented separate price indexes (1982-84=100) for a set of eight media plus the two composite indices
for the period 1960-2005.
33
   Mandese [2009b]. Implicit aggregate price indices for a variety of advertising media mixes using
Laspeyres or Paasche aggregation methods have been reported at various times in the advertising
literature, but have turned out to be "one-off" ad hoc projects that were not sustained. See Bachman
[1967], Schmalensee [1972], Ehrlich and Fisher [1972], Fisher and Ehrlich [1984], and Silk, Klein and
Berndt [2002].
34
   CNTCPM data is not available for 2007, but 2007 values for CNLCPM are 265.3, for PPIFGA 162.220, and
for RGDPIPDA 181.243.

                                                                                              Page 13
each other quite closely. However, from the early 1980s onward, each of the MCE Composite
Advertising Indices grew at rates exceeding the increases of both the PPI for Finished Goods and
the GDP Implicit price deflator, implying that with these composite media price indices, the real
price of advertising was increasing over that time period by almost 70%. Specifically, indexed to
1982-1984 = 100, the 2006 CNLCPM and CNTCPM index values of 261.8 and 299.9, respectively,
exceeded the 2006 PPIFGA and RGDPIPDA values of 156.183 and 176.501, respectively.
Moreover, these data document that since the early 1980s onward, the MCE's National Budgets
Only CNTCPM grew by about 11% more than did the combined MCE National and Local Budgets
CPM CNLCPM, implying that national advertising prices were growing more rapidly than local
advertising prices. Notably, this was the era when advertisers' concerns about "media price
inflation" were aroused, particularly for national television. 35
         Turning to advertising media price data availability from public sector sources, we note
the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) has collected unit volume and value of shipments data
from establishments going back to 1902, and initially used these data to construct its Wholesale
Price Index (WPI) as an unweighted average of price relatives for about 250 commodities. In
1978, the WPI was replaced by the Producer Price Index (PPI) program. The PPI measures the
average change over time in the selling prices received by domestic producers for their output.
The prices included in the PPI are from the first commercial transaction for many products and
some services. 36

         Although initially WPI prices were measured for specific commodities, to be consistent
with other economic data BLS gathered from establishments, all sampled establishments were
classified by industry, where the industry within which an establishment was classified was
determined by those products that accounted for the largest share of the establishment's total
value of shipments ­ called the establishment's primary product. Most industries also have
secondary product indices that show changes in prices received by establishments in the




35
   See Arzaghi et al. [2012], pp. 5-6, and the references cited therein for further discussion. Appendix
Table 1 presents summary statistics for the four price indices displayed in Figure 3. Note that these four
price indices are exceedingly highly intercorrelated, with the Pearson correlation coefficients varying from
0.938 to 0.996. The CNTCPM series is, however, relatively more variable than CNLCPM; the respective
coefficients of variation are 0.7241 and 0.6676.
36
   BLS Handbook of Methods [not dated], "Producer Prices", ch. 14, pp. 1-5.

                                                                                                   Page 14
industry for products made chiefly in some other industry. The BLS PPI program has collected
data on both primary and secondary products at each establishment. 37

         As an alternative to an industry-based classification, the BLS has for many years
constructed and published a commodity classification of its PPI that organizes products "by
similarity of end use or similarity of material composition regardless of whether the products
are classified as primary or secondary in their industry of origin."38 Although the industry-based
PPI has been published for various service industries since 1979, prior to January 2009 the
commodity classification system included only goods-based price indices and excluded services,
thereby excluding services that were classified as commodities. With the release of data for
January 2009, PPI expanded the commodity classification structure to include services and
construction products. 39 As a result, unlike some other media prices, newspaper and periodical
commodity PPI price indexes may contain data going back before 2009, because newspapers
and periodicals (and several other media such as series for directories and mailing lists) may
have previously been classified as manufacturing industries rather than services.

         In 2009 the BLS introduced all of its Services commodity indexes (designated with the
prefix WPU). Figure 7 depicts a portion of the hierarchical structure of the current set of
Advertising Media Price Indices published by the BLS; the Figure is incomplete in that it omits

                  (Insert Figure 7 Somewhere Near Here)

several tiers below the second tier. The structure consists of at least three tiers or levels. The
top tier here is WPU 36, "Advertising Time and Space Sales", which is a 2012 fixed weight
Laspeyres aggregation across four three-digit sub-aggregates for advertising space sales in
periodicals, newspapers, directories and mailing lists (WPU 361), television (WPU 362), radio
(WPU 363) and internet advertising sales, the latter excluding internet advertising sold by print
publishers (WPU 365). The next tier has several four-digit sub-aggregates, such as WPU 3611 ­
advertising space sales in periodicals and newspapers and WPU 3612 ­ advertising space sales in
directories and mailing lists. Several six-digit subaggregates are omitted, but under them are
three eight-digit tiers ­ specialized business and professional periodicals (WPU 3611-0101),
general and consumer periodicals (WPU 3611-0102) and newspapers, print only (WPU 3611-

37
   BLS Handbook of Methods [not dated], op. cit., pp. 4-5.
38
   Id.
39
   Id.

                                                                                              Page 15
0203). By comparison, the three-digit television subaggregate WPU 362 has three six-digit
subaggregates ­ Broadcast and Network (WPU 362101), Cable Network (WPU 362102) and Local
Cable Systems (WPU 362103), currently the three digit WPU 363 for radio has no more detailed
sub-tiers. It appears the eight-digit level of detail is the most detailed level at which the BLS PPI
program publishes prices. The number of tiers may change over time as industries evolve and
the BLS is able to obtain voluntary price quotes from the sampled establishments. 40

        Three issues are particularly relevant here. As noted above, WPU 365 excludes internet
advertising sold by print publishers. BLS officials have informed us that firms that publish both
in print and online formats fall into the "traditional" media format (periodical or newspaper) in
which they primarily publish (WPU 3611 and a lower tier). For this reason the BLS' digital
advertising data are currently dispersed or distributed among different PPI indices, rather than
being combined into a single "digital" three-digit subaggregate. While the PPI currently does
not publish a single index that captures all US digital advertising prices, discussions are currently
underway regarding how the PPI program could adapt to the changing North American Industry
Classification System (NAICS) structure, and how it could consolidate all of the digital advertising
price data into one index. One alternative hierarchical possibility is that of the Magna Global
structure displayed in Figures 2a and 2b. Note that while Magna Global collects price data for
outdoor/out-of-homed (OOH) advertising as a separate stratum, currently the BLS structure
depicted in Figure 7 contains no distinct outdoor/OOH advertising stratum.

        Second, the existence of several tiers or stages of aggregation across the various media
price indices raises the practical question of whether the alternative possibilities of creating sub-
categories and aggregating them affects the top level price index WPU 36 Advertising Time and
Space Sales. For example, if the various digital price media were aggregated into a single
composite Digital price index, rather than being distributed across WPU 365 and several
"traditional" media formats such as in WPU 3611, WPU 362 and WPU 363, how would the
"master" or "top tier" WPU 36 price index measure have been affected?




40
  A comparable BLS hierarchical figure to Figure 7 could be drawn for the Advertising and Related
Services industry, which is a component of WPU45 Professional Services, and nested underneath that is
WPU455 Advertising and Related Services, and WPU4551 Advertising Agency Services. See, for example,
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, PPI Detailed Report [2020], Table 9, p. 80.

                                                                                             Page 16
        According to the economic theory of index numbers, when a top tier price index is
numerically invariant to the hierarchical placement and ordering of sub-indexes and lower tier
elementary price indexes, it is said to be consistent in aggregation ­ an obviously desirable
characteristic of an index number procedure, else aggregate measures of inflation of a universe
of products and services would depend on the somewhat subjective and discretionary
hierarchical and nesting structure of products and services. Fortunately, as has been shown by,
among others, W. Erwin Diewert, the fixed weight Laspeyres, fixed weight Paasche, chained
weight Laspeyres, and chained weight Paasche index procedures each possesses the property of
consistency in aggregation when the hierarchy consists of two stages, as do some but not all
other well-known index number procedures. 41

        Third and perhaps most importantly for facilitating research on the U.S. advertising
industry, recall that the BLS launched the Advertising Time and Space Sales industry
classification in 2009. Although prior to 2009 it collected data on newspaper and periodical
advertising (when considering them part of manufacturing), for most of the media advertising
tiers in Figure 7, BLS media-specific price data are non-existent for years prior to 2009 or 2010.
An implication is that for a medium such as Digital that mushroomed from nothing in 1995 to a
15 percent market share in 2010 and 48 percent share in 2018 (see Figure 4), there is no
historical price series available from BLS that captures and embodies this striking development.
Absent these media-specific data, any aggregate BLS advertising price index from 2010 onward
also necessarily fails to incorporate the pre-2010 compositional changes. While underlying price
and volume data of the various media services may be available in the archives of scattered
private sector or public sector libraries, they remain to be discovered, curated and made
publicly available.

        It is clear that most all detailed econometric analyses of time series of advertising
spending levels require price indices for purposes of adjusting expenditure data for changes in
advertising media composition, volume and prices, thereby facilitating comparisons of nominal
(current prices) and real (constant quality) indices.




41
  See, for example, W. Erwin Diewert ([1978],[2015]). In personal correspondence, Prof. Diewert has
shown that these two-stage consistency in aggregation properties also hold with Laspeyres and Paasche
indices when the number of stages is three rather than two. He has also conjectured that the proof of
consistency in aggregation can be generalized to N stages for all N  2.

                                                                                              Page 17
        Note that the compilation and publication of media-specific and aggregate advertising
price indexes encompassing the pre- and post-digital advertising epochs would contribute
substantively to the understanding of issues concerning not only historical issues involving the
real or nominal elasticity of advertising expenditures with respect to GDP, but also affects
current public policy issues regarding the impact of eliminating the tax deductibility of corporate
advertising expenses, the reliability and credibility of calculated rates of return on investments
in digital vs. non-digital media advertising, the procyclicality of media advertising, and the
effects of eliminating direct-to-consumer advertising of pharmaceuticals and other medical
products and services.

        Absent such data, it is still worthwhile to investigate whether, using the existing
admittedly incomplete and blemished available data, there is evidence suggesting major
structural changes in the aggregate advertising ­ GDP relationship have occurred
contemporaneous with the introduction of digital and internet advertising.

        IV. ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK
        We denote real gross domestic product at time period t as RGDPt, nominal gross
domestic product at time t as NGDPt, and the gross domestic product implicit price deflator that
links real and nominal gross domestic product at time t as GDPIPDt. By definition,

 (Eq. 1) NGDPt  RGDPt*GDPIPDt, or in logarithms, log(NGDPt) = log(RGDPt) + log(GDPIPDt).

Denoting nominal expenditures on advertising at time t as NADVt, we specify a relatively
straightforward double logarithmic relationship between nominal advertising expenditures at
time t and nominal GDP at time t as

 (Eq. 2) log(NADVt) =  + *log(NGDPt).

If one allows for the possibility that the real GDP and implicit price deflator components of
nominal GDP can have differential impacts on nominal advertising expenditures, we can
generalize (Eq. 2) to

 (Eq. 3) log(NADVt) =  + 1* log(RGDPt) + 2*log(GDPIPDt)

where 1 is the elasticity of nominal advertising with respect to real GDP, and 2 is the elasticity
of nominal advertising with respect to the GDP implicit price deflator. An interesting special



                                                                                              Page 18
case of (Eq. 3) arises if one hypothesizes that the two elasticities 1 and 2 are equal, with, say,
their common value being , i.e.,

  (Eq. 4) 1 = 2 =  .

In this case we can simplify (Eq. 3) to

  (Eq. 5) log(NADVt) =  + *[log(RGDPt) + log(GDPIPDt)] = + *log(NGDPt)

which transforms the multivariate relationship between advertising and GDP in (Eq. 3) into a
simpler bivariate nominal advertising expenditures on nominal GDP econometric model
specification, where  is the elasticity of nominal advertising with respect to nominal GDP. If
one hypothesizes that this  elasticity equals 1.0, we can transform (Eq. 5) into the even simpler
relationship

  (Eq.6) log [NADVt/NGDPt] = ,

in which case the nominal advertising expenditure to GDP ratio is a constant equal to . Note
that the parameter restrictions 1 = 2 =  and then  = 1 are separate testable restrictions that
can be evaluated empirically, and that it is also possible to test the hypotheses jointly, i.e., test
whether

  (Eq. 7) 1 = 2 = 1.

        An alternative analytical framework involves first differences in log(ADV), log (NGDP), log
(RGDP) and log (GDPIPD) rather than their levels. In this case Eqn. (1) above is unchanged, but
Eqn. (2) becomes

  (Eq. 2') log(NADVt/NADVt-1) =  + *log(NGDPt/NGDPt-1)

where the constant term  drops out of (Eq. 2) and is replaced by a constant growth rate , i.e.,

  (Eq. 3') log(NADVt/NADVt-1) =  + 1*log(RGDPt/RGDPt-1) + 2*log(GDPIPDt/GDPIPDt-1)

but where the interpretations of 1 and 2 remain unchanged as elasticities of nominal
advertising expenditures with respect to real gross domestic product and with respect to the
gross domestic product implicit price deflator, respectively. When the 1 = 2 =  restrictions in
Eq. (4) are imposed, one obtains a revision of Eqn. (5) involving growth rates rather than levels,
i.e.,


                                                                                              Page 19
     (Eq. 5') log(NADVt/NADVt-1) =  + *[log(RGDPt/RGDPt-1) + log(GDPIPDt/GDPIPDt-1)]

                                   =  + *[log(NGDPt/NGDPt-1)],



where  is the (constant) elasticity of nominal advertising expenditures with respect to nominal
gross domestic product. If one further constrains this constant elasticity to be unity, we obtain a
variation of Eqn. (6) in which the growth rate of the NADV/NGDP ratio is equal to a constant ,
i.e.,

     (Eq. 6') log[(NADVt/NGDPt)/(NADVt-1/NGDPt-1)] = .

As before, the parameter restrictions 1 = 2 =  and then  = 1 are separate and sequential
testable restrictions that can be evaluated empirically, but it is also possible to test these
hypotheses jointly, i.e., test whether simultaneously 1 = 2 = 1. Moreover, one can test
whether the advertising to GDP ratio is constant by comparing goodness of fit in Eqns. (3), (5)
and (6).Alternatively, one can discern whether a structural break has occurred over time by
determining whether the growth rate of the advertising-GDP ratio is constant, by comparing
goodness of fit in Eqns. (3'), (5') and (6').

           V.     ECONOMETRIC METHODS

        Denote the natural logarithms of MCE$BN, IRS$BN, and MG8$BN as LGMCE$BN, LGIRS$BN
and LGMG8$BN, respectively. To determine the properties of our logarithmic nominal
advertising expenditure time series process for LGMCE$BN and LGIRS$BN, we calculate their
autocorrelation and partial autocorrelation coefficients using the EViews Version 9 econometric
software program, 42 and annual data covering the 1960-2007 time period. We summarize the
time series properties in correlograms. In addition to examining raw (levels) data, we first,
second, third and further difference the data as necessary until the autocorrelation functions
exhibit stationarity. Conditional on achieving stationarity, when initiating regression equation
estimation, we also utilize the autocorrelation and partial autocorrelation coefficients of the
estimated time series processes to provide preliminary guidance in the choice of the order of
possible moving average or autoregressive function specifications. 43


42
  EViews 7 User Guide II (Quantitative Micro Software, Irvine, CA [1994-2007]), www.eviews.com. .
43
  We employ time series methods as described in Part 4 (chapters 15-19) of Pindyck and Rubinfeld
[1998].

                                                                                               Page 20
       For the regression equation estimation, we estimate both log-level (raw) and first-
differenced logarithmic linear models by OLS, and then allow and test for the presence of AR1
and AR2 autocorrelation as well as first and second order moving average disturbances. 44

       VI.     EMPIRICAL RESULTS

               VI.1 Stochastic Time Series Analysis Findings

       In Figure 8 we reproduce correlograms for the log-level raw aggregate nominal McCann-
Erickson advertising expenditures (LGMCE$BN) ­ left top panel ­ and raw aggregate nominal
Internal Revenue Service (LGIRS$BN) ­ right top panel; in the bottom panel, we reproduce
correlograms for the first-differenced log aggregate nominal McCann-Erickson advertising
expenditures (MCENG) ­ left panel ­ and for the first-differenced log aggregate nominal Internal

                   (Insert Figure 8 Somewhere Near Here)

Revenue Service advertising expenditures (IRSNG) ­ right panel. The dotted vertical lines in
each of the correlograms are the approximate two standard error bounds; if an autocorrelation
(AC) or partial autocorrelation (PAC) coefficient is within these bounds, it is not significantly
different from zero at (approximately) the 5% significance level. The rows of the correlogram
indicate the AC and PAC coefficients for the series k years apart ­ here, up to 20 years apart.
The last two columns are the Bartlett Q-statistics and their p-values. The Q-statistic at lag k is a
test statistic for the null hypothesis that there is no autocorrelation up to order k.

       Denoting the autocorrelation of a time series at lag k as rk (the correlation coefficient of the
time series k years apart), in the top panel of Figure 8 we observe that log-levels of the MCE and
IRS advertising expenditure series are very similar, each revealing an initially very significant but
monotonically and geometrically declining AC coefficient, and becoming statistically insignificant
after about a 12 to 13 year lag. The large Q-statistic indicates joint statistical significance of the
rk coefficients (more precisely, rejection of the null hypothesis that the rk = 0 up through k = 20).
This pattern of estimated AC coefficients is consistent with the LGMCE$BN and LGIRS$BN being
stationary time series, and obeying a lower order autoregressive process. In addition, that the
estimated AC coefficients are statistically significant even after a substantial number of lags
suggests the time series data are not being generated by a low-order moving average process.



44
     See Charles M. Beach and James G. MacKinnon [1978] for discussion of computational considerations.

                                                                                                Page 21
Notice that the PAC coefficient at lag 2 is insignificant (it is within the two standard error vertical
bounds) is consistent with the time series being generated by an AR(1) process.

      The bottom panels of Figure 8 are correlograms for the log first-differenced data (i.e.,
growth rates). For MCENG, the estimated AC coefficients do not decline monotonically, they
become statistically insignificant at the three-year lag, and become negative after six years.
Moreover, since all the PAC coefficients fall within the two standard error vertical bounds
beginning with lag 2, they suggest at most an AR(1) data generating process. The estimated AC
coefficients for the IRSNG first differenced series are positive up through a lag of 12 years, but
become statistically insignificant after four years.

      In summary, the correlograms of the LGMCE$BN and LGIRS$BN are very similar, each
suggesting stationarity, the possibility of having been generated by an AR(1) process, and
unlikely to have been generated by a moving average process. The log-first differenced MCENG
and IRSNG series yield similar qualitative inferences, although they are not quite as similar as
those based on the log raw (level) data. In terms of providing preliminary guidance for
regression estimation, bearing in mind that residuals from estimated regression equations may
not mimic the time series properties of the dependent variable, we nonetheless find support for
analyzing by regression methods both log raw (levels) and first-differenced log advertising
expenditure models, and because of the stationarity we seem to have observed, we have some
support for estimating regression models using ordinary least squares (OLS), AR(1) and perhaps
AR(2) models.

      However, given the relatively large value of the estimated AC coefficients at short lags
displayed in the correlograms of Figure 8, we believe it prudent to perform unit root tests for
LGMCE$BN and LGIRS$BN in levels, first-and second-differences. Recall that if the data series
contains one or more unit roots, then standard inference procedures such as those implicit in
the correlograms of Figure 8 do not apply. The augmented Dickey-Fuller unit root tests the null
hypothesis of a unit root against a one-sided alternative hypothesis of a stationary series, and is
implemented in the EViews software program using one-sided critical p-values for these tests as
developed by James G. MacKinnon. 45




45
     James G. MacKinnon [1996].

                                                                                              Page 22
     In log-levels, for both LGMCE$BN and LGIRS$BN we cannot reject the null hypothesis of unit
roots; the test-statistics are -0.2282 and -0.22192, respectively, with p-values of 0.9905 and
0.9906. For first-differences, however, the null hypothesis that first differences of LGMCE$BN
and LGIRS$BN have unit roots is rejected; the test statistics are -4.6112 and -4.1419, with p-
values of 0.0030 and 0.0108, respectively. Rejections of the unit root null hypothesis are even
more decisive with second-differences in LGMCE$BN and LGIRS$BN; the augmented Dickey-
Fuller test statistics are -9.910 (p-value of <0.0001) and -6.9903 (p-value of <0.0001),
respectively. These unit root test results therefore lend support for implementing regression
analyses using the first-differenced data, but call into question the reliability of findings from the
log-level models. Below, for comparison purposes we report regression results using
alternatively log-level and log-first-differenced data series for LGMCE$BN and LGIRS$BN.

             VI.2 Initial Regression Analysis Findings: Annual MCE and IRS Data, 1960-2007

     We estimate parameters in the logarithmic raw (level) data of (Eq. 3) ­the "most general"
model and (Eq. 5) ­ the "restricted model" -- by ordinary least squares (OLS), and by maximum
likelihood (ML) allowing for first order autoregressive (AR1), and both first and second order
autoregressive (AR2) disturbances. 46 Natural logarithms of nNominal advertising expenditures
as measured by McCann-Erickson (LGMCE$BN) or the Internal Revenue Service (LGIRS$BN) are
the alternative dependent variables encompassing the 1960-2007 time frame. Results from
these regression equations are presented in Table 1. We then also estimate parameters in the
first-differenced "most general" (Eq. 3') model and the "restricted" (Eq. 5') specification by
OLS, and AR1 and AR2 maximum likelihood methods, first with D(LGMCE$BN) and then with
D(LGIRS$BN) as the first-differenced logarithmic (growth rate) dependent variable over the
1961-2007 time period. Results from these regressions are presented in Table 2.

     We highlight six sets of findings in Table 1. First, over the same 1960-2007 time period, for
each of the three estimation methods, results based on the MCE data are very similar to those
based on the IRS data; this is seen by comparing results across the left and right panels in
columns for OLS estimates, for AR1 estimates and for AR2 estimates. Second, some results are




46
   Although we estimated combined autoregressive and moving average model specifications, none of the
first and second order moving average coefficients were statistically significant, and thus we do not report
them here.

                                                                                                   Page 23
                (Insert Table 1 Somewhere Near Here)

quite sensitive to the estimation method. For example, point estimates and -values for AR1 or
AR2 disturbances can differ substantially from those based on OLS estimates. In the top panel
of Table 1, with OLS estimation the Durbin-Watson test statistics are very low ­ 0.201 (MCE
data) and 0.227 (IRS data). If autocorrelation is indeed present, then standard errors based on
OLS estimates are likely to be downward biased. In both panels of Table 1, when one compares
standard error estimates based on AR1 or AR2 estimation with those based on OLS, we observe
that the latter are 50% to 100% or more greater than the OLS estimated standard errors, likely
due to the fact that estimates of 1 are greater than 0.93 and are significantly different from
zero in both the AR1 and AR2 columns. Third, the presence of autocorrelation affects inference
on whether the 1 = 2 =  null hypothesis is supported empirically; as seen in the row just
above the top of the bottom panel in Table 1, this equal elasticity hypothesis is rejected at just
under the 0.10 p-value with MCE data and much more decisively at the <0.01 level with the IRS
data when OLS is the estimation method, but is not rejected at conventional confidence levels
when AR1 or AR2 estimation methods are employed.

    Fourth, when one imposes the 1 = 2 =  null hypothesis, as seen in the bottom panel of
Table 1, estimates of the  elasticity are all close to 1.0; but because these estimates are
plagued by the presence of autocorrelation, under OLS estimation the nested hypothesis test
that  = 1 is decisively rejected (MCE p-value of 0.0008 and IRS p-value of <0.0001), whereas
with AR1 or AR2 estimation this hypothesis is not rejected. Fifth, although estimates of 1 in the
top and bottom panels of Table 1 are always greater than 0.92 and are statistically significantly
different from zero at the 0.01 p-value level, only one of the four estimates of 2 reaches
statistical significance, and that is only at a p-value of 0.10. Notably, however, the point
estimates of 2 are all negative. Hence, with this level (raw) logarithmic data, it appears that
AR2 estimation is unnecessary, and that AR1 estimation adequately accounts for the
autocorrelated disturbance process. Sixth, recall, however, that all these log-level results in
Table 1 must be viewed with considerable skepticism since the unit root test results reported
earlier suggest that the log-levels data is generated by a unit root process, while for both the
first- and second-differenced data the unit root hypothesis was rejected. An implication is that
conventional statistical inference of results reported in Table 1 may not be valid. Thus we now




                                                                                               Page 24
move on to discuss regression findings based on the fi-differenced data, reported in Table 2 ,
and compare them with those based on the level (raw) logarithmic data in Table 1.

    Comparing the top panels of Tables 1 and 2 in which the respective parameter estimates in
the level-logarithms and first-differenced logarithms Eqs. 3 and 3' are reported, we observe first
that while estimates of the 1 and 2 elasticities are centered around unity in the level-

                 (Insert Table 2 Somewhere Near Here)

logarithms in Table 1, these elasticity estimates are generally greater in the first-differenced
logarithmic models of Table 2 where they are centered around 1.4 or 1.5. Moreover, they are
quite similar in magnitude across the OLS, AR1 and AR2 specifications, and in almost all cases
are significant at the 0.01 level. In all but the OLS cases in Table 1, point estimates of the real
GDP elasticity 1 are greater than estimates of the implicit price deflator elasticity 2. However,
a notable difference between estimates in the two tables is that while the OLS estimates in the
level-logarithms of Table 1 exhibit statistically significant AR1 autocorrelation, in the first-
differenced logarithmic models in Table 2, none of the OLS, AR1 or AR2 models displays
statistically significant autocorrelation. Furthermore, although the null hypothesis that the 1
and 2 elasticities are equal is rejected in the OLS estimates of Table 1 but is not rejected for
each of the AR1 and AR2 models of Table 1, in Table 2 with the first-differenced logarithmic data
this null hypothesis of elasticity equality is never rejected. As seen in the bottom panel of Table
2, at about 1.4, estimates of  -- the elasticity of nominal advertising with respect to nominal
GDP ­ are larger with the first-differenced data (and significantly different from unity) than the 
estimates of around 1.0 in Table 1 based on levels (raw) logarithmic data. However, it is notable
that while their numerical values differ modestly, in general the elasticity estimates are
qualitatively similar across the MCE and IRS data sets, both in the level- (Table 1) and first-
differenced logarithmic (Table 2) data. Finally, when one simultaneously imposes the
restrictions 1 = 2 = 1 (even though these are rejected with the first-differenced logarithmic
data) and estimates the single parameter  as in Eq. 6', one obtains an estimate of the annual
growth rate of the nominal advertising expenditure to nominal GDP ratio; while this annual
growth rate estimate ranges between -0.0028 (OLS), -0.0034 (AR1) and -0.0041 (AR2), with the
MCE data (results not shown in Table 2), with the IRS data the estimates are positive, ranging
between 0.0018 (AR2), 0.0019 (AR1) and 0.0024 (OLS). As seen in the bottom row of Table 2,



                                                                                               Page 25
the null hypothesis that the annual growth rate of this nominal advertising to nominal GDP ratio
is zero is not rejected ­ the p-values are each greater than 0.54.

VI.3 Additional Time Series and Regression Analysis Findings: Annual MG8 Data, 1980-2018

           As discussed earlier, the annual MCE nominal advertising expenditure data are available
for the 1960-2007 time period, while publicly available annual lRS data are currently available up
through 2014. To explore potential differences in the MCE and IRS data, in the previous
paragraphs we have provided stochastic time series and regression analysis findings covering
the 1960-2007 years overlapping both data sources.

           Although compilation and publication of the MCE data by the McCann-Erickson
subsidiary of Interpublic terminated in 2007, Magna Global, the strategic global media unit of
Interpublic Group, utilizes data on advertising revenues obtained from media owners in the U.S.
Magna Global (hereafter, MG) introduced a new measurement methodology in 2009 that
focuses on advertising revenues reported by the various media industry sectors rather than
costs and expenses incurred by advertisers. The total Magna Global Expenditure series ("MG8")
includes national and local data on eight media: television, digital, newspapers, magazines,
radio, out of home, directories and direct mail. 47 To facilitate transition from Interpublic's
McCann-Erickson unit, Magna Global has readjusted Interpublic's MCE historical annual
advertising estimates going back to 1980 based on the new measurement methodology. MG8
total nominal expenditure data for the US is currently available encompassing the 1980-2018
time frame. We now compare MCE and IRS 1960-2007 advertising elasticity estimates with
MG8 estimates based on the shorter 1980-2007 time period, and then extend the MG8 time
frame to include also the 2008-2018 years, giving us a 39 year MG8 series for 1980-2018 that
also enables us to exp lore whether the advertising-GDP relationship is stable or is changing in
recent years.

           As is evident from Figure 3 and discussed in the section 3.2.3 , the total media revenue
series MG8 for advertising is less than that for MCE and IRS advertising expenditure series since
the latter include not only media advertising costs, but also costs of advertising creative and
production services, which for many years were bundled with media placement services.




47
     See Magna Global [2015].

                                                                                             Page 26
         Before we implement regression analysis, we first examine whether the MG8 series is
stationary, or is generated by a unit root process that is non-stationary, in levels and/or in
differenced form, in raw or logarithmic units over the 1980-2018 time period. Analysis based on
the augmented Dickey-Fuller test reveals that we cannot reject the null hypothesis of a unit root
based on the raw level MG8 data (p-value of 0.5457) and we cannot reject the null hypothesis of
a unit root based on the logarithmic raw level data (p-value of 0.5307), but we can reject the
null hypothesis of a unit root based on the first-differenced logarithmic data at usual significance
levels (p-value of 0.0138). Since the validity of conventional regression inference requires that
the underlying series be the result of a stationary data generating process, we now proceed with
regression analysis where the dependent variable is the first-differenced logarithmic MG8
revenue series, hereafter denoted as D(LOGMG8$BN). In Table 3, we report regression
estimates of parameters in the most general Eq. 3' and the restricted Eq. 5' with
D(LOGMG8$BN) as the dependent variable. To facilitate comparison with earlier findings and to

                  (Insert Table 3 Somewhere Near Here)

examine parameter stability over time, we report OLS, AR1 and AR2 findings over the truncated
1981-2007 time period (with 2007 being the final year, as was the case with the MCE and IRS
findings reported in Tables 1 and 2), and then over the extended 1981-2018 time frame that
includes more recent years. We also test for parameter stability over the 1981-1999 and 2000-
2018 sub-periods (with 2000 being the breakpoint year) by performing Chow tests using the
likelihood ratio test statistic. 48

         There are several striking findings in Table 3, all pointing to inclusion of the most recent
data leading to larger estimates of advertising elasticities. First, if one compares estimates of 1
and 2 with the MG8 advertising expenditure data over the 1981-2007 time period (the left
panel of Table 3) with the MG8 advertising expenditure data over the 1981-2018 years (the right
panel of Table 3), we observe that the elasticity estimates become larger when more recent
years are included in the data set; estimates of 1, for example, average about 1.7 with 1981-
2007 MG8 data, but increase to about 2.4 when 1981-2018 MG8 data are utilized; for 2, the



48
  For discussion of the likelihood ratio and other statistics to test the null hypothesis of parameter
stability in the context of AR1 and AR2 processes estimated by maximum likelihood, see the EViews 7 User
Guide II, Version 9 (Quantitative Micro Software, Irvine, CA [1994-2009], www.eviews.com), ch. 14,
"Specification and Stability Tests".

                                                                                               Page 27
respective average estimates are about 0.9 and 1.3. The null hypothesis that the elasticities 1 =
2 is not rejected based on 1981-2007 MG8 data, but is decisively rejected when elasticity
estimates are based on the 1981-2018 MG8 data. It is also notable that these MG8- based
elasticity estimates in Table 3 are greater than the 1981-2007 elasticity estimates based on MCE
and IRS data. When the 1 = 2 =  constraint is imposed on the 1981-2007 data (Eq. 5'
estimates in the bottom panels of Tables 2 and 3), the additional restriction that  = 1 is rejected
with the MCE data and with the IRS data, but with the MG8 data it is not rejected at p-values <
0.05. However, as seen in the bottom right panel of Table 3, this  = 1 hypothesis is decisively
rejected (all p-values < 0.001) when the elasticity estimates are based on data including all the
1981-2018 annual values.

        A second notable finding emerges when one compares autoregressive parameter
estimates across all three tables. When based on 1980-2007 MCE and IRS logarithmic in levels
data, in all models in Table 1 the estimates of the first-order autocorrelation coefficient 1 are
significantly different from zero, and all but one of the estimates of the second-order
autocorrelation coefficient 2 are insignificantly different from zero, and that single instance is
only significant at a p-value of 0.10. Recall, however, that based on the Augmented Dickey-
Fuller test, the null hypothesis that the log (raw) levels MCE and IRS were generated by a unit
root process could not be rejected, implying that the validity of conventional statistical
inference procedures was called into question with this log (raw) levels data. When the 1981-
2007 log MCE and log IRS data are first differenced however, as seen in Table 2, none of the 1
and 2 estimates is statistically significant; recall that with this 1981-2007 first-differenced log
MCE and log IRS data, the unit root hypothesis was rejected, implying that stationary conditions
necessary for valid statistical inference in Table 2 were satisfied with the 1981-2007 first-
differenced log MCE and log IRS data. Finally, when the first-differenced 1981-2018 log MG8
data were analyzed, the unit root hypothesis was rejected, rationalizing use of this data for
regression estimation of the advertising elasticities. As seen in Table 3, when the first-
differenced 1981-2018 log MG8 data are employed, none of the estimated 1 and 2
autoregressive parameters was statistically significant. We conclude, therefore, that use of first-
differenced log MCE, log IRS, and log MG8 data are not compromised by the presence of a unit
root data generating process, although use of level (raw) log MCE and IRS data appear to suffer
from the unit root phenomenon.
        Third, and perhaps most importantly, the finding in Table 3 that estimates of the real

                                                                                             Page 28
GDP 1 and implicit GDP price deflator 2 elasticities increase when one adds more recent years
to the 1981-2007 data set and includes annual values through 2018, raises the issue of whether
these elasticity estimates are stable or instead differ over time. We have implemented the
Chow test of parameter equality, choosing 2000 as the breakpoint year, and tested whether
parameter estimates in Eq. 3' and in Eq. 5' are stable across the 1981-1999 (20th century) and
2000-2018 (21st century) time periods. Results are displayed in the rows designated "Chow ­
2000 break" for Eq. 3' (middle of Table 3) and for Eq. 5' (bottom of Table 3). What we find is
that the null hypothesis of parameter equality over selected years in the 20th and 21st century is
decisively rejected, with all p-values being < 0.001 for Eq. 3' and < 0.03 for Eq. 5'.
           Together, these findings raise the issue, what happened during years near the turn of
the century that resulted in nominal MG8 advertising expenditures becoming more responsive
to changes in real GDP, to changes in GDP price inflation, and to changes in nominal GDP? To
that we next turn our attention.

    VII.       DISCUSSION

           Our time series analyses encompassing almost a half century indicates that beginning in
the late 1990's nominal aggregate advertising spending in the U.S. has become more sensitive to
changes in GDP. Along the way, we have urged that a high priority be given to developing media
specific and aggregate price indices that could be used to distinguish between nominal and real
changes in advertising outlays, and thereby advance understanding of the antecedents and
consequences of short-term, cyclical, and secular shifts in U.S. GDP and its components.

           The digital revolution stands as an exemplar of Schumpeter's "creative destruction"
that has delivered extraordinary benefits to economies and societies around the world, even as
it has also imposed seemingly incalculable costs everywhere. Of particular interest to the
purposes at hand are the questions of whether and how the digital transformation presently
underway in the advertising industry may have affected response measurement practices and
agency-client relations in ways that can effect long-run changes in the size of the total
advertising market and its composition with respect to the various media advertisers employ to
reach their target audiences. Moreover, these evolving digital era practices and relationships
have been accompanies by the reappearance of a number of fundamental issues about the
processes and effects of advertising similar to those that have persisted since the early days of
modern advertising (Fogg-Meade [1900]). Those issues include questions about the


                                                                                            Page 29
intrusiveness and function of advertising and the challenges that follow in assessing the nature
and magnitude of its economic and social effects. In what follows, we consider implications of
our results for the management of advertising campaigns and for looming antitrust policies
affecting advertising. Each of these issues would benefit substantially from the availability of
aggregate advertising and media-specific price indices.

VII.1 Management of Advertising Campaigns

        The ascendancy of digital advertising has served to both "informate and automate"
(Zuboff [1988],[2001]) the organizational planning and control systems surrounding the
management of advertising campaigns and given rise to a "new era of marketing accountability,
in which advertising `budgets'...have turned into marketing `investments'". 49 "Attribution"
methods are now widely used in campaign planning and budgeting that utilize "big" data to
target and track consumers over time on their "journeys" to purchase (Goldfarb and Tucker
[2011], Goldfarb [2014]). Attribution analysis seeks to assign a weight to each "touchpoint"
across all online and offline media to which a consumer is exposed prior to purchase. Such
analyses are typically grounded in some form of a marketing mix model but the methods vary
widely in terms of structure and data inputs. The introduction of "zero-based budgeting" has led
marketing managers to believe they must "do more with less resources" and encouraged the
practice of "managing what can be measured." 50 These developments have revived old
suspicions about excessive "short-termism" in marketing decision-making (Lodish and Mela
[2007]) and fueled new allegations that firms are overspending (Aaker and Carman [1989]) on
media that can be shown to generate short-run response at the expense of investing more in
other media better suited to long-term brand building (Binet and Field [2013]). The latter
authors maintain:

        "The way in which log-term effects are generated is fundamentally different from how
        most short-term effects are produced. Although long-term effects always produce some
        short-term effects the reverse is not true and long-term effects are not simply the
        accumulation of short-term effects." 51
        Recently, Danaher and van Heerde [2018] have shown analytically how reliance on
attributions methods can misguide and distort the allocation of advertising funds across media.


49
   Rapport [2015]. Also see Agrawal et al. [2020] and Bauer [2020].
50
   Jacobs et al. [2018] and Butts et al. [2020].
51
   Binet and Field [2013, p. 9]. Also see Tiltman et al. [2019].

                                                                                           Page 30
Taking into account that current period advertising may carry over into future periods plus there
may be interaction effects among advertising appearing in different media, Danaher and van
Heerde demonstrate the attribution is proportional to the marginal effectiveness of a medium
times its number of exposures. Accordingly, oft-used media will have high attribution weights.
However, in the case of a time invariant profit maximizing allocation of a fixed budget, the
optimal solution does not depend upon the number of times a consumer is exposed to a
medium.

        The state of knowledge about the processes and effects of advertising reflects the
interplay between two different methodologies that aspire to measure the causal effects of
advertising, and have come to be known by their short-hand labels as "Observational Studies"
(OS) because they typically involve econometric analysis of time series data, and "Randomized
Controlled Trials" (RCT). The growth of digital advertising has spurred notable advances in both
streams of research and the healthy cross fertilization between them.

        In an influential study, Lewis and Rao [2015] analyzed the results from 25 RCTs
conducted between 2007 and 2011 with display advertising campaigns: 19 campaigns for five
"well known" retailers and six campaigns for two financial service firms. The campaigns were of
relatively short duration: the median campaign length was ten days for the retailers and 32 days
for the financial service advertisers. Campaign costs involved outlays corresponding to "20-60
`premium' display ads," the equivalent of "7-10 prime time television commercials" (p. 1942).
The experiments utilized individual-level measures of consumer purchase behavior, with the
median campaign reaching over a million individuals. The experiments followed standard
industry practice of defining the evaluation window over which purchase behavior was observed
as "the number of time periods ads were running and a relative short window, 1-4 weeks,
following the campaign" (p. 1955). In designing advertising field experiments, a critical tradeoff
needed to be made between lengthening the evaluation window to capture long-lived response
to ads, and the tendency for there to be a loss of statistical power to diminish as the evaluation
window extends. Relative to great volatility of such data, Lewis and Rao characterized the
effects on purchase behavior required for a campaign to be profitable as "very small," due to
the estimates of the ROI for a campaign being "inherently imprecise " (p. 1942, emphasis
added). Given the imprecision of the results, the authors note that the implied scale required for
RCTs to yield unequivocal results was such to render them infeasible for many advertisers.


                                                                                           Page 31
        Faced with the classic dilemma reminiscent of Lodish's [1986] memorably framing of the
issue as one of choosing between being "vaguely right versus precisely wrong," advertisers turn
to observational studies on the assumption they will yield "satisfactory", if fallible
measurements. The dilemma is particularly vexing when the effects are "small," as in the case of
online advertising, since it has been shown that correlated online behaviors ("activity bias") can
lead to overestimates of the effects of advertising (Lewis, Rao, and Reiley [2011]). Gordon et al.
[2019] report an empirical assessment of whether data typically available to analysts in the
advertising industry when used in conjunction with statistical models for making causal
inferences, is adequate to recover the results obtained from an RCT. The heart of the
assessment is a detailed comparison of the results from 15 "big" advertising field experiments
conducted at Facebook with those obtained by applying these methods for making causal
inferences using the kind of data available in practice from observational studies. The study
focuses on the estimation of "propensity scores" from observable measures used to control for
differences between treated and untreated consumers. The set of 15 campaigns was selected to
encompass a range of advertisers (retail, financial services, e-commerce, telecom, and tech)
conducted during the first nine months of 2015. The authors conclude that "commonly used
observational approaches based on the data usually available in the industry from observational
studies often fail to accurately measure the true effect of advertising" (p. 193). However, this
study is part of an ongoing research project investigating this issue with a larger sample of
several hundred recent campaigns for which results from RCT studies are available to shed light
on the conditions under which data from observational studies may suffice.

        Meanwhile, Shapiro et al. [2020] have pursued a different path to developing a
"generalizable and robust" set of results relating to the causal effect of television advertising on
sales. The stated goal of developing generalizable results is to provide managers and policy
makers with a prior distribution that will guide their decision making and recommendations
relating to television advertising. Accordingly, the focus is on the full distribution of results,
irrespective of their sign, size, or statistical significance, thereby circumventing the problem of
publication bias that may plague meta-analysis studies.

        A particularly noteworthy feature of the study is the use of a "border strategy" to
address the identification problem that arises when advertising is not randomly assigned to
geographical areas (Shapiro [2018]). The authors turn to the prevailing institutional


                                                                                               Page 32
arrangements that surround the buying of television advertising time to justify a plausibly
random source of variation in exposure to advertising across geographical areas and over time.
An extensive database was assembled from multiple sources consisting of the store level weekly
brand sales (quantities and prices) and media purchases for four sources of television (network,
cable, spot, and syndication). The latter information was matched to the Neilsen Designated
Market Areas (DMA) and converted to exposure levels (i.e., Gross Rating Points) levels using
audience size data. The database encompassed five years (2010-2014) of weekly sales and
television advertising exposure levels for 288 brands of consumer purchased packaged goods
that collectively accounted for approximately 10 percent of consumer expenditures. For each
brand, the authors estimated a constant elasticity model where the quantity sold in a particular
store and week is a function of vectors of own and competitor prices and advertising, where
advertising is a stock variable to capture carryover effects. The median of the estimated
distribution of long-run elasticities was 0.014 and more than two-thirds of estimates were not
statistically different from zero. Moreover, for more than two-thirds of the brands the return on
investment in advertising for a given week was negative at the margin, indicating that the
majority of brands overinvested in advertising. The authors caution: "This result does not imply
that all advertising is wasted. For many brands, the observed level of advertising is more
profitable than no advertising at all" (p.4).

         To assess the robustness of the estimates, Shapiro et al. [2020] analyzed the sensitivity
of the results to both the assumptions underlying the selection of the data used in estimation
and the identification strategies essential to support the claim of causality based on
observational data. The findings were affirmative and in line with Chan and Perry's [2017] call
for the development of media mix models that "acknowledge the uncertainty in the modeling
process and the need for transparency between the modeler and the end user of the model
results."(p.2). As a result of privacy regulation and decisions by browsers, digital advertising
faces a future without cookies. Intermedia competition has grown over time and the long-
established structure of "up front" and "spot" markets for television advertising is currently in a
state of flux. Accordingly, media-mix budgeting practices can be expected to continue to evolve
to meet the dynamic demands of decision makers in the digital era. The role of media mix
models and RCTs are often juxtaposed against one another as imperfect substitutes for each
other. Note that in the context of media mix models, the availability of media-specific
advertising price indices is critical.

                                                                                             Page 33
        Kolsarici et al. [2020] have recently proposed a "bounded rationality" theory of
advertising budgeting whereby advertising spending is the outcome of a decision process that
reflects a combination of both heuristics and analytical reasoning. Whereas descriptive studies
of advertising budgeting have traditionally emphasized the role of heuristics in budget setting
(e.g., advertising/sales norms for a product category), Kolsarici et al. argue that managers also to
seek to cope with the uncertainty about the effectiveness of their advertising programs inherent
in a dynamic operating environment. The pioneering work of Little ([1966],[1977]) and others on
adaptive experimentation and control theory provides the rationale for hypothesizing that
experimentation should be proportional to the uncertainty about advertising effectiveness. 52 To
test the implications of their theory, Kolsaric et al. conducted an empirical study using time
series data for eight brands from three product categories (durable and non-durable) and at
different stages of their life cycles. The results show that advertising budgeting is highly brand-
specific, sensitive to different heuristics and changes in advertising effectiveness, and are
consistent with the general proposition that advertising budgeting should be viewed as an
"intendedly rational" decision process (Simon [1957]) in the sense that over time managers
appear to adjust advertising outlays in response to uncertainty surrounding advertising
effectiveness. The perspective that the advertising budget is an instrument that managers in
organizations with a wide variety of objectives employ to adapt to dynamic, competitive
environments is one that warrants further development and testing.

VII.2 Public Policy

        Moving to the public policy domain, one finds that the digital era has given rise to a host
of larger unresolved issues likely to challenge the future organization of the advertising-
supported media industry. Working within the paradigm of industrial economics, Gordon et al.
[2020] have recently enumerated a set of policies and practices alleged to be sources of
"allocative inefficiencies" in digital markets. Gordon et al. [2020] identify four such sources of
inefficiencies: measurement of advertising response, organizational "frictions" affecting
relations within and among firms comprising the industry's vertical structure, ad blocking, and


52
  Early analyses on the economics of advertising make the simplifying assumption that market response
to advertising was certain (Schmalensee [1972], p. 32). Horowitz [1970] explored introducing uncertainty
into a simple advertising model but the subsequent investigation by Dehavez and Jacquemin [1975] found
that incorporating the combined impact of uncertainty and dynamic conditions (e.g., carryover effects)
was unworkable.

                                                                                               Page 34
brand safety. These developments have stimulated a major debate as to whether antitrust
policy needs to undergo a fundamental reform in order to address competition issues related to
the digital economy. 53

        Woodcock [2018], for example, has argued that the internet has rendered the
information function of most advertising obsolete. He further contends that applying antitrust
laws already in place a half century ago, U.S. courts had previously ruled that persuasive
advertising was anticompetitive. However, in Woodcock's telling, those rulings were not widely
enforced by the Federal Trust Commission for "fear of depriving consumers of advertising's
information value" (p. 2270). Khan [2017] has taken the taken a quite different position,
maintaining that the current antitrust paradigm where competition is linked to consumer
welfare is "unequipped to capture the architecture of market power in the modern economy"
(p. 710). Rather than attempting to protect consumer privacy by regulating the business models
of platform companies, Romer [2019] has proposed that the revenue platform companies earn
from the sale of targeted advertising be taxed. Such a policy presumably "would encourage
platform companies to shift toward a healthier, more traditional model."

         In an analyses of public policy issues surrounding the future of advertising-supported
media. Mandel [2019] has also undertaken an analysis of the advertising share of nominal U.S.
GDP. Among other things, he reported that in recent years the growth in ad spending in the U.S.
has "broken out of the long- term trend and in the period 2010-2018 averaged less than 1
percent of nominal GDP" (p. 5). Referring to data for the BLS's media price indices, he goes on
to argue that this trend could be explained by the substantial concomitant decline that has
occurred in the price of digital advertising relative to that for traditional media. As a result, he
posits price competition in the advertising market has risen over time and contributed to the
ascendancy of digital media.
        The above discussion is not intended to be a comprehensive survey of public policy
issues related to advertising, but it does serve to illustrate the range of contemporary yet
longstanhding policy issues that would benefit from the availability of media-specific and
aggregate advertising price indices. In addition, distinguishing between nominal and real growth


53
  While the focus of this paper has been on the U.S. advertising market, the availability of media price
indices for other advertising markets would be valuable to research concerned with cross-national
differences in the intensity and effectiveness of advertising. See, for example, Jones [1990], Deleersynder
et al. [2009], and Steenkamp et al. [2011].

                                                                                                  Page 35
in the advertising and marketing services industry could add to the body of evidence Nakamura
[2020] and others have been accumulating in connection with the investigation of the
measurement and growth and prices in the 21st century.


    VIII.   CONCLUDING REMARKS
        The research question posed at the outset of this research project was: Does the U.S.
advertising industry have a growth problem, a measurement problem, or both? Our most
important empirical finding is that the elasticity of advertising with respect to Gross Domestic
Product appears to have increased over the period of the late 1990's through 2018--from
approximately 1.4 to 1.9. Such a date precedes the onslaught to the pandemic and therefore
precludes the effects that COVID 19 has had on GDP and advertising spending. Nonetheless, the
evidence that over time aggregate advertising spending in the U.S. has become more sensitive
to the overall performance of the national economy is clearly both provocative and tentative.

        It is obvious that much remains to be done to develop data bases to support
econometric analyses that will advance our capabilities to assess and understand structural
shifts in macroeconomic relationships between aggregate advertising activity and the
performance of the economy of which it is a part. Toward that end, we have advocated
collection of data on media-specific media prices that would enable nominal advertising
spending to be converted to real advertising spending. If this research project stimulates such a
development, it will have served a valuable purpose.




Document Name: Aggregate Advertising Expenditures in the US Economy V19

Document Date: 22 November 2020




                                                                                           Page 36
                                           References

Aaker, David A. and James M. Carman [1989], "Are You Over Advertising?" Journal of Advertising
Research, 22 (August/September), 57-70.

Arrow, Kenneth J., George G. Stigler, Elisabeth M. Landes, and Andrew M. Rosenfield [1990],
"Economic Analysis of Proposed Changes in the Tax Treatment of Advertising Expenditures," The
Advertising Tax Coalition, unpublished paper, Chicago, IL: Lexecon Inc., August. Available at:
https://www.scribd.com/document/27267813/Economic-Analysis-of-Proposed-Changes-in-the-
Tax-Treatment-of-Advertising-Expenditures.

Arzaghi, Mohammad, Ernst R. Berndt, James C. Davis, and Alvin J. Silk [2012], "The Unbundling
of Advertising Services: An Economic Analysis," Review of Marketing Science, 10 (Article 4), 1-53.

Bachman, Jules [1967], Advertising and Competition, New York: New York University Press.

Baine, Derek [2019], "Advertising Market Growth Unable to Keep up with GDP," January 30.New
York: S&B Global, Market Intelligence. Available at:
https://platform.mi.spglobal.com/web/client?auth=inherit#news/article?KeyProductLinkType=2
&id=49482900

Bauer, Thomas, Julie Boudet, Michael Lamb, and Kelsey Robinson [2020], "Performance
Branding and How It Is Reinventing Marketing ROI," June 15. Available at:
https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/marketing-and-sales/our-insights/performance-
branding-and-how-it-is-reinventing-marketing-roi?cid=other-eml-alt-mip-
mck&hlkid=c8aeb0778f7345f4b4c30be9079198cc&hctky=2427140&hdpid=cd049d48-afe2-
477e-a8a3-90f68e32b77b

Beach, Charles M. and James G. MacKinnon [1978], "Full Maximum Likelihood Estimation of
Second-Order Autoregressive Error Models", Journal of Econometrics 7:187-198.

Binet, Les and Peter Field [2017], The Long and the Short of It: Balancing Short and Long-Term
Marketing Strategies. London: Institute of Practitioners in Advertising, June.

Blank, David M. [1963], "A Note on the Golden Age of Advertising," Journal of Business, 36
(January), 33-38.


                                                                                          Page 37
Borden, Neil H. [1944], The Economic Effects of Advertising. Chicago: Richard D. Irwin. Especially
Chapter 3, "The Economic Importance of Advertising as Measured by Expenditures," pp. 53-62.

Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) [not dated], BLS Handbook of Methods, ch. 14, "Producer
Prices", 16 pp.

Bureau of Labor Statistics [2020], Producer Price Index Detailed Report, June. Available online
https://www.bls/gov/ppi/ppidr202006.pdf.

Burton, Joe [2009], "A Marketer's Guide to Understanding the Economics of Digital Compared to
Traditional Advertising and Media Services." New York: American Association of Advertising
Agencies.

Byrne, David M., John G. Fernald, and Marshall B. Reinsdorf [2016], "Does the United States
Have a Productivity Slowdown or a Measurement Problem? Finance and Economics Discussion
Series 2016-017. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Available at:
http://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2016.017

Campbell, Donald T. and Donald K. Fiske [1959], "Convergent and Discriminant Validation by the
Multitrait-Multimethod Matrix," Psychological Bulletin, 56 (March), 81-105.

Chemi, Eric [2014], "Advertising's Century of Flat-Line Growth," Bloomberg News, March 3.
Available at: https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2014-03-03/advertisings-century-of-
flat-line-growth

Comanor, William S. and Thomas A. Wilson [1974], Advertising and Market Power. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.

Coyle, Diane and Leonard Nakamura [2019], "Toward a Framework for Time Use, Welfare-
Centric Economic Measurement," Working Paper 19-11, Federal Reserve Board of Philadelphia,
February. Available at: https://doi.org/10.21799/frbp.wp.2019.11.

Danaher, P. J., & van Heerde, H. J. [2018]. "Delusion in attribution: caveats in using attribution
for media budget allocation, Journal of Marketing Research, 55(5), 667-6 66.

Dehez, Pierre and Akex Jacquemin [1975], "A Note on Advertising Policy Under Uncertainty and
Dybanic Conditions," Journal of Industrial Economics, 23 (September), 73-78.



                                                                                            Page 38
Deleersynder, Barbara, Markin G. Dekimpe, Jean-Benedict E.M. Steenkamp, and Peter S.K.
Leeflang [2009], "The Role of National Culture in Advertising's Sensitivity to Business Cycles: An
Investigation Across Countries," Journal of Marketing Research, 46 (October), 623-636.


Diewert, W. Erwin [1978], "Superlative Index Numbers and Consistency in Aggregation",
Econometrica, July, 46(4):883-900.

Diewert, W. Erwin [2015], "Two Stage Aggregation and Homogeneous Weak Separability", ch. 9
in Diewert, Index Number Theory and Measurement Economics, Vancouver, B.C.: University of
British Columbia, Vancouver School of Economics, unpublished lecture notes, February.

Diewert, W. Erwin and Kevin J. Fox [2020], "Measuring Real Consumption and CPI Bias under
Lockdown Conditions", Vancouver B.C.: University of British Columbia, Vancouver School of
Economics, unpublished manuscript, April 13.

Ehrlich, Isaac and Lawrence Fisher [1972], "The Derived Demand for Advertising: A Theoretical
and Empirical Investigation", American Economic Review, 72(3):366-388.

Evans, David S. [2008], "The Economics of the Online Advertising Industry," Review of Network
Economics, 7 (September), 351-391.

Evans, David S. [2009], "The Online Advertising Industry: Economics, Evolution, and Privacy,"
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23 (September), 37-60.

Fogg-Meade, Emily [1901], "The Place of Advertising in Modern Business," Journal of Political
Economy, 9 (March), 218-242.

Fisher, Lawrence, and Isaac Ehrlich [1984], "A New Price Index for Advertising in the United
States", unpublished manuscript.

Goldfarb, Avi [2014], "What Is Different About Online Advertising?" Review of Industrial
Organization, 44 (2), 115-129.

Goldfarb, Avi and Catherine Tucker [2019], "Digital Economics," Journal of Economic Literature,
57(1), 3-43.




                                                                                           Page 39
Gordon, Brett, Florian Zettelmeyer, Neha Bhargava, and Dan Chapsky ]2019], "A Comparison of
Approaches to Advertising Measurement: Evidence from Big Field Experiments at Facebook,"
Marketing Science, 38 (2), 193-225.

Gordon, Brett R., Kinshu Jerath, Zsolt Katona, Sridhar Narayanan, Jiwoong Shin, and Kenneth C.
Wilbut [2020], "Inefficiencies in Digital Advertising Markets," Journal of Marketing, forthcoming.

Griliches, Zvi [1992], "Introduction" in Griliches, Zvi, Ernst R. Berndt, Timothy F. Bresnahan, and
Marilyn E. Manser, eds., Output Measurement in the Service Sector. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Guptam, Sunil and Joseph Davin [2019], Digital Marketing. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School
Publishing, December 19.

Hall, Robert E. [2012], "The Cyclical Response of Advertising Refutes Counter-Cyclical Profit
Margins in favor of Product-Market Frictions", Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
Research, Working Paper 18370, September.

Hall, Robert E. [2014], "What the Cyclical Response of Advertising Reveals about Markups and
Other Macroeconomic Wedges", Stanford, CA: Stanford University, Hoover Institution and
Department of Economics, unpublished manuscript, April 23.

Internal Revenue Service [2012], Statistics of Income 2012: Corporate Income Tax
Returns. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of the Treasury, Internal Revenue Service.

Internal Revenue Service [1962], "Statistics of Income 1960-61: U.S. Business Tax Returns,"
Washington DC: U.S. Treasury Department, Internal Revenue Service, Publication No. 438 (6-
62).

Internet Advertising Bureau [2019], "Internet Advertising Revenue Report: 2018 Full Year
Results," May. Available at: https://www.iab.com.

Internet Advertising Bureau [2020], "Internet Advertising Revenue Report: Full Year 2019
Results and Q1 2020 Revenues," May. Available at: https://www.iab.com.

Jones, John P. [1990], "Advertising: Strong Force or Weak Force: Two Views and Ocean Apart,"
International Journal of Advertising, 9, 233-246.



                                                                                            Page 40
Juenger, Todd, Jason Park and Nataliya Nedzhvetskaya [2016], "The Long View: U.S. Media:
Revisiting the Graveyard Four Years On-- Not So Funny Anymore." New York: Bernstein
Research, April 7.

Kolsarici, Ceren, Demetrios Vakrasats, and Prasad A. Naik [2020],"The Anatomy of the
Advertising Budget Decision: How Analytics and Heuristics Drive Sales Performance," Journal of
Marketing Research,57 (3), 468-488.

Kossar, Kevin R. [2014], "Advertising by the Federal Government: An Overview," unpublished
paper, Congressional Research Service, Washington, D.C., June 23.
Available at: https://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R41681.pdf

Letang, Vincent and Michael Leszega [2017],"U.S. Advertising Forecast: Executive Summary,"
Magna Global, New York, March.

MacKinnon, James G. [1996], "Numerical Distribution Functions for Unit Root and Cointegration
Tests", Journal of Applied Econometrics, November/December, 11(6):601-618.

Magna Global [2015], "U.S. Media Forecasts: Definitions and Methodology," July.
Available from: http://www.magnaglobal.com.

Mandel, Michael [2019], "The Declining Cost of Advertising: Policy Implications," Progressive
Policy Institute, Washington, D.C., July. Available at:
https://www.progressivepolicy.org/issues/government-reform/the-declining-price-of-
badvertising-policy-implications-2/

Mandese, Joe [2007], "The Thinking Person's Guide to Media: Chapter One: What is Advertising
Anyway? MediaPost, February 27. Available at:
http://www.mediapost.com/publications/article/56253.

Mandese, Joe [2009a], "Bottoms Up: Interpublic Revises Forecast Model, Sifts to `Top-Down,'
Media-Centric Approach," Media Daily News, (July 10). Accessed at:
http://www.mediapost.com/publications/article/109547/.

Mandese, Joe [2009b], "Costly Decision: Interpublic Scraps Media Inflation Index," Media Daily
News," (July 13). Accessed at:




                                                                                         Page 41
http://www.mediapost.com/publications/article/109625/costly-decision-interpublic-scraps-
media-inflation/

McAlister, Leigh, Raj Srinivasan, Niket Jindal, and Alberta A. Cannella [2016], "Advertising
Effectiveness: The Moderating Effect of Firm Strategy," Journal of Marketing Research, 53
(April), 207-224.

Myers, Kenneth H. [1958], "Have We A Decline in Advertising Appropriations?" Journal of
Marketing, 23 (April), 370-375.

Myers, Kenneth H. [1962], "Is Advertising a Growth Industry?" Media/Scope, (June), 35-41.

Nakamura, Leonard I. [2020], "Evidence of Accelerating Mismeasurement of Growth and
Inflation in the U.S. in the21st Century," Working Pape 20-41, Research Dept., Federal Reserve
Bank of Philadelphia, October.

National Bureau of Economic Research [2016], "US Business Cycle Expansions and Contractions,"
Cambridge, MA, February 24. Available at: http://www.nber.org.cycles/.

Phillipson, Guy [2016], "IAB's Guy Phillipson: `Ad industry's transformation has only just begun',"
Campaign (September 5). https://www.campaignlive.co.uk/article/iabs-guy-phillipson-ad-
industrys-transformation-just-begun/1407492

Pindyck, Robert S. and Daniel L. Rubinfeld [1998], Econometric Models and Economic Forecasts,
Fourthh edition, Boston, MA: Irwin McGraw-Hill.

Quantitative Micro Software, EViews7 V9 User's Guide II, Irvine, CA: Quantitative Micro Software
[1994-2009]. www.eviews.com.

Pope, Daniel [1983], The Making of Modern Advertising. New York: Harper.

Rapport, Jeffrey F. [2015], "Is Programmatic Advertising The Future of Marketing?" Harvard
Business Review (Website), June 22. Available at:
https://www.hbs.edu/faculty/Pages/item.aspx?num=49520

Rogers, Richard T. and Robert J. Tokle [1995], "The Economics of Advertising: Where's the
Data?" Review of Industrial Organization, 10 (6), December, 675-687.

Schmalensee, Richard [1972], The Economics of Advertising, New York: North-Holland.


                                                                                           Page 42
Schultz, Donald [2016], "The Future of Advertising or Whatever We're Going to Call It," Journal
of Advertising, 45(3), 276-285.

Sherman, Sidney A. [1900], "Advertising in the United States," Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 7 (December), 1-44.

Shi, Huanhuan, Rajdeep Grewal, and Shrihari Sridhar [2017], "Organizational Herding in
Advertising Spending Disclosures: Evidence and Mechanisms," UNC Kenan-Flagler Business
School, Mays Business School Research Paper No. 3071616, November 15. Available at:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3071616.

Silk, Alvin J. [2012], "Conflict Policy and Advertising Agency-Client Relations: The Problem of
Competing Clients Sharing a Common Agency," Foundations and Trends in Marketing, 6(2).
Hanover, MA: now Publishers Inc.

Silk Alvin J., Lisa R. Klein and Ernst R. Berndt [2001], "The Emerging Position of the Internet as an
Advertising Medium," Netnomics, 3 (September), 129-148.


Silk, Alvin J., Lisa R. Klein and Ernst R. Berndt [2002], "Intermedia Substitutability and Market
Demand by National Advertisers," Review of Industrial Organization, 20 (June), 323-348.

Silk, Alvin J. and Charles King III [2013], "How Concentrated is the Advertising and Marketing
Services Industry? Myth vs. Reality," Journal of Current Issues and Research in Advertising, 34
(1), 166-193. Available at:
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/10641734.2013.754721

Silk, Alvin J. and Marta S. Stiglin [2016], "Build It, Buy It, or Both? Rethinking the Sourcing of
Advertising Sources," International Journal of Marketing Studies, Vol 8, No. 1 (February).

Simon, Julian [1970], Issues in the Economics of Advertising. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois
Press

Standard and Poor's COMPUSTAT User's Guide [2003]. New York: McGraw-Hill. Available at:
http://sites.bu.edu/qm222projectcourse/files/2014/08/compustat_users_guide-2003.pdf




                                                                                             Page 43
Steenkamp, Jan-Benedict E.M. and Eric (ER) Fang [2011], "The Impact of Economic Contractions
on the Effectiveness of R&D and Advertising: Evidence from U.S. Companies Spanning Three
Decades," Marketing Science, 30 (July-August), 628-645.

Telser, Lester G. [1964], "Advertising and Competition," Journal of Political Economy, 72
(December), 537-562.

Telser, Lester G. [1968], "Some Aspects of the Economics of Advertising," Journal of Business, 41
(April), 166-173.

Vakratssas, Demetrios, and Tim Ambler [1999], "How Advertising Works: What Do We Really
Know?" Journal of Marketing, 63 (January), 26-43.

Wieser, Brian [2019], "Digital Deceleration Deciphered," Group M, (May 5), New York. Available
at: https://www.groupm.com/news/digital-deceleration-deciphered.

Yang, Charles [1962], A Theoretical and Empirical Investigation of Advertising Cycles,
unpublished Ph.D. Thesis, Graduate School of Business Administration, New York University.

Zuboff, Shoshana [1988].   In the Age of the Smart Machine: The Future of Work and
Power. New York: Basic Books, 1988.

Zuboff, Shoshana [2001], "Automate/Informate: The Two Faces of Intelligent Technology,"
Organizational Dynamics, 14 (Autumn), 5-18.




                                                                                            Page 44
Page 45
Page 46
Figure 4




           Page 47
                          Figure 5




FIGURE 6: Comparison of MCE Composite Media Advertising CPMs, BLS Producer Price Index for
             Finished Goods, and BEA GDP Implicit Price Deflator: 1960-2006.




                                                                                  Page 48
Page 49
Figure 8: Correlograms of Log-Level (top panel) and Log First
Differenced (bottom panel) Nominal Advertising Expenditures ­
McCann-Erickson (left) and Internal Revenue Service (right)




                                                                Page 50
Table 1: Regression Results from Estimation of Logarithmic Raw (Level) Models
                               1960-2007 Annual Data

                                              Most General Model in Eq. 3
Parameter Estimate        Dependent Variable LGMCE$BN        Dependent Variable LGIRS$BN
   (Std. Error)            OLS        AR1         AR2       OLS          AR1         AR2
                        -7.895*** -9.208 *** -10.031*** -7.792*** -9.558*** -9.622
                        (0.666)    (1.005)     (1.097)   (0.539)     (1.186)      (1.131)

      1                  0.857***     1.130*** 1.275***        0.782*** 1.097***          1.108***
                        (0.108)       (0.152)  (0.170)        (0.087)   (0.150)          (0.169)

      2                  1.178*** 0.881*** 0.755***            1.313*** 1.031***          1.023***
                        (0.083)   (0.128)  (0.167)            (0.067)   (0.139)          (0.167)

      1                   n/a         0.939*** 1.302***          n/a        0.931***      1.257***
                                     (0.046)   (0.184)                     (0.056)       (0.251)

      2                   n/a           n/a     -0.363*          n/a         n/a          -0.341
                                                (0.183)                                  (0.238)
     R2                 0.995        0.999        0.999        0.997         0.999         0.999
    SSR                 0.261        0.046       0.041         0.171         0.032        0.028
    DW                  0.201        1.392       2.194         0.227         1.286        1.941
p-value of HO:
 1=2=                  0.0967*      0.3564  0.1104       0.0012*** 0.7972                0.7885
                                        Restricted Model in Eq. 5
                      -4.214*** -3.873*** - 3.915*** -4.631*** -4.470***                 -
4.476***
                      (0.089)       (0.310)     (0.296)       (0.079)       (0.596)      (0.460)

                      1.039***      0.998***    1.003***       1.083***      1.061***     1.063***
                     (0.011)        (0.037)      (0.036)      (0.010)       (0.066)      (0.053)

     1                  n/a          0.926***    1.202***        n/a         0.926***     1.248***
                                    (0.044)      (0.162)                    (0.058)       (0.237)

     2                  n/a          n/a        -0.293          n/a           n/a        -0.340
                                                (0.178)                                  (0.230)

     R2                0.995       0.999           0.999        0.996          0.999       0.999
   SSR                 0.278       0.047           0.043        0.217          0.032        0.029
   DW                 0.174        1.443           2.083        0.152          1.289       1.929
p-value of
 H0:  = 1           0.0008       0.9539           0.9404      <0.0001         0.3579       0.2477
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. n/a means "not applicable". SSR is sum of squared
residuals.
        ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at p-values of 0.01, 0.05 and 0.10,
respectively.

                                                                                             Page 51
    Table 2: Regression Results from Estimation of First-Differenced Logarithmic Models
                                       1960-2007 Annual Data
                                     Most General Model -- Eq. 3'
Parameter Estimate Dependent Variable D(LGMCE$BN) Dependent Variable D(LGIRS$BN)
   (Std. Error)           OLS         AR1        AR2           OLS         AR1        AR2
                        -0.037**    -0.033** -0.028          -0.030**    -0.025*   -0.026
                        (0.014)     (0.015)    (0.019)       (0.012)     (0.013)   (0.018)

      1                 1.690***     1.645*** 1.657*** 1.566***           1.471*** 1.511***
                       (0.249)       (0.176)  (0.195)  (0.208)           (0.174)   (0.238)

      2                 1.305***    1.224*** 1.035**         1.378***     1.326*** 1.314***
                       (0.217)      (0.340)  (0.446)        (0.182)      (0.269)   (0.340)

      1                 n/a          0.217      0.198        n/a          0.192      0.148
                                    (0.187)    (0.233)                   (0.233)    (0.203)

      2                 n/a           n/a       0.288        n/a          n/a        0.155
                                               (0.228)                              (0.235)

      R2              0.575         0.594      0.623        0.651        0.662       0.670
     SSR              0.041         0.039      0.036        0.029        0.028       0.026
     DW               1.555         2.049      1.963        1.632        1.980       1.957
 p-value of HO:
 1=2= in Eq. 3'      0.1438         0.2373     0.1476       0.3890       0.6326     0.5403
                                        Restricted Models --Eq. 5' and Eq. 6'
                      -0.035**     -0.034*** -0.037**       -0.029**     -0.025**   -0.027
                      (0.014)      (0.012)     (0.014)       (0.012)     (0.011)    (0.016)

                       1.455***    1.446*** 1.484***        1.451***    1.395***     1.423***
                      (0.195)      (0.171)  (0.208)        (0.160)      (0.159)     (0.248)

      1                 n/a         0.211      0.175         n/a        0.208        0.170
                                   (0.168)    (0.190)                   (0.228)     (0.203)

      2                 n/a          n/a       0.182         n/a           n/a       0.128
                                              (0.224)                               (0.247)
      R2              0.544        0.574       0.588       0.645        0.660        0.665
    SSR               0.043        0.041       0.039       0.029        0.028        0.027
    DW                1.542        2.024       1.941       1.574        1.971        1.946
p-value of H0:
 = 1 in Eq. 5'       0.0239**      0.0125**   0.0248**    0.0073***     0.0168**    0.0948*
 = 0 in Eq. 6'       0.5573        0.5881     0.5835      0.5449        0.7943      0.8101

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. n/a means "not applicable". SSR is sum of squared
residuals.
        ***, ** and * denote statistical significance at p-values of 0.01, 0.05 and 0.10,
respectively.

                                                                                      Page 52
    Table 3: Regression Results from Estimation of First-Differenced Logarithmic Models
                          1981-2007 and 1981-2018 MG8$BN Annual Data
                Most General Model -- Eq. 3' ­ Dependent Variable D(LOGMG8$BN)
Parameter Estimate           1981-2007 Annual Data                1981-2018 Annual Data
   (Std. Error)           OLS          AR1        AR2           OLS        AR1         AR2
                        -0.034*      -0.015      -0.014       -0.052*** -0.051*** -0.051***
                        (0.019)      (0.040)     (0.038)     (0.013)     (0.011)    (0.012)

      1                  1.910***    1.626*** 1.617*** 2.408*** 2.382***           2.406***
                        (0.372)     (0.309)   (0.307)  (0.300)  (0.246)            (0.265)

      2                  1.194***    0.815      0.800       1.324***     1.293*** 1.300***
                        (0.393)     (1.378)    (1.324)     (0.360)      (0.335)   (0.342)

      1                  n/a         0.356       0.355       n/a         0.050       0.049
                                     (0.235)    (0.248)                 (0.210)     (0.215)

       2                 n/a          n/a        0.018       n/a         n/a       -0.030
                                                (0.324)                            (0.223)

      R2            0.546            0.586      0.586       0.686       0.687       0.687
     SSR             0.022           0.020      0.020       0.037       0.037       0.037
     DW              1.490           1.941      1.928       1.871       1.952       1.952
 p-value of HO:
 1=2= in Eq. 3'    0.1280           0.5052      0.4879     0.0255**      0.0056*** .0048***
 Chow ­ 2000 break                                         0.0005*** <0.0001*** 0.0001***
                                       Restricted Models --Eq. 5' and Eq. 6'
                      -0.035*        -0.023      -0.023     -0.056*** -0.054*** -0.053***
                      (0.020)        (0.016)    (0.016)     (0.014)     (0.010)    (0.010)

                       1.579          1.359*** 1.369*** 1.965***        1.919***    1.903***
                      (0.316)        (0.292)   (0.289)  (0.247)         0.162)      (0.164)

     1                  n/a           0.329      0.338        n/a        0.111       0.102
                                     (0.247)    (0.245)                 (0.166)     (0.166)

     2                  n/a            n/a       -0.031      n/a          n/a        0.056
                                                 (0.326)                            (0.213)
      R2                0.499            0.543    0.544          0.637        0.641  0.642
    SSR                0.024              0.022   0.022          0.043         0.042 0.042
    DW                 1.382             1.915    1.941          1.684        1.900  1.892
p-value of H0:
 = 1 in Eq. 5'        0.0790*           0.2322      0.2149      0.0004*** <0.0001***<0.0001***
Chow -2000 break                                                0.0212*** 0.0070*** .0017***
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. n/a means "not applicable". SSR is sum of squared
residuals.
        ***, ** and * denote statistical significance at p-values of 0.01, 0.05 and 0.10,
respectively.

                                                                                      Page 53
                                         Appendix Table 1
Definitions of Sectors Comprising the Advertising and Marketing Services (A&MS) Industry
            Based on the North American Industry Classification System ((NAICS)


 NAICS Category                                   Definition1
 541810             Create advertising campaigns and place such advertisements in media;
 Advertising        organized to provide a full range of services (through in-house capabilities
 Agencies           or subcontracting).
 541820             Design and implement public relations campaigns to promote the interests
 Public Relations   and image
 Agencies           of clients; includes establishments providing lobbying and political
                    consulting services.
 41830              Purchase advertising time or space from media outlets and reselling it to
 Media Buying       advertising agencies or individual companies directly.
 541850             Crete and design public display advertising campaign materials, such as
 Outdoor            printed. painted, or electronic displays; and/or placing such displays on
 Advertising        indoor or outdoor billboards and panels, or on or within transit vehicles or
                    facilities, shopping malls, retail (in-store) displays, and other structures
                    and sites.
 541860             Create and design advertising campaigns involving the distributions of
 Direct Mail        advertising materials (e.g., coupons, flyers, samples) or specialties (e.g., key
 Advertising        chains, magnets, pens); and/or preparing advertising materials and
                    specialties mailing or other direct distribution; may also compile, maintain,
                    sell, and rent mailing lists.
 541870             Direct distribution or delivery of advertisements (e.g., circulars, coupons,
 Advertising        handbills) or samples; including door-to-door delivery, placement on car
 Materials          windshields in parking lots, handouts in retail outlets.
 Distribution
 541890             Includes display and sign lettering, decorating and store window dressing,
 Other Services     welcoming services, merchandise demonstrations.
 541910             Systematic gathering, recording, tabulating, and presenting marketing and
 Marketing          public opinion data.
 Research &
 Public Opinion
 Polling
 541613             Provide operating advice and assistance to businesses and other
 Marketing          organizations on marketing issues, such as developing marketing
 Consulting         objectives, strategies, policies, and plans; sales forecasting, new product
                    development, pricing, licensing, and franchising.




                                                                                            Page 54
                           Appendix Table 2a

                    Summary Statistics for Annual Advertising
                Expenditure and GDP Time Series: Median and Range



                                  Period
Variable    1960-      1960-       1980-         1996-       1960-
($Bill.)    2007       2014       2018           2018        2018
MCE
Median     82.005
(Range)    (11.860-
           281.653)

IRS
Median                106.556
(Range)               (9.291-
                      295.421)
MG8
Median                            162.739
(Range)                           (41.021-
                                  232.906)
SAS6
Median                                          79.027
(Range)                                        (44.519-
                                               112.129

GDP
Nominal                                                    564.1.600
Median                                                     (542.400-
(Range)                                                    20580.20)
GDO
Real                                                       9192.166
Median                                                     (3260.007-
(Range)                                                    188638.11)
GDPIPD
Median                                                       61.374
(Range)                                                    (16.6380-
2012=                                                      110.420)
 100




                                                                        Page 55
                               Appendix Table 2b
Summary Statistics for Annual Advertising Expenditure and GDP Time Series:
                        Mean and Std. Dev. ($Billion)


                                       Period
Variable        1960-      1960-        1980-        1996-         1960-
($Bill.)        2007       2014        2018          2018          2018
   MCE
  Mean          104.982
 (Std. Dev.)   (89.494)

    IRS
   Mean                   122.399
 (Std. Dev.)              (98.494)
   MG8
  Mean                                 140.142
(Std. Dev.)                           (56.598
  SAS6
  Mean                                              75.938
(Std. Dev.)                                         (18.839)

  GDP
 Nominal                                                         7220.281
 Mean                                                            (6085.592)
(Std. Dev.)
  GDP
  Real                                                            9845.972
Mean                                                             (4666.481)
(Std. Dev.)
 GDPIPD
  Mean                                                            59.335
(Std. Dev.)                                                      (30.505)
  2012=
  100




                                                                              Page 56
                                      Appendix Table 3

                Summary Statistics for Two Composite Advertising Price Indices,
           PPI for Finished Goods, and GDP Implicit Price Deflator: 1960-2006 (n=47)


                                CNLCPM      CNTCPM PPIFGA          GDPIPDA
                   Mean         113.585      120.734 87.352        95.509
                   Std. Dev.     75.828       87.426 41.362        48.047
                   Median        99.000       99.000 98.929        100.054
                   Minimum       29.000      31.000 32.522         32.605
                   Maximum      261.800     299.900 156.183        176.501
                      n            47          47     47             47




CNLCPM = MCE Composite Index National & Local Budgets, 1982-84=100

CNTCPM = MCE Composite Index for National Budgets Only (excluding Direct Mail), 1982-
84=100

PPIFGA =   Producers Price Index for Finished Goods, 1982-84=100

GDPIPDA = GDP Implicit Price Deflator, 1982-84=100




Pairwise Correlations Among: CNLCPM, CNTCPM, PPIFGA, and GDPIPDA



                             CNLCPM CNTCPM             PPIFGA GDPIPDA
                     CNLCPM --------
                     CNTCPM 0.996    ---------
                     PPIFGA  0.962    0.938            -------
                     GDPIPDA 0.981    0.961            0.995     --------




                                                                                       Page 57
Appendix Figure 1




 Appendix Figure 2




                     Page 58
Appendix Figure 2




                    Page 59
Appendix Figure 3




                    Page 60
