                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            ESTIMATING PREFERENCES FOR NEIGHBORHOOD AMENITIES
                       UNDER IMPERFECT INFORMATION

                                      Fernando V. Ferreira
                                          Maisy Wong

                                      Working Paper 28165
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28165


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020




We are grateful for support from the Dean's Research Fund, the Research Sponsors Program of
the Zell/Lurie Real Estate Center, and the Wharton Behavioral Lab. We thank Ricardo Perez-
Truglia and Nicolas Bottan for sharing their survey design. We thank Eduardo Morales, Gregorio
Caetano, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, Milena Almagro Garcia, Robert Inman, and participants at
seminars in McGill, Google, and Wharton, as well as conferences including UEA and the Real
Estate NBER Summer Institute, for helpful comments and suggestions. Qize Chen, Richard Jin,
Jacob Krimmel, Xuequan Peng, Trevor Wooley, Fan Xia, Shuo Yang, and Rui Yu provided
excellent research assistance. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Fernando V. Ferreira and Maisy Wong. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Estimating Preferences for Neighborhood Amenities Under Imperfect Information
Fernando V. Ferreira and Maisy Wong
NBER Working Paper No. 28165
December 2020
JEL No. C1,J60,R0

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper presents a new framework to estimate preferences for neighborhoods in the presence
of individual imperfect information about every amenity in each neighborhood. We estimate the
model with data from a new neighborhood choice program that provided information about
market rents and same-school network, and collected neighborhood rankings for the same
individual before and after receiving information. We find that switchers - who change rankings
after the information intervention - increase network shares by 1.46 percentage points and
decrease rents by $430. This variation from the panel data of individual rankings is critical to
produce a latent quality index that addresses biases arising from imperfect information. Estimates
from the neighborhood sorting model reveal a strong negative marginal utility of rents, and a
positive marginal willingness to pay of $123 per month to live in a neighborhood with a larger
network. Finally, information also influenced residential choices after graduation.


Fernando V. Ferreira
Wharton Real Estate
University of Pennsylvania
430 Vance Hall
3733 Spruce Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6301
and NBER
fferreir@wharton.upenn.edu

Maisy Wong
Wharton Real Estate
University of Pennsylvania
434 Vance Hall
3733 Spruce Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6301
and NBER
maisy@wharton.upenn.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28165
1     Introduction
Choosing a neighborhood is an important and complex decision. Several neighborhood
amenities are critical for the well-being of adults and children, such as exposure to the
social and professional network, and access to public and private goods, among others.1
But choosing a neighborhood in which to live can be a challenging process given the many
neighborhoods available in a labor market area, with each neighborhood having an ex-
ceedingly large number of characteristics. In practice individuals have varying knowledge
about neighborhoods and their multitude of amenities, and face difficulties processing the
terabytes of information available in public websites, such as Zillow. These problems may
be even more salient for young adults, since they do not have much experience with res-
idential choices, and may rely on social norms and a limited network of friends to gather
information.2
    In this paper we provide a new framework for estimating the value of neighborhood
amenities, accounting for heterogeneity in how much individuals know about a neighbor-
hood. A standard assumption in choice models is that individuals have perfect informa-
tion about their choice set characteristics ­ all neighborhoods and their amenities in our
case.3 We present a more general model that allows for heterogeneity in individual knowl-
edge about neighborhood amenities, i.e., some individuals may have imperfect information
about the cost of living in a neighborhood, while others may have imperfect information
about neighborhood demographic composition or the presence of trees and sidewalks in
other neighborhoods, while a third set of individuals could have different expectations
about future amenities. In this context, standard methods to account for unobserved neigh-

1A   few examples from this literature include how neighborhoods impact long-term outcomes for children
  (Chetty, Friedman, Hendren, Jones, and Porter, 2018; Chetty and Hendren, 2018a,b; Chetty, Hendren, and
  Katz, 2016), the value heterogeneous households place on endogenous neighborhood amenities, such as
  school quality and sociodemographic composition (Bayer, Ferreira, and McMillan, 2007; Wong, 2013),
  how informal hiring networks arise from place of residence (Bayer, Ross, and Topa, 2008), the importance
  of private consumption goods (Allcott, Diamond, Dubé, Handbury, Rahkovsky, and Schnell, 2019), negative
  consequences of local disamenities such as pollution (Chay and Greenstone, 2003, 2005; Isen, Rossin-Slater,
  and Walker, 2017), and crime (Linden and Rockoff, 2008).
2 There were almost 20 million individuals enrolled in college in 2019 in the United States (National Center for

  Education Statistics, 2020), who will soon have to choose where to live. Recent research has highlighted the
  role of housing costs, amenities, social and professional networks in shaping the location choices of young
  adults (Moretti, 2013; Diamond, 2016) and the importance of friends and social norms in their decision-
  making (Bailey, Cao, Kuchler, Stroebel, and Wong, 2018; Bursztyn and Jensen, 2017).
3 Discrete choice models applied to neighborhood choice have roots in the work of McFadden (1978); Berry

  (1994); Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995, 2004); Epple and Sieg (1999); Nevo (2001); Petrin (2002); Train
  (Train); Pakes, Porter, Ho, and Ishii (2015). Perfect information is a standard assumption in all these models.
borhood quality using neighborhood fixed effects or market share inversions (Berry, 1994;
Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes, 1995) can still lead to biased estimates because of unobserved
heterogeneity across individuals about what they know. Moreover, given the high dimen-
sionality of this type of imperfect information, it is generally difficult to sign the potential
resulting bias.4
    To deal with this issue we integrate our generalized model with panel data from a new
neighborhood choice program that allows us to observe individual rankings before and after
an information intervention. We partnered with a large professional school in the East Coast
to develop a neighborhood choice program to help graduating students choose where to live.
The school was worried about students having imperfect information about neighborhood
quality, and students had concerns about cost of living and access to professional and social
networks. Given those issues, the program focused on providing information to all students
about two neighborhood characteristics: average rent and the same-school network shares.
    The neighborhood choice program was offered in April 2019 to students who by and
large had already completed their job search, and were in the early stages of their housing
search in a given metropolitan area (MSA). The first part of the program was a six-minute
survey with four main components: 1) Elicitation of neighborhood rankings in chosen
MSA; 2) Elicitation of knowledge about rents and network shares in those neighborhoods;
3) Information provision of market rents (from Zillow) and network shares for all neigh-
borhoods (from administrative data); 4) Elicitation of updated neighborhood rankings. The
second part of the program, received upon completion of the survey, was an interactive map
with granular information about rents and the same-school network. Students had perma-
nent access to the map, and could use that information during their summer housing search
and final neighborhood choice.
    A total of 341 students completed the survey (40% response rate), with 309 respon-
dents choosing one of our 20 available MSAs.5 For each MSA students had a menu with
an average of 19 neighborhoods, and they could rank up to 10 of their preferred neighbor-

4 For example, individuals may think expensive neighborhoods such as Tribeca tend to have better unobserved

  school quality and more trees and sidewalks relative to the average neighborhood quality, giving rise to a
  positive correlation between prices and unobserved heterogeneity about neighborhood quality. But other in-
  dividuals may under-estimate the cost of living in expensive neighborhoods given their experiences of living
  in low or middle cost areas, giving rise to a negative correlation between price and unobserved knowledge
  about cost of living.
5 Students moving to a different MSA or country are not part of the final sample, even though they could still

  complete the survey by choosing a secondary MSA. See survey section for details on choice of MSAs and
  neighborhood construction.

                                                      2
hoods ­ an average of five neighborhoods were actually ranked. Survey responses showed
significant heterogeneity in their initial knowledge of neighborhood amenities. On aver-
age, respondents under-estimated monthly rent by $620 relative to data from Zillow, and
over-estimated network shares significantly (by six percentage points, relative to an average
of five percent). There is also asymmetric heterogeneity with respondents over-estimating
rents by $140 for neighborhoods below $2,500 and under-estimating rents by more than
$1,000 for neighborhoods above $4,000. Respondents also tended to over-estimate network
shares by more in expensive neighborhoods, consistent with the administrators' concerns
that students had imperfect information.
     Comparing rankings pre and post information reveal that individuals systematically
prefer expensive neighborhoods with better amenities. In particular, neighborhoods that
are always ranked in the top three for a given student tend to have higher rents and network
shares relative to neighborhoods that are never ranked in the top three. Importantly, we
also observe switchers who change their rankings after the information intervention in a
way that increases the network shares by 1.46 percentage points and decreases rents by
$430 for their top neighborhoods. These patterns suggest a negative marginal utility for
rent, and a positive marginal willingness to pay to live close to a larger network. The
variation from switchers is critical since students who exhibit persistent tastes have perfect
collinearity between pre and post information rankings and therefore cannot help with the
identification of preferences for amenities. There is tremendous variation in individual
rankings: a large number of students (76%) had at least one change in their neighborhood
rankings after receiving the information, including 64% who had at least one change in
their top neighborhoods.
     Estimation of our neighborhood choice model under imperfect information follows two
stages. In the first stage we recover heterogeneity in preferences by estimating a rank or-
dered logit model where post information neighborhood rankings are a function of market
rents, actual same-school network shares, and neighborhood-by-individual unobservables
that include all types of individual level imperfect information. The first stage also pro-
duces estimated neighborhood fixed effects that are decomposed into mean preferences in
a second stage. Individuals have their own unique consideration sets, based on their se-
lected neighborhoods. We allow for ample heterogeneity in preferences by age, gender,
first-generation and minority groups, marital status, school major, industry, and location of
prior residence.
     To account for endogeneity due to heterogeneity in individual knowledge, we use pre


                                              3
information rankings to construct latent quality indices that capture what individuals know
about neighborhoods. The validity of the indices relies on two key assumptions: a) Indi-
viduals report pre information rankings given their best knowledge so that pre information
rankings are relevant proxies for the desirability of neighborhoods; b) Changes in rank-
ings after the information intervention reflect the new information about the networks and
rents. These two assumptions are akin to index sufficiency assumptions (Dahl, 2002) and
basically require that our quality indices constructed using the pre information rankings ex-
haust all the information about how unobserved heterogeneity influences post information
rankings. We demonstrate that our latent quality indices have rich identifying variation,
above and beyond the standard model with neighborhood fixed effects.
    Our results show that a model without the latent quality indices produces a marginal
willingness to pay of $400 per month for a 1 percentage point increase in network shares.
Our generalized model with latent quality indices estimates a 70% lower willingness to
pay of $123, given an average monthly rent of $2,470. This reduction in marginal will-
ingness to pay is mainly driven by a more negative and precise estimate of the marginal
utility for rents, while preferences for the network remain somewhat constant. This sug-
gests the omitted variable bias due to imperfect information is consistent with the notion
that individuals perceive that higher rent neighborhoods having higher quality, even after
conditioning on neighborhood fixed effects. The nature of this imperfect information gives
rise to a positive correlation between rent and latent preferences for neighborhood quality
that biases the marginal utility of rent towards zero, leading to inconsistent estimates of
MWTP for amenities. Such biases are addressed by our latent quality index which utilizes
information about individual rankings for neighborhoods.
    A number of robustness tests confirm the internal validity of our main estimates. For
example, we test different ways of estimating latent indices for unobserved neighborhood
quality. We find that just adding neighborhood-level averages of pre information rankings
can reduce the MWTP by 61% to $157, while just including the individual-level rankings
reduces the MWTP by 54% to $184. Including both is needed to reduce the MWTP to $123.
Thereafter, the MWTP remains stable even if we augmented the model with additional
proxies using initial knowledge about rents and network shares. We also use our survey
data to better understand why individuals prefer to live in a neighborhood with a larger
same-school network. Social and professional interactions account for the largest fraction
of the responses. Moreover, we include richer measures of individual heterogeneity using
administrative data, including industry, major, stage of search, but none of them lead to


                                             4
significant changes in the main MWTP estimate.
    Finally, we demonstrate that the patterns in the online survey persist up to a year after
the program by collecting data on how individuals searched for neighborhoods and their
neighborhood choices after graduation. Our measure of search is based on neighborhood
clicks from the interactive maps made available to students upon the survey completion.
We also obtained administrative data on actual neighborhood choices after graduation. Re-
assuringly, both datasets reveal similar patterns consistent with stated preferences in the
online survey. Students have persistent tastes, generally choosing neighborhoods with
higher rents and network shares. We find the same behavior for switchers, i.e., students
tend to switch into neighborhoods with lower rents and larger network, while switching out
of neighborhoods with higher rent and smaller network. This confirms that our marginal
utility estimates from the neighborhood choice model with imperfect information, based
on stated preferences, also translated into changes in revealed neighborhood preferences.
Moreover, it indicates that the new neighborhood choice program successfully provided
consistent and systematic information that allowed students to improve their location deci-
sions by choosing places with lower cost of living and higher network amenities.
    This work is in the intersection of many literatures. We contribute to a long line of
neighborhood choice papers by showing how to flexibly account for imperfect informa-
tion. Other recent work have made progress in modeling neighborhood choice using ob-
servational data and structural assumptions in different ways, such as Bayer, Keohane, and
Timmins (2009) who account for moving costs, Bayer, McMillan, Murphy, and Timmins
(2016) who consider neighborhood choice in a dynamic framework, Calder-Wang (2019)
who allows for changes in the supply of houses in a neighborhood, Caetano and Maheshri
(2019) who allow for choices to be observed out of equilibrium, Büchel, Ehrlich, Puga,
and Viladecans-Marsal (2020) who utilize high frequency mobile phone data to understand
spatial mobility patterns, and Almagro and Domínguez-Iino (2020) who allows for changes
in the supply of amenities in neighborhoods. We also complement recent methodological
advances in discrete choice models that address selection bias using hedonic indices (Ep-
ple, Quintero, and Sieg, 2020) and fixed effects (Pakes and Porter, 2016; Honoré and Hu,
2020).
    Our research is also part of a growing body of work that combines surveys, experiments,
and structural estimation, such as Benjamin, Heffetz, Kimball, and Rees-Jones (2014) who
study life satisfaction of students who submit choice rankings to medical schools, and
Galiani, Murphy, and Pantano (2015) who use the moving to opportunity experiment to


                                             5
simulate the effect of changes in the subsidies, Bottan and Perez-Truglia (2017) who apply
information surveys to medical students in order to understand the importance of relative
income in city-level choices, and Bergman, Chan, and Kapor (2020) who study the role of
imperfect information about school quality.
    There is a theoretical literature on different dimensions of imperfect information, such
as Kacperczyk, Van Nieuwerburgh, and Veldkamp (2016) and Gao, Sockin, and Xiong
(2020), and applications to household mobility, such as Fujiwara, Morales, and Porcher
(Fujiwara et al.) and Kosar, Ransom, and Van der Klaauw (2019). Finally, our work is
related to programs that provide information and assistance for low income families to
move to better neighborhoods, such as Kling, Liebman, and Katz (2007) and Bergman,
Chetty, DeLuca, Hendren, Katz, and Palmer (2020), but in our context students are unlikely
to have the same constraints faced by very low income and at risk families. While we focus
on imperfect information of neighborhood choices for young college-educated adults, our
framework can be generalized to other settings, such as choice of college, college majors,
and type and location (city) of first job.

    The paper proceeds as follows: In section 2 we describe our general neighborhood
choice model, and we present the survey design in section 3 and descriptive analysis in
section 4. In section 5 we explain our estimation approach, and results are shown in section
6. Section 7 concludes the paper.


2    Neighborhood Choice Model
We model the neighborhood location decision of each individual as a discrete choice, fol-
lowing the utility function specification of the random utility models originally developed
by McFadden (1973, 1978) and Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995). The individual i's
indirect utility from choosing neighborhood j in labor market area m is:

                                    ui jm =  jm ic + i jm                                (1)

where  jm is a C-dimensional vector that includes all neighborhood amenities, ic is a
vector of individual preferences for each neighborhood amenity, and i jm is an error term
that is i.i.d. with a Type-I extreme value distribution. For simplicity, we will suppress the
subscript m for now. Preferences for each amenity c are a function of the individual's own
observed demographic attributes zid :

                                             6
                                               D
                                 ic = o
                                      c
                                        +      dczid = oc + id
                                                             c
                                                                                                  (2)
                                              d =1

    The vector  j literally includes all characteristics that define a neighborhood, such as
price, quality of the housing stock, demographic composition, number and type of trees, air
quality, crime rates, number and type of restaurants and bars, access to sidewalks, etc. Un-
der the assumption of perfect information individuals have common and complete knowl-
edge about all characteristics from all neighborhoods.
    However, given the high dimensionality of neighborhoods and amenities, imperfect in-
formation is likely pervasive and individuals may observe a large set of amenities with error.
We re-write equation 1 to account for imperfect knowledge of amenities using the notation
 . This captures a generalized notion of imperfect information, allowing flexibly for
some individuals to have imperfect information about the cost of living in a neighborhood,
while others may have imperfect information about the presence of trees and sidewalks in
other neighborhoods. It can also allow different knowledge about expectations over future
amenities.6 We decompose  into two components:

                              ui j =  j ic +  j ic + i j ic + i j                                 (3)

    where  j captures the neighborhood average of the error, and i j allows for het-
erogeneity in how much individual i's error deviates from the neighborhood mean. For
example,  p j represents the average error of the cost of living for neighborhood j and
 pi j allows for heterogeneity in individual i's mis-perception above and beyond the aver-
age error. Our generalized model nests perfect information as a special case if individual
i observes each neighborhood characteristic  c perfectly, so  j and i j are just null
vectors.
    In practice econometricians do not observe all characteristics  c , and in general it is
not feasible to estimate choice models with thousands of characteristics. Assuming the
econometrician observes a limited number of characteristics xk :

                                          -    -
                          ui j = xk  k   k   k      c       c
                                  j i + x j i +  j i + i j i + i j                                (4)
                      -
    The new term xk
                  j for neighborhood j represents the c - k neighborhood characteristics


6 See
    Bayer, McMillan, Murphy, and Timmins (2016) for a more structural approach to model evolving local
 amenities.

                                                     7
that are unobserved by the econometrician. In models with perfect information the key
source of bias in the estimation of ik is that observed neighborhood characteristics (xk )
                                                                         -
are generally correlated with the unobserved neighborhood quality in xk j . To address this
identification problem, one can control for unobserved neighborhood quality using a com-
bination of neighborhood fixed effects - which can be estimated using panel data or market
share inversions (Berry, 1994) - and neighborhood shifters.7 However, once we allow for
imperfect information, the identification problem cannot be solved using standard methods
                                                                   -
alone, since they generally account only for the omitted factor xk
                                                                 j but not for the other two
terms associated with imperfect information.
    To simplify our notation we can collect the terms in equation 4 that are unobserved
by the econometrician and express them using a neighborhood-specific term,  j , as well
as a term for individual heterogeneity around the neighborhood mean, i . The former
                                                                                           -
captures the average neighborhood quality that is not observed by the econometrician, xk  j ,
and also the average errors for neighborhood j arising from imperfect information,  j .
Next, i represents deviation from the neighborhood means arising from heterogeneity in
mis-perceptions, i j .

                                        ui j = x j ik +  j + i + i j                                         (5)

     It will generally be difficult to sign the bias due to the endogeneity of  j and i as
it depends on the nature of the imperfect information for each individual. For example,
individuals may use price as a signal of quality. They may think expensive neighborhoods
such as Tribeca tend to have better unobserved school quality and more trees and sidewalks,
giving rise, to a positive correlation between p j and  j . In addition, some individuals may
under-estimate the cost of living in expensive neighborhoods, giving rise to a negative
correlation between p j and i . Still, others may over-estimate the cost of living in Tribeca
if they think that all the houses there have similar costs to the most expensive brownstones
in Tribeca. These different sources of endogeneity can potentially bias the estimate of
preferences for cost of living in opposite directions, therefore biasing MWTP estimates.
     In our empirical strategy below we propose a new method for estimating preferences in
equation 5 using repeated data on neighborhood choices by the same individual with and

7 Thisstrategy involves estimating the relationship between estimated fixed effects and average neighborhood
 characteristics in a second stage, where instrumental variables are needed in order to deal with the correlation
 between observed characteristics and unobserved quality. See for example Bayer, Ferreira, and McMillan
 (2007).

                                                       8
without information about certain amenities. Repeated choice data by the same individ-
ual will be useful to construct latent quality indices to control for  j and i . Given that
neighborhood preferences tend to be stable over time, it is rare to have within-individual,
across-time variation in choices. To address this, we use data from a new neighborhood
choice program that generates exogenous variation by observing individuals switch their
choices before and after receiving information about some amenities. Given the impor-
tance of those data requirements, before delineating our estimation method in section 5
we first introduce the neighborhood choice program and describe the data sets used in the
structural estimation.


3      Information Survey and Data

3.1    Neighborhood Choice Program
We partnered with a large professional school in the East Coast to design a neighborhood
choice program to help students choose where to live after graduation. In our discussions
with students and administrators to understand how students chose neighborhoods, many
acknowledged that this was a complex decision given the large number of neighborhood
characteristics and the large number of neighborhoods to choose from. The school detected
four main issues in qualitative interviews. First, students mentioned anxiety about cost of
living due to high housing costs in many cities. Second, students highly value access to
the professional and social network of fellow students and alums, and wanted to preserve
that network after graduation. Third, students had unequal access to information and relied
on limited networks to obtain neighborhood information.8 Finally, students believed in a
social norm where the same-school network tended to live in neighborhoods with high cost
of living, inadvertently leading students to choose expensive neighborhoods upon gradua-
tion. To address these concerns, we designed a program to provide all students access to
information to help them choose neighborhoods.
    In April 2019, the Vice Dean of the school emailed all students from the graduating
cohort to introduce the new neighborhood choice program. April is the ideal timing be-
cause it is about a month before graduation and a majority of the students already have a
job and know which city they want to move to - and at the same time most students had just

8 In
   our survey, 88% of respondents report speaking to fewer than four contacts about their search process,
 95% connected with fewer than four contacts online or through social media.

                                                   9
started the process of searching for housing in their new destination. The program provided
neighborhood information in two ways. Students would first access an online survey which
provided information about the neighborhoods in their preferred metropolitan area in the
United States and also asked basic questions about their neighborhood choices. Students
were given a $25 Amazon gift card to encourage them to complete the survey. After com-
pleting the survey, students can access a mapping tool which provides the same information
at a more granular spatial resolution for all metropolitan areas available in our data.


3.2   Neighborhood Information
Below, we describe how we defined neighborhoods. Then, we explain the type of informa-
tion we provided to the students.

Neighborhood names. We begin by selecting the top 20 most popular labor markets
(MSAs) in the United States, based on the current residence of all school cohorts who grad-
uated from 2010 to 2018. Other MSAs with a small number of graduates were not used in
order to preserve data confidentiality. We then split each MSA into a set of comprehensive
yet parsimonious neighborhoods. As a baseline, we used shapefiles from Zillow which
classifies the urban core into neighborhoods. In places without Zillow neighborhoods -
usually suburban areas - each county would be a neighborhood. In some instances where
we had to combine neighborhoods to reduce the total number of choices in each MSA,
we joined adjacent neighborhoods with similar levels of college graduates, based on the
census, and reported both names in the survey. To generate a list of neighborhood names
that students would be familiar with, we relied on Google Trends data. In particular, when
there were multiple ways to identify a location, we chose the most popular name according
to Google Trends. Ultimately, we ended up with an average of 18.5 neighborhoods across
all MSA's. Columns 1 and 2 of Table 1 lists the MSA's and the number of neighborhoods
in each MSA.
Cost of Living. Cost of living was a major concern since many students have student loans
and live in cities with high housing costs. We focus on rental housing costs as the main
metric for cost of living. Monthly rents were preferred over housing prices because the vast
majority of students occupy rented residences in their first few years after graduation. We
obtained monthly rents from Zillow, which publicly provides a monthly rent index for an
average home in each neighborhood. We chose to present information about the average


                                            10
        Table 1: Number of Neighborhoods and Percent of Respondents by MSA

      MSA                  Number of Neighborhoods             Percent of Respondents
      Atlanta                         19                                 2.3
      Austin                          14                                 0.6
      Baltimore                       19                                 0.3
      Boston                          21                                 5.5
      Chicago                         22                                 4.2
      Washington, DC                  20                                 4.9
      Dallas                          18                                 1.6
      Denver                          19                                 1.0
      Houston                         15                                 0.6
      Los Angeles                     22                                 2.9
      Miami                           20                                 0.6
      Minneapolis                     17                                 0.3
      New York                        25                                 43.7
      Philadelphia                    20                                  6.1
      San Diego                       20                                  0.3
      San Francisco                   22                                 20.4
      San Jose                        18                                  1.0
      Seattle                         22                                  3.6
      Total                          353                                100.0
   Notes: Top 18 MSA's in the neighborhood choice program with the number of neighborhoods and per-
   cent of respondents for each MSA. We offered 20 MSA's but Bridgeport (10 neighborhoods) and Trenton
   (7 neighborhoods) were not chosen by any student.


2018 rent using all months in order to mitigate outliers coming from solely using one or
two months of data.
Same-School Network. Given the professional school setting, students highly value access
to a close knit professional network of fellow students and alums. At the same time, ad-
ministrators were concerned about unequal access to information and social norms that the
same-school network tended to live in expensive neighborhoods, which can potentially lead
some students to only consider those neighborhoods. To describe the same-school network
comprehensively, we first obtained proprietary administrative data with the current street
addresses of all recent graduates of the school. The school utilizes various sources to ensure
that the addresses are current and accurate. We focused on the cohorts who graduated be-
tween 2010 and 2018 - this aggregation was required in order to preserve student privacy.
Additionally, survey respondents do not have access to the total number of individuals

                                                11
living in individual neighborhoods. Instead, we present respondents with same-school net-
work shares in neighborhood j in MSA m (N jm ), by dividing the total number of graduates
currently living in neighborhood j by the total number of graduates living in the MSA.


3.3     Survey Design
We designed the neighborhood choice survey to collect unique information about how in-
dividuals make choices before and after receiving information about neighborhoods. Each
student would first choose a metropolitan area in which they were planning to live upon
graduation. They had to choose among 20 MSAs or select the option "None of the above".
In this latter case students self-reported the name of another city in the US or abroad - 32
students picked that option and we exclude them from the remaining analysis. Another
309 students chose one of the top 20 MSAs and completed the survey. Column 2 of Table
1 shows that forty four percent of these respondents selected New York, followed by San
Francisco (20%), Philadelphia (6%), Boston (6%) and DC (5%).
    Around 40% of the graduating cohort of students participated in the neighborhood
choice program. Panel A of Table A1 in the Appendix reports the summary statistics of
our respondents. The average age is 29, half of them are female, 15% are first-generation
or part of an under-represented minority, 12% are married or have children, and 23% are
international students (by citizenship). We also show that average characteristics of survey
takers are not that different from non-respondents, except respondents are less likely to be
international students since they are less likely to want to live in the United States.9
    Then we asked students to rank up to ten neighborhoods in that metropolitan area,
allowing them to create their own neighborhood consideration sets. Only for these neigh-
borhoods we then ask students to provide their best estimates of the same-school network
shares and the monthly rent for the average home. Right after that we displayed the pro-
gram information about the rent and network shares in all neighborhoods in that MSA.10
Here, each respondent would also see in a figure how this new information compared with
her own unique estimates.
    After presenting the information, we asked students to re-rank up to ten neighborhoods.
9 Indeed, the coefficient on the international student dummy falls from 0.17 to 0.09 when comparing the 309
 respondents who chose the top-20 MSA's in our neighborhood choice program (Panel A of Table A1) versus
 the full set of respondents, including the 32 who chose other cities (Panel B). These demographics are based
 on administrative data from the school.
10 We randomly assigned the order students would receive the information about rents and network shares.

   This order did not have any impact on our results described below.

                                                    12
           Table 2: Summary Statistics for All and Considered Neighborhoods
                                          All             Considered (pre)        Considered (post)
                            N Mean SD       N Mean SD       N Mean SD
 Same-School Network Share 353 5.10   5.01 213 6.17   5.08 193 7.08   5.25
 Rent (thousands)          353 2.47   1.01 213 2.72   1.14 193 2.80   1.14
 Income (thousands)        353 80.26 25.45 213 83.52 28.05 193 86.81 27.15
 Bachelor s Degree+        353 0.46  0.19 213 0.52   0.19 193 0.55   0.18
 Non-White Share           353 0.38   0.19 213 0.40   0.19 193 0.40   0.18
   Notes: Summary statistics for amenities in all (353) neighborhoods in the neighborhood choice program,
   as well as the 213 (193) neighborhoods considered pre (post) information. The five amenities include
   the same-school network share, average monthly rent from Zillow, average income, share of population
   with a college degree or more, non-White share. The latter three are from the 2010 Census.


This page looks identical to the pre information stage, except with the new information just
so students would not need to scroll back in order to check the data. Students could choose
from a menu of all the neighborhoods along with information about the rent and network
shares. We did not pre populate this page with their prior rankings so as not to prime
their post information choices. Finally, at the end of the survey we also asked some ques-
tions about whether and why they thought the information influenced their neighborhood
choices, and other factors related to their neighborhood search processes. The Survey Ap-
pendix provides more details about the survey questions.
    The survey was designed to be short. The median student completed the survey in
six minutes, spending one minute on the pre information ranking of neighborhoods, sev-
enty seconds to estimate the rent and network shares in their chosen neighborhoods, forty
seconds to read about the rent and network shares for the full set of neighborhoods, and
another one minute to re-rank neighborhoods.
    The neighborhood choice program did not include a control group since the objective
of the program was to promote equal access to information. Having a control group which
did not receive the same information intervention would raise equity concerns. Given the
nature of the information intervention, it would also be difficult to prevent treated students
from sharing information with those assigned to the control group. Nonetheless, this is not
as relevant to our estimation because the key identifying variation in our model comes from
comparing neighborhood rankings by the same individual before and after the information
intervention.
    Table 2 presents the neighborhood characteristics of all the 353 neighborhoods, as well
as the 213 the neighborhoods considered in the pre information rankings and the 193 neigh-


                                                  13
borhoods considered post information. Interestingly, individuals only rank an average of
5 neighborhoods, even though they can rank up to 10 neighborhoods in each MSA. The
chosen neighborhoods have higher monthly rent ($2,720 pre information and $2,800 post
information) relative to $2,470 for all neighborhoods. The ranked neighborhoods also have
higher network shares (6 percent pre information and 7 percent post information) compared
to all the neighborhoods (5 percent). Moreover, the average income and the college share
in the chosen neighborhoods are also higher.
    Upon completion of the survey, students were directed to a restricted-access mapping
service with the information about rents and network shares at an even more granular geo-
graphic resolution for all metropolitan areas available in our data. These interactive maps
require students to click in neighborhood geographies in order to access the relevant in-
formation. The maps became permanently available in order to help students during their
housing and neighborhood search, and we collected data on map clicks. Almost 55% of
the students had at least one recorded interaction with the maps from the time of survey
completion until graduation. We count the number of clicks students make in each neigh-
borhood as a proxy of how intense they are searching in a neighborhood.
    Even though the survey does not formally request information about students' actual
neighborhood choices, we obtained post graduation residential locations from the school
alumni office. That office utilizes various sources to keep updated location information
of alums, and was able to provide accurate addresses for 137 graduates from our sample
as of July 2020.11 We georeferenced them in order to compare where students chose to
live after graduation relative to stated preferences in the online survey. Table A2 in the
Appendix shows that both samples of students where we have map clicks data and actual
post graduation locations are largely representative.
    We also obtained rich administrative data to supplement our online survey, which had
to be short. Our baseline demographic variables include age, gender, married and/or with
children, first-generation or minority status, and citizenship status. We also observe other
pre-determined characteristics, such as, their industry, intended major, where they worked
before attending school.



11 The process to update the location information of alums has been disrupted due to the Covid pandemic.
  Most of the address information reflect post graduation choices made long before the Covid pandemic. As
  a conservative robustness exercise, our conclusions remain the same using a subset (110 out of 137) of
  location information identified in January 2020, before the pandemic.

                                                   14
4           Descriptive Analysis

4.1              Heterogeneity in Neighborhood Knowledge


             Figure 1: Differences Between Reported and Actual Neighborhood Attributes

                                 Panel A: Rent                                                    Panel B: Same-School Network Shares
     .4




                                                                                                  .05
                                                                                                  .04
     .3




                                                                                                    .03
                                                                                               Density
  Density
    .2




                                                                                                  .02
     .1




                                                                                                  .01
     0




                                                                                                  0




            -8   -7   -6   -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0            1   2   3    4     5   6   7   8                   -72   -60   -48   -36 -24 -12         0   12   24    36    48   60   72
                            Estimates - Zillow Rent (Thousands of Dollars)                                                  Estimates - Actual Same-School Network




Notes: Panel A presents kernel density estimates of the difference of individuals' best guesses of neighbor-
hood rent and Zillow rent for each neighborhood ranked in the pre information period. Panel B repeats the
same for same-school network shares.


    Panel A of Figure 1 presents a kernel density of respondents' estimates of rents mi-
nus the neighborhood rents from Zillow. This figure includes 1,910 neighborhood-by-
individual choices where we have rent estimates for neighborhoods considered in the pre
period by 309 respondents. On average, respondents under-estimate monthly rent by $620
relative to the average monthly rent of $2,700 for neighborhoods considered in the pre
period. But there is a fair amount of heterogeneity: about two-thirds of the choices are
underestimates and about one-third of the choices are over-estimates.
    Interestingly, the differences are correlated with rent levels in that respondents under-
estimate rents in expensive neighborhoods and over-estimate rents in cheap ones. Panel A
of Figure 2 shows that respondents over-estimated rents by $140 for neighborhoods below
$2,500, and under-estimated rents by more than $1,000 for neighborhoods above $4,000.
    Turning to knowledge about same-school network shares, Panel B of Figure 1 com-
pares estimates and actual network shares for neighborhoods ranked in the pre period. Of
the 1,910 estimates of network shares, sixty-nine percent are over-estimates. On average,
respondents over-estimate the network shares by 6 percentage points - a fair amount relative


                                                                                          15
            Figure 2: Binscatter for Differences in Reported and Actual Amenity

                             Panel A: Rent Differences vs. Zillow Rent




                                                                  1
                               Estimated Rent - Zillow Rent
                                                                  0
                                                                  -1
                                                                  -2
                                                                  -3




                                                                        0   1        2   3        4   5        6   7        8
                                                                                  Zillow Rent (Thousands)


                      Panel B: Network Share Differences vs. Zillow Rent
                               Estimated Shares - Actual Shares
                                                                  9
                                                                  8
                                                                  7
                                                                  6
                                                                  5
                                                                  4




                                                                        0   1        2   3        4   5        6   7        8
                                                                                  Zillow Rent (Thousands)


               Panel C: Network Share Differences vs. Actual Network Shares
                               Estimated Shares - Actual Shares
                                                                  20
                                                                  10
                                                                  0
                                                                  -10
                                                                  -20




                                                                        0        5           10           15           20
                                                                                Same-School Network Shares


Notes: The solid line in Panel A represents the estimate from a local polynomial regression of the differences
in the vertical axis (e.g. individuals' estimate minus Zillow rent) on Zillow rent. The dashed lines correspond
to 95% confidence intervals. We trimmed the figure by dropping estimates at the boundaries. The dots
correspond to the average within each decile for Zillow rent. Panel B presents the same but using differences
in network shares versus Zillow rent. Panel C presents differences in network shares versus network shares.


                                                                                             16
to a mean of 5 percent for all neighborhoods.
     Respondents also appear to over-estimate network shares by more in expensive neigh-
borhoods. In particular, Panel B of Figure 2 shows a positive correlation between the degree
of over-estimation and rent levels for neighborhoods with rents above $4,000. This echoes
the concern of school administrators that a social norm whereby same-school alums tended
to live in expensive neighborhoods could influence students to only consider a small set of
expensive neighborhoods. Panel C in the same figure shows no relationship between the
difference in network share estimates and the actual shares.
     Overall, the figures above show remarkable heterogeneity around the nature of imper-
fect information. The differences between respondents' estimates and the data provided
also correlate with rent levels. Such imperfect information could lead to omitted variable
biases in the estimation of neighborhood preferences, especially the taste coefficient for
rent.


4.2   Rankings Before and After Information
Table 3 presents a simple cross-tabulation to compare network shares and rents for neigh-
borhoods ranked in the top 3 before and after information. We investigate compositional
changes in top neighborhood choices by using actual network shares and rents, not the
individuals' estimates.
    The sample includes 7,012 potential individual-by-neighborhood choices. The diagonal
entries in Panel A show that individuals systematically prefer high rent neighborhoods,
consistent with the common omitted variable problem that neighborhoods that have high
rent tend to have high unobserved quality relative to neighborhoods that are never chosen.
Specifically, the top left cell reports the average Zillow rent ($3,627) for neighborhoods
that are always ranked in the top 3 before and after information (9% of 7,012 choices were
always ranked in the top 3). The bottom right cell reports the average Zillow rent ($3,007)
for neighborhoods that are never ranked in the top 3 (83%).
    The key sources of variation we use to identify preferences for amenities rely on
changes in rankings after the information intervention. The off-diagonal cells show that
respondents tended to switch in neighborhoods that have lower average rent ($3,380) and
switch out neighborhoods that have higher average rent ($3,844). This is consistent with
individuals responding to new information and updating their neighborhood rankings to
choose neighborhoods with lower rent. Both types of top 3 switches correspond each to


                                            17
           Table 3: Comparing Top Three Neighborhoods Pre and Post Information

                             Panel A: Rent
                                                             Pre
                                                     Yes               No
                                      Yes      Always Top 3         Switch In
                                                  $3,627             $3,380
                             Post
                                      No         Switch Out        Never Top 3
                                                  $3,844             $3,007

                             Panel B: Same-School Network
                                                       Pre
                                                     Yes               No
                                      Yes      Always Top 3         Switch In
                                                  7.73%              7.18%
                             Post
                                      No         Switch Out        Never Top 3
                                                   5.72%             3.87%


    Notes: Panel A reports the average rent of neighborhoods. The diagonal cells include neighborhoods that
    are always and never ranked top three by a given individual before and after the information intervention.
    The off-diagonal cells report average rent for neighborhoods that are switched in or out of the top three
    for a given individual, after information relative to before. Panel B repeats the same for same-school
    network shares.


4% of all individual-by-neighborhood choices with 64% of individuals switching their top-
three choices.12
    Panel B reports an analogous pattern of switching behavior for network shares. Respon-
dents tended to switch in neighborhoods with high network shares (7.18 percent) and switch
out neighborhoods with low network shares (5.72 percent). Always top 3 neighborhoods
have the highest average network shares (7.73 percent) and never top 3 neighborhoods have
the lowest average network shares (3.87 percent).
    Together, comparing the rents and network shares for the switchers before and after
the information shows that respondents updated their rankings to favor neighborhoods with
higher network shares and lower rents, consistent with a positive marginal willingness-to-
pay for same-school network. Table 4 shows that this pattern is robust to a regression anal-
ysis controlling for MSA fixed effects and demographic controls (odd columns) and even
12 TableA3 in the Appendix show minimal compositional differences along demographics when comparing
  switchers to non-switchers.

                                                     18
          Table 4: Rent and Same-School Network for Switched Neighborhoods

              Dependent variable:                Rent            Same-School Network
                                             (1)     (2)     (3)                  (4)
              Always in top 3             0.68*** 0.68*** 3.79***              3.78***
                                           (0.03)  (0.03)  (0.17)               (0.17)
              Switch in                   0.39*** 0.41*** 3.30***              3.36***
                                           (0.05)  (0.05)  (0.25)               (0.26)
              Switch out                  0.82*** 0.84*** 1.86***              1.91***
                                           (0.06)  (0.06)  (0.21)               (0.22)
              N                             7012    7012    7012                 7012
              R-squared                     0.40    0.41    0.13                 0.13
              Switch in - Switch out       -$434   -$432    1.44                 1.46
              p-value                       0.00    0.00    0.00                 0.00
              MSA FE                          Y       N       Y                    N
              Demographics                    Y       N       Y                    N
              Individual FE                   N       Y       N                    Y

   * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** 0.01
   Notes: OLS regressions including the full set of 7,012 neighborhood-by-individual level choices. The
   dependent variables are monthly Zillow rent in thousands of dollars (columns 1 and 2) and same-school
   network shares (columns 3 and 4). The key regressors include a dummy that is one for neighborhoods
   that are always ranked in the top three by a given individual before and after information, as well as
   neighborhoods that were switched in and switched out of the top three choice set after information,
   relative to neighborhoods that were never top three (the omitted group). Columns 1 and 3 have MSA
   fixed effects and demographic controls, including age, and a dummy for female, married or with children,
   under-represented minority and first-generation, international. Columns 2 and 4 include 309 individual
   fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by individuals.


individual fixed effects (even columns). In the most saturated specification with individual
fixed effects, neighborhoods that are switched in have network shares that are greater by
1.46 percentage points on average and $430 lower monthly rent, relative to neighborhoods
that were switched out of the top 3. Our findings are similar if we used top one, top five, or
top ten.
    Below, we describe how the identification of our neighborhood sorting model relies on
variation in choice rankings by the same individual, before and after receiving information
about amenities. Our model will make use of all rankings, not just in and out of top 3.
A large number of students (76%) had at least one change in their neighborhood rankings
after receiving the information, including 64% who had at least one change in their top 3
neighborhoods. About 50% of the individual neighborhood choices involve a change of at
least 2 ranks. Our model also captures remarkable heterogeneity across the individual-level

                                                   19
rankings, with close to half of the neighborhoods ranked as an always top neighborhood by
someone.


4.3       Neighborhood Preferences Persist After Neighborhood Survey
The stated preference behaviors uncovered in our analysis of the neighborhood choice pro-
gram are also present in revealed preference behavior during the search and actual neigh-
borhood choices after graduation. Starting with search, Panels A and B of Table A4 present
cross-tabulations to compare rents and network shares for neighborhoods ranked in the top
3 pre information, and top 3 in the post-survey search. Our measure of search is based on
neighborhood clicks from the interactive maps made available to students upon the survey
completion, i.e., for each individual we count and rank neighborhoods based on the number
of clicks.13 As with Table 3, we compare actual rents and neighborhood shares for the four
groups of neighborhoods.
    The diagonal entries show that always top 3 and never top 3 neighborhoods have pat-
terns consistent with stated preferences, i.e., students tend to search more in neighborhoods
that are more expensive and with a larger network. More interestingly, we also find consis-
tent behavior for switchers, i.e., students tend to switch into neighborhoods with lower rents
and larger networks, while switching out of neighborhoods with higher rents and smaller
networks.
    Turning to post graduation choices, Panels A and B of Table 5 present cross tabulations
for the actual post survey neighborhood choice and the pre intervention top 1 neighbor-
hood. We restrict to top 1 rank because individuals only chose one actual neighborhood to
live. Again, the patterns echo those in Table 3, with students having persistent tastes, gen-
erally choosing neighborhoods with higher rents and network shares. Neighborhoods that
are always top 1 in the survey and post graduation have higher rent on average ($3,385)
and larger network shares (8.17%) relative to never-top-1 neighborhoods which tend to
have lower average rent ($3,058) and lower average network shares (4.18%). Once again,
switchers influenced by the intervention tend to switch in neighborhoods with lower rents
($3,364) and larger network shares (7.27%) and switch out neighborhoods with higher rent
($3,884) and lower network shares (6.44%).
    These results indicate that the new neighborhood choice program successfully provided
consistent and systematic information that allowed students to improve their location deci-
13 This analysis uses a more limited number of observations since only 44% of individuals used the interactive

  maps.

                                                     20
      Table 5: Comparing Neighborhood Choices Post Graduation with Survey Data

                         Panel A: Rent
                                                         Pre
                                                Yes                 No
                                  Yes     Always Selected        Switch In
                                              $3,385              $3,364
                         Post
                                  No        Switch Out         Never Selected
                                             $3,884               $3,058

                         Panel B: Same-School Network
                                                    Pre
                                                Yes                 No
                                  Yes     Always Selected        Switch In
                                              8.17%               7.27%
                         Post
                                  No        Switch Out         Never Selected
                                              6.44%               4.18%


    Notes: Repeats Table 3 but the pre rankings use top neighborhoods instead of top three and the post
    rankings use data from actual home addresses after graduation.


sions by choosing places with lower cost of living while preserving similar or higher levels
of network amenities. Indeed, students are living in neighborhoods where the monthly
Zillow rent is $627 lower relative to the Zillow rent in the pre information top-ranked
neighborhood stated in their survey.


5    Estimation
In section 2 we described a general neighborhood choice model that allows for individuals
to have imperfect information about every amenity in each neighborhood in a given labor
market. This introduces new omitted variable biases (i and  j in equation 5). Now we
provide details on how to estimate the model using data and neighborhood rankings before
and after information as explained in section 3.3. While the post information rankings
are the backbone of our choice model, the pre information rankings are used to construct
latent quality indices ( f (i ) and g( j )). Finally, estimated preferences are converted into
measures of willingness-to-pay to live in a neighborhood with higher (or lower) network


                                                 21
shares. Below we cover each of these steps.


5.1   Neighborhood choice model and rank-ordered logit
We estimate a version of equation 5 in two stages. We first estimate heterogeneous param-
eters id and a set of neighborhood fixed effects  jm in equation 6. In the second stage
we decompose the neighborhood fixed effects into their average components to infer the
average MWTP for amenities by estimating equation 7.
     The neighborhood amenities we observe include post information network share
amenity N and rents p, a set of 2010 Census neighborhood characteristics X , including
average income, the share of college graduates, and the non-White share. The preference
heterogeneity terms id for each of these five neighborhood amenities follow equation 2
and are a function of five observed demographic variables: age, gender, married and/or
with children, first-generation or minority status, and citizenship status. The unobserved
heterogeneity terms in equation 6 include im as described in equation 5 and also i jm which
is i.i.d. with a Type-I extreme value distribution:

                                       N         p         X
                   ui jm =  jm + N jm id + p jm id + X jm id + im + i jm                 (6)

    In the second stage we decompose the neighborhood fixed effects  jm to recover mean
preferences o , and also the metropolitan area effects, µm . The unobserved errors in equa-
tion 7 include the unobserved neighborhood quality  jm as described in equation 5 and  jm
is an idiosyncratic error term:

                                    N
                     jm = µm + N jm o + p jm op + X jm o
                                                       X
                                                         +  jm +  jm                     (7)

    We estimate equation 6 using a rank-ordered logit model (Beggs, Cardell, and Haus-
man, 1981) based on the post information neighborhood rankings in each individual's con-
sideration set. For each individual i choosing metropolitan area m, our data reveals:

                                 Uiri1 > Uiri2 > ... > UiriLi                            (8)

    where ril denotes the neighborhood that received post information ranking l by individ-
ual i. Each individual could rank between two and ten neighborhoods, and we denote the
last ranked neighborhood for each individual as Li . The probability of individual i choosing
a ranking ri is:


                                              22
                           Piri = P[Uiri1 > Uiri2 > ... > UiriLi ]                        (9)
                                     Li -1
                                              exp(uiril )
                                 =           Li
                                                                                         (10)
                                      l =1
                                              exp(uirih )
                                             h=l

    We rely on maximum likelihood to estimate the model. The log likelihood function is
just the sum of the log of the individual probabilities across all individuals:

                                                   I
                                       L =  log Piri                                     (11)
                                                  i=1

    This first step returns the heterogeneity in preference parameters and the neighborhood
fixed effects that maximize the log likelihood function above, i.e., maximize the probability
that each individual makes the correct rank ordering of neighborhoods. We estimate the
second step using OLS. In order to credibly estimate these parameters we still need to
construct proxies for  j and i , otherwise estimated preferences will suffer from omitted
variable bias.


5.2    Latent Quality Indices
We integrate the survey design with the choice model to develop latent quality indices to
address endogeneity due to i and  j . For simplicity, we will suppress the subscript m
in this subsection. So far the neighborhood choice model above has solely used the post
information data on individual rankings, network shares, and rents. Now, we introduce the
pre information rankings to construct latent quality indices f (i ) and g( j ) to respectively
control for selection bias due to i and  j . According to the same logic of the general model
described in equation 3, the pre information rankings should capture all neighborhood-
by-individual factors (observed by the econometrician or not) that influence individual i's
utility.
    To construct f (i ), we include pre information rank dummies using six categorical vari-
ables based on whether each individual pre ranked a neighborhood in her consideration set
as top 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or from 6 to 10. We omit from the estimation a dummy for neighbor-
hoods never ranked in the pre information data. Additionally, we include the average of
these pre rank dummies and interact these averages with demographics. We include these


                                                   23
heterogeneity terms in equation 6. Next, to construct g( j ), we include six averages of the
rank dummies in equation 7. In the results section we report robustness tests that investigate
the use of different variables to construct latent quality indices.
     Estimated mean preferences for rents and network shares (op and o       N ) will be unbi-

ased  j is uncorrelated with p j and N j , conditional on observables. This will be true if
(i) individuals report pre information rankings given their best knowledge about neighbor-
hoods consistent with equation 3 and that (ii) changes in rankings after the information
intervention only reflect the new information about networks and rents. We require the for-
mer so that pre information rankings are valid proxies for an individual's latent knowledge
about neighborhood quality. The latter condition ensures that pre information rankings re-
main relevant proxies for individual's knowledge about neighborhood quality in the post
information rankings. Our identifying strategy echoes the index sufficiency assumption
(Dahl, 2002) which requires that our quality indices f (i ) and g( j ) constructed using the
pre rankings exhaust all the information about how i and  j influence post information
rankings.
     The empirical validity of our latent quality indices is shown in two parts. First MWTP
estimates change significantly with and without f (i ) and g( j ). Importantly, the coef-
ficient on rent becomes more negative once we control for latent quality. We would not
see this pattern if individuals completely updated their neighborhood rankings after the in-
formation intervention in a way that renders the pre information rankings uninformative.
This shift in the coefficient on rent also shows that Cov( j , p j ) > 0 even in a model with
neighborhood fixed effects. Our latent quality indices mitigate this bias using additional
moments that capture the share of individuals that give neighborhood j a rank of 1, rank
of 2, etc. instead of just the share of individuals who chose j as their the most preferred
neighborhood. These pre information rankings are useful since individuals have persistent
preferences that systematically favor expensive neighborhoods with better amenities, as
shown in Table 3.
     Second, changes in the rankings after the information intervention are associated with
rents and network shares. The descriptive analysis in section 4 showed that individuals
switched in neighborhoods with higher network shares and lower rents, and switched out
neighborhoods with lower network shares and higher rents. Absent this identifying vari-
ation from the switchers, pre information rankings would be highly correlated with post
information rankings, and preferences for rents and network would not be identified.
     One concern of the identification strategy is that the new information about network


                                             24
shares and rents may indirectly cause updates on individual's knowledge about other ameni-
ties. For example, if they saw that Tribeca was more expensive than they thought, they may
also indirectly update that other amenities in Tribeca tend to be above average, using price
as a signal of quality. While it is impossible to measure this indirect effect, we can rule
out that the indirect updates are significant enough to overturn the direct effects of the new
information since price and quality affect utility in opposite manners. In particular, the
direct effect of the new rent information suggests someone who under-estimated the price
of Tribeca would rank it less favorably after learning that Tribeca is more expensive than
the other neighborhoods, consistent with the evidence of individuals switching out of ex-
pensive neighborhoods. By contrast, if she also indirectly updated that Tribeca has better
amenities upon learning that Tribeca is more expensive than she thought, she would rank
Tribeca more favorably, which would offset her choice above to switch out Tribeca.
    Turning to the estimation of the heterogeneity preference terms in equation 6, the iden-
tifying assumption is that the six pre information rank dummies and the average rankings
interacted with demographics sufficiently address endogeneity arising from i . We also
assume that heterogeneity in preferences is solely a function of our observed demographic
variables, following Bayer, Ferreira, and McMillan (2007)


5.3    Average and heterogeneity in willingness-to-pay
We define the average marginal willingness to pay for the same-school network neighbor-
hood characteristic as:

                                                   N
                                                   o
                                      MW T P = -                                         (12)
                                                   op
    whose components are estimated in the second stage decomposition of the estimated
neighborhood fixed effects  j . Moreover, we combine first and second stage estimations
to calculate heterogeneity in marginal willingness to pay for N according to the following
formula:

                                              N + z N
                                              o    id d
                                MW T Pi = -                                              (13)
                                              o +  zid dp
                                               p


    Subsequently we compare this MWTP for a baseline individual, representing the major-
ity groups in all dimensions of heterogeneity, against another individual who shares similar
demographics with the exception of just one feature d . Standard errors for both average


                                             25
and heterogeneity in willingness to pay are calculated used the delta method.


6       Results

6.1     Estimated Preferences
The first column of Table 6 reports estimates of mean preferences (o ) for the same-school
network and for rents, using a version of equation 6 that does not include the latent quality
indices. Students have negative preference for higher rents, but the estimate is not sta-
tistically different from zero. This a common problem in sorting models, i.e., estimated
marginal utility of rents is generally biased towards zero because expensive places tend to
have higher unobserved neighborhood quality. On the other hand, the network amenity es-
timate is positive and statistically significant. Those two estimates are then converted into a
mean MWTP for the network amenity, according to equation 12, and presented in the third
row. Students, on average, are willing to pay $400 per month in rent (given an average rent
of $2,470) to live in a neighborhood with a one percentage point higher network share (the
average network share is 5.1%). Such mean MWTP is likely upward biased because the
rent estimate is downward biased.
     The second column of Table 6 reports similar estimates, but now for a model that in-
cludes the latent quality indices. Interestingly, the rent estimate becomes more negative
(-0.55) and statistically different from zero - this is exactly the expected effect of properly
controlling for the correlation between rents and unobserved neighborhood quality. More-
over, conditional on rent, the network estimate is quite similar to the model in column 1,
perhaps because that information was truly new for most survey respondents. The com-
bination of those two estimates lead to a new mean MWTP for the network amenity of
$123 per month and is now statistically significant at the 5% level.14 This estimate is 70%
smaller than the comparable mean MWTP without the latent index.
     Next, Table 7 provides a few robustness tests for the latent quality indices. Column 1
is our baseline estimate and columns 2 to 4 repeat the same model but including different
latent quality indices. Column 2 shows that the MWTP estimate changes by 61% from
$400 to $157 by just including g( j ) using the average rankings in the delta regression.
14 As a robustness check, we also find that this MWTP estimate remains significant at the 5% level if we
  clustered standard errors by MSA's (the standard error for the MWTP is 45 instead of 40). Given that we
  only have 18 MSA's, which is less than the rule-of-thumb of 40 clusters (Angrist and Pischke, 2008), we
  opted to not cluster standard errors in our primary estimation.

                                                   26
        Table 6: MWTP Estimates With and Without Latent Quality Indices


                                                         (1)           (2)
                       Same-School Network            0.330***     0.310**
                                                       (0.075)      (0.092)
                       Rent                            -0.180     -0.550***
                                                       (0.118)      (0.126)
                       Implied MWTP                     $400       $123**
                                                        (257)         (40)
                       MSA FE                             Y             Y
                       Census Characteristics             Y             Y
                       Latent Quality Indices             N             Y
Notes: Mean preference estimates of the neighborhood choice model using neighborhood-by-individual
choices post information intervention. The first stage involves a rank-ordered Logit model using post
information neighborhood rankings, neighborhood fixed effects, neighborhood amenities (rent, same-
school network shares, as well as Census characteristics - average income, share college graduates,
average non-White share). The second stage represents a decomposition of the neighborhood fixed
effects from the first stage, including MSA fixed effects. Column 2 adds the latent quality indices, g( j )
and f (i ). Table A5 presents the coefficients on the different latent quality indices. Standard errors
calculated using the Delta method.


                 Table 7: Robustness Results for Latent Quality Indices
                                           (1)             (2)      (3)               (4)
        Same-School Network            0.310**        0.293*** 0.328***           0.311**
                                        (0.092)         (0.071)  (0.093)           (0.094)
        Rent                          -0.550***       -0.408*** -0.389**         -0.552***
                                        (0.126)         (0.120)  (0.121)           (0.127)
        Implied MWTP                   $123**          $157**    $184**           $123**
                                          (40)            (54)     (65)              (41)
        g( j )                             Y             Y              N             Y
        f (i )                             Y             N              Y             Y
        Pre rent, Pre network              N             N              N             Y
Notes: Column 1 reports our baseline model (column 2 in Table 6). Column two only includes g( j )
using the averages of the six pre information rankings. Column three only includes f (i ) using six pre
information rank dummies and the average of the rankings interacted with demographics in the first
stage. Column 4 adds pre information estimates of same-school network shares and rent to the baseline
model. Standard errors calculated using the Delta method.




                                                 27
In column 3, the MWTP changes by 54% to $184 if we only include f (i ) in the first
stage (equation 6), using the six rank dummies as well as the average rankings interacted
with demographics. In column 4, we augment our baseline model in column 1 with pre
information estimates of rents and network shares. In principle, these continuous measures
of individual perceptions could also proxy for latent quality to the extent that individuals
perceive that higher quality neighborhoods have a larger network and higher rent. Interest-
ingly, the MWTP estimate remains stable at $123 suggesting these additional proxies are
not adding more information above and beyond our baseline model. Table A5 presents the
key coefficients for our latent quality indices.
     Table 8 reports the implied heterogeneity in MWTP for the network amenity. Panel
A presents the overall MWTP across the different specifications and Panel B presents the
heterogeneous WTP estimates. There is some heterogeneity in MWTP estimates, but the
results are understandably less precise given that only 309 students completed our survey.
Four measures of heterogeneity generally have negative values relative to the baseline:
Age, married and/or with children, international, first-generation and under-represented
minorities. Estimates for female are positive and small.
     Our administrative data from the school provides a number of other features about the
survey respondents. Columns 2, 3, and 4 of Table 8 report results that additionally in-
clude, respectively, measures of student heterogeneity by type of industry, school major,
and whether the student previously worked in that same MSA. The mean MWTP remains
practically unchanged in all models, and none of the extra heterogeneity measures are sta-
tistically different from zero. Next we include a variable from the survey related to the stage
of the housing search process, i.e., whether the student had already visited rental properties
or signed a lease. Accounting for the stage of the search process does not seem to change
our main MWTP estimate. Finally, Column 6 includes all measures of heterogeneity in one
model. The mean MWTP from this model is $104.
     How do students interpret the new information about the share of same-school network
living in a neighborhood? At the very end of the survey we asked students to consider
a neighborhood with a large network, and asked them to check at most three reasons for
why that neighborhood would be desirable. The most common response was related to
professional networking opportunities and social activities with the same-school network.
Next came good restaurants and shops, which is not only an indicator of local availability of
services, but also an indicator of venues that promote social interactions within the network.
Convenient commute was next, followed by high income and well-educated neighbors, and


                                              28
                  Table 8: Robustness Results for Demographic Attributes
                                        (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)
Panel A: Overall MWTP
Implied MWTP                         $123***    $110***     $130***    $103***     $114***     $104***
                                       (40)       (37)        (38)       (37)        (38)        (29)

Panel B: Heterogeneity in MWTP
Age                                     -12        -20         -14          4         -20        -25
                                        (45)       (49)        (31)       (36)        (45)       (31)
Married/Kids                          -1,031      -992       -3,300       808       -1,466       309
                                      (4,400)    (5,284)    (55,334)    (6,354)     (9,055)    (1,299)
International                           -83        -68         -14        -55         -93          12
                                       (108)      (102)        (89)       (94)       (107)       (79)
First-gen/URM                          -428       -433       -249*       -317        -427       -194*
                                       (413)      (445)       (147)      (243)       (435)      (116)
Female                                   49         52          55         73          40          56
                                        (82)       (78)        (60)       (71)        (84)       (55)
Industry - Consulting                              -50                                            -57
                                                   (94)                                          (62)
Industry - Finance                                  61                                             47
                                                  (130)                                          (76)
Previous worked                                                128                               112
                                                              (192)                             (154)
Visited/Signed                                                             54                      62
                                                                          (92)                   (68)
Major - Finance/Real estate                                                          -20          -42
                                                                                     (98)        (63)
Demographics                            Y           Y          Y           Y          Y            Y
Industry                                N           Y          N           N          N            Y
Previous worked                         N           N          Y           N          N            Y
Visited/Signed                          N           N          N           Y          N            Y
Major                                   N           N          N           N          Y            Y
   Notes: This table presents robustness estimates with additional observed heterogeneity. Panel A reports
   the overall MWTP while Panel B reports the heterogeneous WTP estimates. Column 1 repeats the base-
   line (column 2 in Table 6). Column 2 adds industry dummies, column 3 adds a dummy for individuals
   who previously worked in the MSA, column 4 adds a dummy for individuals who have visited or signed
   a lease, column 5 controls for intended majors. Column 6 includes all controls.




                                                  29
safe area with good schools and parks.


7    Conclusion
We introduce a generalized neighborhood choice model to estimate preferences for ameni-
ties under imperfect information. This is a complex and pervasive problem given the many
amenities and the large number of neighborhoods in a labor market. Moreover, we show
that the endogeneity problem cannot be solved with standard methods since the nature of
the imperfect information is heterogeneous across individuals and has a high dimension. To
address this, we introduce latent quality indices which we estimate by observing the same
individual choosing neighborhoods before and after receiving information about amenities.
     Our empirical strategy integrates structural estimation with a survey design associated
with a neighborhood choice program for graduating students of a large professional school.
The program provided information about cost of living and same-school professional and
social network. We observe switchers changing their neighborhood rankings after the in-
formation intervention to increase network shares by 1.46 percentage points and decrease
rents by $430 for their top-three neighborhoods, implying a positive willingness-to-pay for
the same-school network.
     The structural preference estimates show that controlling for the latent quality index
significantly reduces bias in the marginal utility for rents, implying a mean MWTP for net-
work shares of $123 (with the latent quality index) relative to $440 (without the quality
index). We probe the robustness by examining additional demographic variables and dif-
ferent ways to estimate the latent quality index. We also find that social and professional
networking opportunities are the main reason for the students' desire to live close to the
network.
     Finally, the empirical framework developed in this paper can be fruitfully applied to
estimate preferences for any other neighborhood amenity. It can also be applied in many
other settings where imperfect information is pervasive or in which individuals have dif-
ficulties processing information about choice sets and product characteristics. Examples
faced by young adults include choice of college, college major, and type and location (city)
of first job.




                                            30
References
Allcott, H., R. Diamond, J.-P. Dubé, J. Handbury, I. Rahkovsky, and M. Schnell (2019). Food
  Deserts and the Causes of Nutritional Inequality. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 134(4),
  1793­1844.
Almagro, M. and T. Domínguez-Iino (2020). Location Sorting and Endogenous Amenities: Evi-
  dence from Amsterdam.
Angrist, J. D. and J.-S. Pischke (2008). Mostly harmless econometrics: An empiricist's companion,
  pp. 238.
Bailey, M., R. Cao, T. Kuchler, J. Stroebel, and A. Wong (2018, August). Social connectedness:
  Measurement, determinants, and effects. Journal of Economic Perspectives 32(3), 259­80.
Bayer, P., F. Ferreira, and R. McMillan (2007). A Unified Framework for Measuring Preferences
  for Schools and Neighborhoods. Journal of Political Economy 115(4), 588­638.
Bayer, P., N. Keohane, and C. Timmins (2009). Migration and Hedonic Valuation: The Case of Air
  Quality. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 58(1), 1­14.
Bayer, P., R. McMillan, A. Murphy, and C. Timmins (2016). A Dynamic Model of Demand for
  Houses and Neighborhoods. Econometrica 84(3), 893­942.
Bayer, P., S. Ross, and G. Topa (2008). Place of Work an Place of Residence: Informal Hiring
  Networks and Labor Market Outcomes. Journal of Political Economy 116(6), 1150­1196.
Beggs, S., S. Cardell, and J. Hausman (1981). Assessing the potential demand for electric cars.
  Journal of econometrics 17 (1), 1­19.
Benjamin, D. J., O. Heffetz, M. S. Kimball, and A. Rees-Jones (2014, November). Can Marginal
  Rates of Substitution Be Inferred from Happiness Data? Evidence from Residency Choices.
  American Economic Review 104(11), 3498­3528.
Bergman, P., E. W. Chan, and A. Kapor (2020). Housing Search Frictions: Evidence from De-
  tailed Search Data and a Field Experiment. Working Paper 27209, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.
Bergman, P., R. Chetty, S. DeLuca, N. Hendren, L. Katz, and C. Palmer (2020). Creating Moves to
  Opportunity: Experimental Evidence on Barriers to Neighborhood Choice. Working paper.
Berry, S. T. (1994). Estimating Discrete-Choice Models of Product Differentiation. The Rand
  Journal of Economics 25(2), 242­262.
Berry, S. T., J. Levinsohn, and A. Pakes (1995). Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium. Econo-
  metrica 63(4), 841­890.
Berry, S. T., J. Levinsohn, and A. Pakes (2004). Differentiated Products Demand Systems from
  a Combination of Micro and Macro Data: The New Car Market. Journal of Political Econ-
  omy 112(1), 68­105.
Bottan, N. L. and R. Perez-Truglia (2017). Choosing Your Pond: Location Choices and Relative
  Income. Working Paper 23615, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Büchel, K., M. V. Ehrlich, D. Puga, and E. Viladecans-Marsal (2020). Calling from the outside:
  The role of networks in residential mobility. Journal of Urban Economics 119, 103277.


                                               31
Bursztyn, L. and R. Jensen (2017). Social image and economic behavior in the field: Identifying,
  understanding, and shaping social pressure. Annual Review of Economics 9(1), 131­153.
Caetano, G. and V. Maheshri (2019). A Unified Empirical Framework to Study Segregation. Work-
  ing paper.
Calder-Wang, S. (2019). The Distributional Impact of the Sharing Economy on the Housing Market.
  Working paper.
Chay, K. and M. Greenstone (2005). Does Air Quality Matter? Evidence from the Housing Market.
  Journal of Political Economy 113(2), 376­424.
Chay, K. Y. and M. Greenstone (2003). The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant Mortality: Evidence
  from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a Recession. The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 118(3), 1121­1167.
Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, N. Hendren, M. R. Jones, and S. R. Porter (2018). The Opportunity
  Atlas: Mapping the Childhood Roots of Social Mobility. Working Paper 25147, National Bureau
  of Economic Research.
Chetty, R. and N. Hendren (2018a). The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational Mobility
  I: Childhood Exposure Effects. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 133(3), 1107­1162.
Chetty, R. and N. Hendren (2018b). The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational Mobility
  II: County-Level Estimates. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 133(3), 1163­1228.
Chetty, R., N. Hendren, and L. F. Katz (2016). The Effects of Exposure to Better Neighborhoods
  on Children: New Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity Experiment. American Economic
  Review 106(4).
Dahl, G. B. (2002). Mobility and the Return to Education: Testing a Roy Model with Multiple
  Markets. Econometrica 70, 2367­2420.
Diamond, R. (2016). The determinants and welfare implications of us workers' diverging location
  choices by skill: 1980-2000. American Economic Review 106(3), 479­524.
Epple, D., L. Quintero, and H. Sieg (2020). A New Approach to Estimating Equilibrium Models
  for Metropolitan Housing Markets. Journal of Political Economy 128(3), 948­983.
Epple, D. and H. Sieg (1999). Estimating Equilibrium Models of Local Jurisdictions. Journal of
  Political Economy 107 (4), 645­681.
Fujiwara, T., E. Morales, and C. Porcher.
Galiani, S., A. Murphy, and J. Pantano (2015). Estimating Neighborhood Choice Models: Lessons
  from a Housing Assistance Experiment. American Economic Review 105(11).
Gao, Z., M. Sockin, and W. Xiong (2020). Learning about the Neighborhood. Working paper.
Honoré, B. E. and L. Hu (2020). Selection without exclusion. Econometrica 88(3), 1007­1029.
Isen, A., M. Rossin-Slater, and W. R. Walker (2017). Every Breath You Take ­ Every Dollar
   You'll Make: The Long-Term Consequences of the Clean Air Act of 1970. Journal of Political
   Economy 125(3), 848­902.
Kacperczyk, M., S. Van Nieuwerburgh, and L. Veldkamp (2016). A Rational Theory of Mutual
  Funds' Attention Allocation. Econometrica 84(2), 571­626.


                                              32
Kling, J., J. Liebman, and L. F. Katz (2007). Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood Effects.
  Econometrica 75(1), 83­119.
Kosar, G., T. Ransom, and W. Van der Klaauw (2019). Understanding Migration Aversion Using
  Elicited Counterfactual Choice Probabilities. Working paper.
Linden, L. and J. E. Rockoff (2008). Estimates of the Impact of Crime Risk on Property Values
  from Megan's Laws. American Economic Review 98(3), 1103­27.
McFadden, D. (1973). Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behavior. In P. Zarembka
 (Ed.), Frontiers in Econometrics. New York: Academy Press.
McFadden, D. (1978). Modelling the Choice of Residential Location. In A. Karlqvist (Ed.), Spatial
 Interaction Theory and Planning Models. New York: North-Holland.
Moretti, E. (2013). The New Geography of Jobs. Mariner Books.
National Center for Education Statistics (2020). Digest of education statistics.
Nevo, A. (2001). Measuring Market Power in the Ready-to-Eat Cereal Industry. Economet-
  rica 69(2), 307­342.
Pakes, A. and J. Porter (2016). Moment Inequalities for Multinomial Choice with Fixed Effects.
  Working Paper 21893, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Pakes, A., J. Porter, K. Ho, and J. Ishii (2015). Moment inequalities and their application. Econo-
  metrica 83(1), 315­334.
Petrin, A. (2002). Quantifying the Benefits of New Products: The Case of the Minivan. Journal of
  Political Economy 110(4), 705­729.
Train, K. Discrete Choice Methods With Simulation. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Wong, M. (2013). Estimating Ethnic Preferences Using Ethnic Housing Quotas in Singapore. Re-
 view of Economic Studies 80(3), 1178­1214.




                                                 33
Online Appendix Tables (Ferreira and Wong, 2020)

            Table A1: Characteristics of Respondents and Full Sampling Frame
                                                    All    Respondents   Non-respondents   Difference   p-value
 Panel A: Survey respondents in top 20 MSA's
 Female                                             0.44        0.50           0.41         0.09***      0.01
 Age                                               29.68       29.36          29.87        -0.51***      0.00
 Married/Kids                                       0.13        0.12           0.14           -0.02      0.33
 First-gen/URM                                      0.19        0.15           0.20          -0.05*      0.06
 International                                      0.34        0.23           0.40        -0.17***      0.00
 N                                                  852         309            543             852       852

 Panel B: Survey respondents choosing all cities
 Female                                             0.44        0.49           0.41          0.07**      0.03
 Age                                               29.68       29.46          29.83         -0.37**      0.01
 Married/Kids                                       0.13        0.14           0.13           0.01       0.69
 First-gen/URM                                      0.19        0.16           0.20          -0.05*      0.10
 International                                      0.34        0.28           0.38        -0.09***      0.00
 N                                                  852         341            511             852       852

  * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** 0.01
  Notes: Panels A and B show how the demographics for survey respondents compare to the full student
  population of 852 students. Panel A includes the 309 students in our primary estimation sample, i.e.
  those who chose the top MSA's in our program. Panel B includes 341 students who responded to the
  survey, including 32 who chose other cities not in the Neighborhood Choice Program. The five de-
  mographic characteristics include an indicator for females, age, an indicator for married individuals or
  those who have children, an indicator for first-generation or under-represented minorities, an indicator
  for international students who are not U.S. citizens.




                                                          34
Table A2: Students in the Map and Post Graduation Samples Relative to Survey Respon-
dents
                                        Survey    Post Survey     Missing    Difference   p-value
    Panel A: Map clicks
    Female                               0.50         0.43         0.54        -0.10*       0.09
    Age                                  29.36        29.51        29.28         0.23       0.28
    Married/Kids                         0.12         0.16         0.10          0.06       0.11
    First-gen/URM                        0.15         0.17         0.14          0.03       0.53
    International                        0.23         0.22         0.24         -0.02       0.63
    N                                     309          106          203          309        309

    Panel B: Post graduation choices
    Female                               0.50         0.54         0.47         0.07        0.23
    Age                                  29.36        29.34        29.37       -0.02        0.91
    Married/Kids                         0.12         0.09         0.15        -0.06        0.12
    First-gen/URM                        0.15         0.16         0.15         0.02        0.71
    International                        0.23         0.17         0.28       -0.12**       0.02
    N                                     309          137          172         309         309
   * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** 0.01
   Notes: Similar to Table A1 but Panel A compares demographics for 106 students in the map clicks data
   relative to the survey respondents that are missing map clicks. Panel B compares demographics for 137
   students we have post graduation location data relative to those with missing addresses.




                                                 35
             Table A3: Demographics for Switchers and Non-Switchers
                  Always in top 3         Switch in   Switch out    Switch in - Switch out
    Female              0.00                0.01         0.01                0.00
                       [0.64]              [0.71]       [0.64]              [0.87]
    Age                 -0.01               0.02         0.02                -0.01
                       [0.83]              [0.87]       [0.81]              [0.82]
    Married/Kids        0.01                0.00         0.00                -0.01
                       [0.37]              [0.98]       [0.74]              [0.36]
    First-gen/URM       0.00                0.01         0.01                0.01
                       [0.84]              [0.54]       [0.71]              [0.36]
    International    -0.03***             0.08***      0.07***               0.01
                       [0.00]              [0.00]       [0.00]              [0.45]
    N                   7012                7012         7012                7012
* 0.10 ** 0.05 *** 0.01
Notes: Each row repeats the OLS regression in column 1 of Table 4 but the dependent variables are now
student demographics instead of Zillow rent or network shares. We include MSA fixed effects but no
demographic controls. Standard errors clustered by individuals.




                                              36
Table A4: Rent and Same-School Network for Top Three Neighborhoods Pre and Post
Information (Map Clicks)

                          Panel A: Rent

                                                        Pre
                                                Yes               No
                                  Yes      Always Top 3        Switch In
                                              $3,437            $3,179
                          Post
                                   No       Switch Out        Never Top 3
                                             $3,672             $2,931



                          Panel B: Same-School Network

                                                        Pre
                                                Yes               No
                                  Yes      Always Top 3        Switch In
                                              9.06%             7.73%
                          Post
                                   No       Switch Out        Never Top 3
                                              6.48%             3.88%


   Notes: Repeats Table 3 but using the number of map clicks in each neighborhood to define top three
   neighborhoods post information.




                                                37
                      Table A5: Estimates for Latent Quality Indices
                                                (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)
       Same-School Network                  0.310**     0.293***      0.328***      0.311**
                                             (0.092)      (0.071)      (0.093)       (0.094)
       Rent                                -0.550***    -0.408***     -0.389**     -0.552***
                                             (0.126)      (0.120)      (0.121)       (0.127)
       Implied MWTP                           123**        157**        184**         123**
                                               (40)         (54)         (65)          (41)
       Average Rank 1                      0.296***     0.377***                   0.298***
                                             (0.076)      (0.070)                    (0.077)
       Average Rank 2                        0.165*     0.233***                     0.165*
                                             (0.064)      (0.062)                    (0.065)
       Average Rank 3                         0.086      0.149**                      0.089
                                             (0.066)      (0.057)                    (0.067)
       Average Rank 4                         0.092     0.200***                      0.086
                                             (0.065)      (0.045)                    (0.068)
       Average Rank 5                         0.087       0.118*                      0.088
                                             (0.074)      (0.056)                    (0.076)
       Average Rank 6-plus                    0.138        0.086                      0.141
                                             (0.096)      (0.073)                    (0.097)
       Rank 1                               0.711***                  0.711***     0.712***
                                             (0.065)                   (0.065)       (0.076)
       Rank 2                               0.436***                  0.436***     0.438***
                                             (0.063)                   (0.063)       (0.074)
       Rank 3                               0.205***                  0.205***      0.208**
                                             (0.057)                   (0.057)       (0.067)
       Rank 4                                 0.033                     0.033         0.037
                                             (0.055)                   (0.055)       (0.064)
       Rank 5                                 -0.061                   -0.061         -0.056
                                             (0.052)                   (0.052)       (0.059)
       Rank 6-plus                          -0.209**                  -0.209**      -0.202**
                                             (0.065)                   (0.065)       (0.076)
       Pre information rent                                                           0.006
                                                                                     (0.065)
       Pre information network shares                                                 0.067
                                                                                     (0.096)
       g( j )                                  Y             Y            N              Y
       f (i )                                  Y             N            Y              Y
       Pre rent, Pre network                   N             N            N              Y
* 0.10 ** 0.05 *** 0.01
Notes: Coefficients on the latent quality indices for each of the four specifications reported in Table 7.
In column 1, we present estimates for our baseline model by reporting coefficients for the six average
rank dummies in the second stage (g( j )) as well as coefficients for the six individual rank dummies in
the first stage f (i ). We suppress interactions of the average rankings with demographics due to space
constraints. Column 2 only includes g( j ) and column 3 only includes f (i ). Column 4 includes both
and adds the pre information estimate of rent and network shares.




                                                   38
Survey Appendix

              Figure A1: Pre Information Choice Set




                               39
Figure A2: Pre Information Ranking of Neighborhoods




                        40
Figure A3: Estimates of Monthly Rent in Considered Neighborhoods




                              41
Figure A4: Estimates of Same-School Network Shares in Considered Neighborhoods




                                     42
Figure A5: Monthly Zillow Rent (Alongside Pre Information Estimates) in All Neighbor-
hoods




Notes: We also presented an analogous figure for same-school network shares but suppressed it here due to
the proprietary nature of the data.
                                                   43
                   Figure A6: Post Information Ranking of Neighborhoods




Notes: Survey repondents saw a full schedule of all neighborhoods, as well as the Zillow rent and network
shares (suppressed here due to the proprietary nature of the data).




                                                   44
