                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       JIM CROW IN THE SADDLE:
  THE EXPULSION OF AFRICAN AMERICAN JOCKEYS FROM AMERICAN RACING

                                         Michael Leeds
                                         Hugh Rockoff

                                      Working Paper 28167
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28167


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020




Joshua Chen, Jessica Jiang, Ning Li, Weinan Yan, and Mriga Bansal provided superb research
assistance. We received several very helpful comments from Joseph Sabia, our discussant of a
previous paper on the Kentucky Derby, David Card, and the audience at the 2017 Western
Economic Association meetings in Santiago Chile. We also received set of helpful comments
from a presentation of that paper at the 2018 World Economic History Conference in Boston. The
audience at a presentation of this paper at the 2020 meeting of the Southern Economic
Association provided another set of helpful comments. The remaining errors are ours. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Michael Leeds and Hugh Rockoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Jim Crow in the Saddle: The Expulsion of African American Jockeys from American Racing
Michael Leeds and Hugh Rockoff
NBER Working Paper No. 28167
December 2020
JEL No. N11,N3

                                          ABSTRACT

Between the Civil War and the turn of the nineteenth century there were many prominent African
American jockeys. They rode winners in all of the Triple-Crown races. But at the turn of the
century they were forced out. This paper uses a new data set on the Triple-Crown races, which
includes odds on all of the entrants in all of the races, to explore the causes of the expulsion of
African American jockeys. Our conclusion is that although there is some evidence of prejudice by
owners and the betting public ­ for the latter in the Kentucky Derby although not in the other legs
of the Triple Crown ­ historical evidence indicates that the final push came from the White
jockeys who were determined to "draw the color line."


Michael Leeds
Department of Economics
Temple University
Philadelphia, PA 19122
michael.leeds@temple.edu

Hugh Rockoff
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1248
and NBER
rockoff@econ.rutgers.edu
                                           1. Introduction

         In a previous paper (Leeds and Rockoff 2019) we explored the expulsion of the

African American jockeys from the Kentucky Derby. Here we expand our analysis to

include the other legs of the "Triple Crown", the Preakness Stakes and the Belmont

Stakes. 1 These races were run entirely (Belmont) or mostly (Preakness) on northern

tracks. The contrast with the Derby helps us better understand the causes of the

expulsion.

         At the first running of the Kentucky Derby in 1875, thirteen of the fifteen jockeys

    were African Americans. The winning horse was Aristides, the favorite. The jockey was

    Oliver Lewis, an African American. The trainer was Ansel Williams, an African

    American. This was a legacy of slavery, when most jockeys on Southern tracks were

    African American. Gradually, in the decades that followed, more and more White

    jockeys entered the field. But African Americans continued to play an important role.

         The list of great African American jockeys includes Isaac Burns Murphy who won

    many important races, including three Kentucky Derbies (1884, 1890, and 1891) and

    was in the inaugural class of jockeys inducted into the National Museum of Racing and

    Hall of Fame. It also includes Willie Simms who won the Kentucky Derby twice (1896,


1
  Although these three races were always important, in the 19th century there was competition for the
position of America's top races. The term "Triple Crown" was first used to describe the three most
important British races. It appears that in the United States the first prominent use of the term was in the
New York Times in 1923; but we have not done a comprehensive search for the origin of the term in
American racing. The Kentucky Derby was first run in 1875, the Preakness Stakes in 1873, and the
Belmont Stakes in 1867.
                                                       3
    1898), the Preakness Stakes once (1898), and the Belmont Stakes twice (1893, 1894).

    And it includes Jimmy Winkfield who won the Kentucky Derby in 1901 and 1902 and

    rode the favorite to a second-place finish in 1903. But Winkfield was the last African

    American jockey to win a Triple Crown race. Indeed, he was one of the last African

    Americans to ride in a Triple Crown race for almost a century. The simple fact is that

    African American jockeys were forced out of American racing at the end of the 19th

    century despite their stellar record. It was another tragic example of "the Strange

    Career of Jim Crow."

          Figure 1 shows what happened in a particularly graphic way. The chart shows

    the number of Triple Crown races won by African American jockeys from 1870 to 2018.

    The effect of the "regime change" as we might call it today ­ "drawing the color line," as

    it was called at the time ­ could not be clearer.

          Racism and segregation had always existed in both the North and South, but at

    the turn of the 19th century there was a surge of racism. African American were

    disenfranchised and forced out of many jobs that they had occupied. The classic

    history of the intensification of racism at the turn of the century is C. Vann Woodward's

    The Strange Career of Jim Crow. The title conveys the thesis: although racism was

    always present in the South, segregation became even more extreme in the 1890s.2

    Horse racing fits the pattern he describes to a T. Somers (1974, 35) reports that the

    Whites and African Americans were separated at New Orleans tracks in the immediate

    aftermath of Reconstruction but that things then changed for the better.


2
 Vann Woodward later conceded that he may have underestimated the early extent of segregation,
particularly in cities.

                                                 4
        "Black jockeys continued to ride on local tracks in the 1880s and 1890s and
       often dominated the winner's circle. Negroes gained the right to attend races on
       equal footing with whites in the 1880s after professional sportsmen assumed
       control of local racing from the city's socially exclusive jockey clubs."

But by the beginning of the twentieth century racial inclusion at the track was over.

       The surge in racism in the 1890s and at the turn of the nineteenth century, of

which the expulsion of the African American jockeys from the Triple Crown is a striking

example, was the product of cultural, political, and economic forces. Untangling these

forces has challenged historians for more than a century. We cannot hope to make a

definitive analysis here, but the expulsion of the African American jockeys is a

particularly clear case of the exclusion of African Americans. By studying it, we add to

the general understanding of the rise of Jim Crow.

       We approach the expulsion of the African American jockeys from several

directions. First, we make use of the work of narrative historians such as O'Connor

(1921), Parmer (1939), and most importantly Mooney (2014), and our reading of the

newspapers and other contemporary sources. Then we estimate two econometric

models that test for the presence of discrimination against black jockeys. These models

are based on a new data set that we have constructed. The sources and methods we

used to construct the data set are explained in the Appendix.

       The first model, reported in section 4, explores the relationship between the rise

of Jim Crow and the decline in the number of mounts going to black jockeys. We used

both a straightforward timing variable to represent the rise of Jim Crow, and variables

that track the disenfranchisement of African Americans in the South.

       The second econometric study, reported in section 5, sheds light on the behavior

of the bettors. One way of determining whether there was discrimination against black
                                             5
jockeys is by applying what sports economists refer to as an "outcome test." Does a

particular class of athletes do better than predicted by the odds? This test aligns with

the claim by many women and minorities that they must be better than their peers to get

a job or a promotion. Indeed, outcome tests widely applicable. As Gary Becker pointed

out in his Nobel lecture, "If banks discriminate against minority applicants, they should

earn greater profits on the loans made to them than on those to whites." (Becker, 1993:

389).

        The outcome test has since been applied in a variety of contexts, ranging from

racial disparities in police practices (Knowles, Persico, and Todd, 2001; and Ayers,

2002) to discriminatory practices by journal editors. (Smart and Waldfogel, 1996) While

studies of sports have not directly tested for an outcome effect, studies have shown that

racially integrated Major League Baseball teams (Hanssen, 1998) and English Football

League teams (Szymanski, 2000) outperformed teams that had failed to integrate.

        In our case, the outcome test reveals whether bettors allowed racial prejudice to

affect their betting patterns. Specifically, a discriminatory bettor might be unwilling to

place a bet on a horse ridden by an African American jockey even if such a bet were a

profitable action. In section 5 we ask, specifically, whether in the era we consider it was

smart to bet on black jockeys because they were more to finish "in the money" (first,

second, or third) than predicted by the odds.




                                 2. The Triple Crown




                                              6
The Triple Crown consists of three races: The Kentucky Derby, first run in 1875, the

Preakness Stakes, first run in 1873, and the Belmont Stakes, first run in 1867.3 At the

crudest level, the story was the same in all three Triple Crown races: There was initially

a period in the nineteenth century when African American Jockeys raced and frequently

won, followed by expulsion at the end of the nineteenth century. However, the story

developed differently in each race, so in the following sections we describe the

changing role of African American jockeys in each leg of the Triple Crown in more

detail.


2.1 The Kentucky Derby

The Kentucky Derby is now, undoubtedly, the leading horserace in America. This race,

like other legs of the Triple Crown, is for three-year olds: young colts that have just

reached full form. The excitement they generate resembles that generated by a star

minor-league baseball player who is a rookie in the majors.

          Figure 2 shows the odds (as probabilities) at the track for the winning horse in

each Kentucky Derby from 1875 to 1902 by ethnicity of the jockey.4 Evidently, African

American Jockeys sometimes had to beat the odds to win. The outstanding case was

the 1882 Derby won by the African American jockey "Babe" Hurd, who rode Apollo, a

33:1 longshot to victory; a record that was not exceeded until the White jockey Roscoe




3
  Although these three races were always important, in the 19th century there was competition for the
position of America's top races. The term "Triple Crown" was first used to describe the three most
important British races. It appears that in the United States the first prominent use of the term was in the
New York Times in 1923; but we have not done a comprehensive search for the origin of the term in
American racing.
4
    The Appendix explains the relationship between track odds and implied probabilities.
                                                      7
Goose rode a 91:1 longshot to victory in 1913, still the record for the Derby.5 Apollo had

not raced as a two-year old, possibly a factor in the long odds against him. This was the

origin of the "Apollo Curse:" the belief that a horse that did not run as a two-year old

cannot win the Derby. The curse was finally broken in 2018 by Justify. Justify, however,

was a favorite, perhaps reflecting the great abundance of information available today,

even for a horse without a record in competitive races. All told, between 1875 and 1902,

15 winners of the Kentucky Derby were ridden by African American Jockeys and 13 by

White jockeys, after which African American jockeys were excluded until Marlon St.

Julien rode in the 2000 Derby.

          Figure 3 provides perspective on the quality of rides African American jockeys

were getting before they were finally forced out. It shows the implied probabilities for the

favorite in each Kentucky Derby from 1875 to 1905 by the ethnicity of the jockey. It is

clear that African American jockeys were getting some very good rides. In several cases

they rode the "odds-on favorite." True, there is a run of years at the end of the 19th

century when the White jockeys rode the favorites, but in 1903 Jimmy Winkfield, fresh

off two Derby victories rode the odds-on favorite to a second place finish. Evidently,

despite widespread racism there were owners who were willing to trust their best horses

to African American jockeys and bettors who recognized a good thing when they saw it.

          The last African American to ride in the Kentucky Derby before 2000, and the last

finish "in the money" (first, second, or third), was Jess "Long Shot" Conley who rode

Colston to third place in the 1911 Derby. Colston's owner and trainer was Raleigh




5
    We have not found a reference to Hurd's first name.
                                                      8
Colston Jr., an African American. In the morning-of-the-race odds published in the

Louisville Courier-Journal (May 13, 1911, p. 10) a White jockey is listed as riding

Colston, so Conley seems to have been a last-minute substitution. Conley did well.

According to the odds in the Derby Media Guide he was expected to finish fifth. Conley

ran a fine race and exceeded his expected finish.

       While outstanding African American jockeys, such as Winkfield, did get rides in

the Derby in the 1890s and the first years of the twentieth century, there was an

ominous trend, as shown in Table 1. Column 5 shows the share of rides in each race

that went to African American jockeys. A peak is reached in 1892 when all three entries

were ridden by African Americans. From 1892 onward, the trend is downward. Column

4 shows the total number of African American jockeys in each race; it contains only

ones and zeroes after 1902. The existence of a break point in 1892 is not a surprise, as

it was the year of the populist revolt that would ultimately produce C. Vann Woodward's

"Strange Career of Jim Crow." In 1892, Kentucky enacted the Separate Coach Bill, "the

first of several pieces of legislation that placed [Kentucky] in line with southern states in

legally limiting the social, economic, and educational opportunities of African

Americans." (Marshall, 2000: 242)

       The last column of Table 1 allows us to see how bettors responded to African

American jockeys. To get the number shown in the table we first ranked the entries in

each race according to the final odds and compared that ranking with the race results. If

the odds, for example, said that an African American jockey was expected to finish

fourth but he finished third, we credit him with a step up. If he was expected to finish

fourth but finished fifth, we recorded a step down. As you can see the African American

                                              9
jockeys on average finished higher than expected more often than they finished lower.

This is preliminary evidence that bettors underestimated the skills of the African

American jockeys or bet against them from prejudice. We explore this issue

systematically in Section 5.




2.2 The Preakness

Relatively few African Americans rode in the Preakness. Table 2 shows that African

Americans rode in four Preakness Stakes before the modern era. Only one of these

races took place at Pimlico in Maryland; the others were run on Northern tracks. The

race at Pimlico, incidentally, was a strange affair. Initially, only one horse was entered,

with African American jockey George "Spider" Anderson aboard. All he would have had

to do to win was walk his horse around the track. At the last moment, another entry was

found to make it a race, but Anderson won easily. Some of the owners who raced their

horses at Pimlico we think, preferred White jockeys, especially White English jockeys,

but this form of prejudice is hard to establish given our data. In each case, we compared

the expected finish in the race based on the odds with the actual finish to see if bettors

underrated the African American Jockeys. As you can see, only one case showed a

change from the expected finish based on the odds, a step up.



2.3 The Belmont Stakes

Table 3 shows the Belmont Stakes in which African American Jockeys rode. As one can

see, African American jockeys continued to get rides in the 1890s, when the trend was

downward in Kentucky. The African American jockeys, moreover, acquitted themselves
                                             10
well, and bettors seem to have realized how good they were. If anything, the table

suggests that bettors overrated African American jockeys at Belmont. Over the 15 races

in which African American jockeys rode, they finished worse by a total of 4.5 positions.

The average probability of winning assigned a horse ridden by African American

jockeys by the bookies and bettors was slightly higher than the average for a horse

ridden by White jockey, 22.5 compared with 15.2.

       Figure 4 shows the odds assigned by the bettors to the four horses ridden by

African American winners (expressed as a percentage) as well as the odds on the

favorite. In 1870, Edward Brown rode the favorite to a win; hence, the two columns are

equal. In 1893 the future Hall of Fame Jockey Willie Simms had to beat the odds to win,

but the following year he rode the favorite. Overall, it appears that bettors at the

Belmont Stakes put their prejudices behind them. Discrimination probably came many

forms, only some of which we can measure.



                 3. The White Jockeys "Draw the Color Line"

Contemporary newspaper accounts suggest that White jockeys conspired at the turn of

the century to force out the African American jockeys, to "draw the color line," as it was

expressed at the time. They had the tacit support of the owners, although it is difficult to

tell the extent to which owners passively accepted or actively supported drawing the

line. We return to the interests of the owners below. One of the most convincing

accounts the expulsion appeared in the New York Times (July 29, 1900, p.19). After

describing the sudden decline in the number of African American jockeys from the 1899

racing season to the 1900 season, the Times reporter explained that
                                             11
          "The public generally accepted the theory that the old time favorites of African
          blood had outgrown their skill, and really were out of date because of their
          inability to ride up to form of past years. Racing men know better. As a matter of
          fact, the Negro jockey is down and out not because he could no longer ride, but
          because of a quietly formed combination shut him out."

    The reporter could not say for sure whether the owners played a role in the expulsion

    of the African American jockeys. He would only go this far.

          "Gossip around the racing headquarters said that the white riders had organized
          to draw the color line. In this they were said to be upheld and advised by certain
          horse owners and turfmen who have great influence in racing affairs. Rumor
          even went so far as to state that The Jockey Club approved the plan tacitly and
          unofficially."

    The reporter had some circumstantial evidence that the conspiracy had reached the

    Jockey Club, the ruling body of New York racing: a report that a member who was

    close to offering a ride to an African American jockey whom he had employed before,

    suddenly broke off negotiations. He also reports that some owners initially laughed at

    the idea of a color line and continued to offer mounts to African American jockeys, but

    they were soon brought into line.

          "The Negro riders got mounts at first, but they failed to win races. Somehow or
          other, they met with all sorts of accidents and interferences in their races. The
          doubting horse owners seem to have been convinced since the early meetings
          that if they want to win races they must ride the white jockeys."

          In the summer of 1900, fresh off a third-place finish in the Kentucky Derby, the

future Hall of Fame African American jockey Jimmy Winkfield went to New York to look

for rides. There he heard about the "Anti-Colored Union" 6 of White jockeys, and saw



6
  The policy of excluding African Americans was practiced by many, although not by any means all, labor
unions during this era (Sundstrom 1994). African Americans were often used as strikebreakers and the
willingness of the African American workers and community leaders to support strikebreaking was
influenced by the racial policies of the striking unions (Whatley 1995). Racial discrimination by craft
unions continued well into the twentieth century (Leigh 1978).

                                                  12
famous African American jockeys searching desperately for rides. Winkfield then went

to Chicago, but the determination of White jockeys to shut out African American jockeys

had hit Chicago as well. Winkfield was attacked in a race at a track near Chicago,

crashed into the rail by a White jockey. Winkfield was hospitalized with severe leg

injuries, but the story did not end there. Soon the papers were reporting a "race war"

between White and African American jockeys at the track (Drape 2006, 71-84, Hotaling

2005, 36-39). Winkfield was not out of American racing at this point ­ he would go on to

win the Kentucky Derby twice, and finish second once ­ but the color line was being

drawn. Drape (2006, 81-82) suggests that hiring African American jockeys lasted longer

at Southern tracks because Southern White jockeys were used to competing against

African Americans and did not feel threatened.

        Charles B. Parmer (1939, 150) summarized the tactics used by White jockeys in

For Gold and Glory, his classic history of American racing.

        But some of his [African-American Jockey Jimmy Lee's] compatriots of color
        became a trifle cocky in the jockey rooms. The white boys retaliated by ganging
        up on the black riders on the rails. A black boy would be pocketed, thrust back in
        the race; or his mount would be bumped out of contention; or a white boy would
        run alongside, slip a foot under a black boy's stirrup, and toss him out of the
        saddle. Again, while ostensibly whipping their own horses those white fellows
        would lash out and cut the nearest Negro rider ...They literally ran the black boys
        off the track.

Ganging up on a jockey of a different race was not, of course, strictly the province of the

White jockeys. Bergin (1917) reported an interview with "Babe" Hurd the African

American jockey who won the 1882 Derby aboard Apollo.7 According to the interview,

Hurd claimed that he had beaten the odds on favorite Runnymede because the White


7
 This race was the source of the "Apollo Curse." Apollo had not raced as a 2-year old, and no horse that
had not raced as a 2-year old would win again until Justify in 2018.
                                                    13
jockey from New York riding Runnymede had bragged that he would teach the African

American jockeys how to ride. In retaliation he was boxed out by three African American

jockeys, permitting Apollo to win. However, given the larger number of White jockeys,

and the prejudice of the stewards, this tactic better served White jockeys.



4. An Empirical Model of the Share of African American Jockeys in the

                                  Triple Crown Races

       Figures 5a-5d show how the presence of black jockeys rose and fell over the

period 1867-1911. They reveal three patterns. First, the Kentucky Derby had far more

black jockeys than either the Preakness or the Belmont Stakes. Second, the variation

in the representation of black jockeys was both greater and more sustained for the

Kentucky Derby, as the other two races generally had no black jockeys, with brief

exceptions occurring, largely in the 1890s.

       Finally, the representation of black jockeys was far greater in the 1890s than in

any other decade. As noted, this was the result of spikes for the Preakness and the

Belmont Stakes that offset the declining trend in the Kentucky Derby. As noted above,

the existence of a break point in 1892 is not a surprise. It was the year the populist

revolt became a major political force in the South.

       Our estimation strategy uses this observation by estimating two sets of

regressions. The first identifies whether the relationships we see in Figures 5a-5d are

statistically significant. This regression largely contains variables that identify specific

time periods and races:


                                              14
 = 0 + 1  + 2  + 3 1900 + 4  + 5  +  (1)


PBJrt, the percentage of mounts ridden by black jockeys in race r in year t, is the

dependent variable. PROXt is a measure of the proximity of year t to 1892, the peak

year of black ridership in Figures 5a and 5b.8 Because the relationships in Figures 5a

and 5b are non-linear, we express PROXt as


                                   = 1892                   < 1892                             (2a)

                                          (-1892)
                          = 1 -             1892
                                                                  > 1892                       (2b)


POST1900t is a dummy variable intended to capture increasing repression of blacks,

particularly in the South, through the intensification of Jim Crow laws in the early 1900s.

DERBYr and PREAKt identify the race as being either the Kentucky Derby or the

Preakness, with the Belmont Stakes as the default. The only continuous variable,

NUMHrt, captures the number of horses entered in race r in year t. To the degree that

qualified white jockeys were a scarce resource, we expect the representation of black

jockeys to rise with the number of horses in the race.

        In our alternative specification, we replace PROXt with variables intended to

capture the social and legal environment in which these races took place:




 = 0 + 1  + 2  + 3  + 4  + 5 1900 + 6  +
7  +                                   (3)




8
 We also estimated a variant of Equation (1), which replaced the proximity variable with a dummy
variable that identified the 1890s. The results of this regression, whose results are largely the same but
with a slightly higher likelihood ratio, are available upon request.
                                                        15
PAYrt is the payout to the first-place finisher in race r in year t. We include this variable

because, as racing became more popular, payments to jockeys rose accordingly. At

the pinnacle of his career in 1891, Isaac Murphy, perhaps the greatest black jockey,

enjoyed an income of up to $25,000 (McDaniels III, 2013: 374). As jockeys' pay rose,

other ethnicities ­ particularly Irish Catholic immigrants ­ saw it as an increasingly

attractive occupation (McDaniels III, 2013: 212)

        POPVt is the percentage of the popular vote in Southern states that went to third-

party presidential candidates (Kousser 1974, Table 1.1, 12). These votes usually went

to populist candidates. This variable tracks the sudden rise of Populism in the South in

the 1890s, and its gradual demise as a political force as the Democratic Party absorbed

its segregationist policies.9 Because we observe these data only once every four years,

we take a log-linear interpolation of the vote between presidential elections. We also

scale the numbers so that the variable equals 1.0 in 1892, which was the peak year of

votes for populist candidates in the South. VSLt is a three-year moving average for the

number of laws designed to suppress the voting by African Americans (e.g., the poll tax)

that were enacted in Southern states (Kousser 1974, Table 9.1, 240).10

        The dependent variable in Equations (1) and (3) lies between 0 and 1. As a

result, we estimated both equations using the tobit procedure for a sample that is

censored both below and above. Because most of the variation in black ridership took




9
 Initially some of the southern Populists advocated a racially inclusive polity, but that was soon reversed
as documented famously by Vann Woodward (2002 [1955]) and many other sources.
10
  In regressions not shown here, we included a three-year moving average for the number of lynchings in
Kentucky. The coefficient for this variable was not significant.
                                                     16
place in the Kentucky Derby, we estimated both equations for both all three Triple

Crown races and for the Derby alone.

       Means for all relevant variables appear in Table 4. They show that, while less

than one in five jockeys overall was African American, more than one-third of the

jockeys in the Kentucky Derby were. As noted earlier, the Southern vote for populist

third parties peaked in 1892. This corresponds to 9.71 percent of the popular vote.

Laws to suppress the voting rights of African Americans were relatively uncommon until

the late 1880s, with no such laws being enacted from 1883 to 1888. However, every

year but one from 1889 to 1903 saw at least one law restricting the franchise for African

Americans.

       As shown in Figures 6a-6c, the payouts for the three races show very different

patterns. The Kentucky Derby shows steady growth until the 1890s. This is followed by

a sharp decline in the early 1890s and then a flat payment for the remainder of the

period. The Preakness follows a U-shape, declining from its inception in the mid-1870s

until the mid-1890s and then rising steadily. The Belmont Stakes showed little growth

until the late 1880s but increasingly rapid growth thereafter.

       The number of horses in the race showed surprising variation. The 1883, 1884,

and 1889 Preakness all had only two entrants, as did the 1887, 1888, 1892, and 1910

Belmont Stakes. The Kentucky Derby never went below three horses (1892 and 1905).

The largest race was the very first Kentucky Derby in 1875, with 15 entrants. All three

races had several races with 14 horses.


4.1 Results


                                            17
       Our tobit results appear in Table 5. The first two columns show the estimates

from using the full sample, while the last two columns show the results from using only

the Kentucky Derby. Columns (1) and (3) show the estimates of Equation (1), and

columns (2) and (4) show the results for Equation (3).

       The results in columns (1) and (3) are very similar to each other, indicating that

the employment of black jockeys in the Kentucky Derby followed a similar temporal

pattern to the employment of black jockeys in the Triple Crown as a whole. As

expected, employment rose as one approached 1892 and fell thereafter. The

coefficient is so large because the differences in the values of PROXt fall into a narrow

range between 0.9 and 1.0. Also as expected, employment fell after 1900. The

dummies for each leg of the Triple Crown confirm the observation that the Kentucky

Derby had the most African American jockeys, and the Preakness had the fewest. The

only statistically insignificant coefficient was for the number of horses in the race. Thus,

we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the number of horses did not affect the

percentage of jockeys who were African American.

       When we replace proximity with variables reflecting the political setting in which

the races took place, the coefficients in column (2) generally resemble the coefficients in

column (1). The coefficient for the number of horses is still insignificant, the coefficient

indicating races after 1900 is still negative, and the dummy variable for the Kentucky

Derby is still positive. The only meaningful change is that the coefficient for the

Preakness now is statistically insignificant, indicating that, controlling for the new

factors, the Preakness and the Belmont Stakes are indistinguishable.



                                              18
        The new coefficients have largely counterintuitive results. While the payout to

the winning horse has no impact, black ridership is positively related to both votes for

populist candidates and laws suppressing the rights of African Americans to vote.

These results are best understood if we recall that the regression here shows

correlation, not causation. The rising representation of African Americans in horse

racing, as elsewhere in Southern society, was met with increasing hostility from those

who felt displaced by blacks and from others who objected to the presence of blacks in

general. The basic purpose of Jim Crow Laws was to prevent African Americans from

rising politically, economically, and socially. Had they not been doing so, there would
                                          11
have been no need for such laws.               It is also possible that the rise of Jim Crow in the

South stimulated efforts by black jockeys to find rides on northern tracks, a subsidiary

factor that may help explain the spikes in the number of black jockeys that we see in the

Belmont and Preakness in the 1890s.

        As seen in column (4), when we restrict the sample to the Kentucky Derby, most

of the coefficients are not substantially different from the other specifications. However,

we see two changes relative to the full sample (column (2)) and to the temporal model

using just the Kentucky Derby (column (3)). First, the number of horses now has a

positive impact on the representation of African American jockeys, which indicates a

greater readiness to employ African American jockeys when the field expands. Second,

the payout now has the expected negative impact. This shows that, for the Kentucky

Derby, the growing revenue for the owners ­ and, presumably for the jockeys, although


11
  A similar pattern of black achievement before the intensification of segregation was present in other
areas such as accumulation of property (Higgs 1982, 1984) and Margo (1984), and patenting (Cook
2014).
                                                    19
we have only anecdotal evidence ­ led other groups to want to take over those

positions. Such displacement has occurred in contemporary sports, as seen, for

example, by the decline in the number of women coaching women's collegiate sports

with the advent of Title IX.



              5. Did Bettors Undervalue African American Jockeys?

       We test for discrimination by applying the outcome test described earlier.

Specifically, we test whether African American jockeys in the Triple Crown races of the

late 19th and early 20th century were more likely to finish "in the money" (first, second, or

third place), holding constant other factors, most importantly the expected finish of the

horse, as set by the betting odds. If betting on a horse with an African American jockey

is a winning strategy, then there is a market failure in the betting market. Our estimating

equation is given by:


 = 0 + 1  + 2  + 3  + 4  +                                                            (4)



Our dependent variable, MONEYFINrt, is a binary variable, equal to 1 if the horse

finishes "in the money." That is, whether it finishes first, second, or third in the race. As

before, NUMHrt is the number of horses in the race. As the number of horses in a race

rises, we expect the probability that any one of them finishes in the money to decline.

Hence, we anticipate the coefficient here to be negative. In contrast, the better the

betting odds are on a horse, the higher the probability that it will finish in the money.

       The final two variables are the key to testing for an outcome effect. If the

coefficient for AAJrt, a dummy variable indicating whether the horse was ridden by an
                                             20
African American jockey, is positive, then betting on that horse improves a bettor's

chances of winning, cet. par. The final independent variable interacts the presence of an

African American jockey with the probability of winning. It therefore asks whether an

African American jockey increases the likelihood that a good mount will finish in the

money.

       We estimate Equation (4) using the probit technique. We first estimate it without

the interaction effect, using data for all three races. Because the Kentucky Derby seems

qualitatively different from the other two races in employing black jockeys, we also run

the regression using data for only the Kentucky Derby. Finally, we add the interaction

effect for the full data set.


5.1 Results

       The results for our estimation of Equation (4), whether a horse finishes in the

money, appear in Tables 6a and 6b. Table 6a contains results using data from all three

of the Triple Crown races. The results in 6b contain results only from the Kentucky

Derby. The 2 statistic for each of the equations is strongly significant, indicating that

the regressions fit the data well. Overall, they provide support for the presence of an

outcome effect that indicates racial prejudice by Triple Crown bettors.

       The impacts of our control variables conform to our expectations. The probability

that a horse finishes in the money declines as the number of horses in the race rises.

At the same time, bettors tend to be on target, as the horses with a greater probability of

winning, as defined by the betting odds, are more likely to finish among the top three.

       The first column of Tables 6a and 6b show the impact of a horse's being ridden

by a black jockey. In both cases, this variable has a positive coefficient in the first two
                                              21
regressions. However, it is statistically insignificant for all races and of borderline

significance for the Kentucky Derby.

       The second column in the tables shows the impact of interacting the presence of

an African American jockey and the quality of the mount. These coefficients are

strongly significant and positive. This indicates that African American jockeys increased

the likelihood that a better horse would finish in the money.

       Regressions using both the dummy variable and the interaction variable, found in

column 3 of the tables, yielded generally statistically insignificant coefficients for both

variables. This is likely because the two variables are positively correlated (a

correlation coefficient of about 0.6 for both samples). This correlation suggests that

Black jockeys were not subject to discrimination in the assignment of mounts. If

anything, the horses they rode were more highly regarded by the bettors.

       We also ran the regressions shown in Table 6 on several subsamples not shown

here. We found no significant differences when we restricted the sample to the pre-1892

years or to only the Preakness, the Belmont, or these two races combined. We

conclude, therefore, that there is mild evidence that betting on a horse ridden by an

African American jockey was a winning betting strategy. In other words, some bettors

bet against horses ridden by African Americans out of prejudice, but we emphasize that

the evidence is mild. Many bettors were willing to put their money on the great African

American jockeys. That is why Jimmy Winkfield was a strong favorite in the 1903

Kentucky Derby.

                    6. The Story was Similar in Other Sports


                                              22
        Other major sports tell a similar story, inclusion followed by exclusion, though the

timing was different in each. The expulsion of African Americans from Major League

Baseball preceded the expulsion of the African American jockeys by a decade

(McDaniel 2013, 280; Seymour 1960, 278). The first African American recognized to be

a major league baseball player was Moses Fleetwood Walker, who played for the

Toledo Blue Stockings in 1884. But a warning shot had been fired already in an

exhibition game. Adrian "Cap" Anson, the game's first superstar, the player manager of

the Chicago White Stockings, let his team take the field against the Blue Stockings to

save their share of the gate receipts, but he let it be known that he would never again

play against a Black man. Until 1947, the major leagues remained all-white enterprises.

        The exclusion of African Americans from white baseball led to the formation of

the famous Negro leagues that provided limited opportunities for African American

players to play exciting baseball and for African American and white fans to see them.

Nothing equivalent arose for African American jockeys. A few African American jockeys

continued to get rides in the steeplechase and in less prestigious flat races.12 But the

Triple Crown was out of bounds. Many owners, moreover, continued to employ African

Americans as trainers and consultants long after African American jockeys had been

forced out of the big races. The African American Jockey William Walker became one of

the nation's foremost experts on racehorse bloodlines. It is said that the prominent

stable owner for whom he worked would never trade a horse without Walker's consent.

For a few years after the expulsion of the African Americans, several tracks ran


12
  The steeplechase may have presented fewer opportunities for the rough tactics used to force out
African American jockeys. In the steeplechase those tactics would be more likely to endanger valuable
horses or wealthy amateur riders.
                                                  23
"Darktown Derbies" in which only African American jockeys could ride. But without a

regular path to the big races, owners and trainers had little incentive to train African

American jockeys, and, unlike the Negro baseball leagues, the Darktown Derbies

disappeared.

          A correlation between hard times and segregation can be found in other

professional sports. Hard times are not the whole story; racial animus was always a

force. Nevertheless, the correlation appears to be there. The National Football League

began in 1920 as a combination of formerly independent teams in the Midwest and

upstate New York. 13 In the 1920s, the NFL featured several African American players.

Frederick Douglass "Fritz" Pollard, an All American at Brown, played and coached for a

number of teams. He was inducted posthumously into the National Football Hall of

Fame. Jay Mayo "Ink" Williams who played for the Hammond (Indiana) Pros, the Dayton

Triangles, and several other teams later became well-known as a record producer.

Paul Robeson was an All American at Rutgers in 1917 and 1918 and then played

professionally with the Canton Bulldogs before beginning his renowned career as actor,

singer, and activist. However, when the league expanded nationally, at the start of the

Great Depression, African American players were cut out ­ partly because of the

competition for fewer jobs as teams went bankrupt and partly to placate potential

owners of southern franchises. Black players were not permitted to play in professional

football until after World War II (McCambridge 2005).

          In the 1890s the sport that most resembled horse racing was bicycle racing. The

modern bicycle did not become widely available until the 1890s. The reasons for the


13
     Its original name was the American Professional Football Conference. It took its current name in 1922.
                                                     24
timing are not entirely clear. Some historians stress technological innovations, in

particular the invention of the inflatable rubber bicycle tire by John Boyd Dunlop in 1887.

Once bicycles were available, the craze for riding and racing them took off. One of the

greatest early stars was an African American: Marshall Walter "Major" Taylor (Kranish

2019, Ritchie 2017). In the late 1890s he won many races, set world records at several

distances, and was recognized as a national and world champion. He also became a

favorite with the race-going public.

       Like the leading African American jockeys, Taylor faced determined, sometimes

violent efforts by white cyclists to prevent him from winning or even competing. In some

cases, he was boxed out, in others he was bumped and jostled by white riders.

Sometimes it was worse. In 1897, a white rider who had finished third in a race in which

Taylor had finished second, tackled Taylor and choked him into unconsciousness. In

1904, a white rider in Australia deliberately collided with Taylor, who fell to the track,

unconscious. Fortunately, he made a full recovery. The parallel with African American

jockeys ­ for example Winkfield who, as noted above, was deliberately forced into the

rails in a race in Chicago in 1900 ­ is striking




                          7. Discussion and Conclusions

Before the Civil War, many of America's most famous jockeys were slaves; After the

War, African American jockeys continued to play a major role. Between 1890 and 1899,

African American jockeys won six Kentucky Derbies, one Preakness Stakes, and three



                                              25
Belmont Stakes. Nevertheless, at the end of the 1890s and early years of the twentieth

century African American jockeys were forced out of the sport.

       Who was responsible? As shown in section 5, we find no evidence of racial

prejudice by the betting public for races run on Northern Triple Crown tracks, but we find

some evidence of prejudice for the Kentucky Derby. We find that horses ridden by

African American jockeys were more likely to finish in the money (first, second, or third)

than predicted by the betting odds. Thus, some bettors at the Derby were complicit with

the expulsion of African American jockeys.

       At the very least, owners also gave tacit approval to the expulsion of African

American jockeys. For some owners it was probably a matter of prejudice. For others, it

was likely just a business decision: why employ a black jockey if white jockeys were

going to use violence to prevent him from finishing in the money and, in the process,

possibly damage a valuable racehorse. Some owners who had regularly employed

African American jockeys continued to employ them in other capacities, such as trainer

or advisor.

       The historical evidence suggests that the key push came when white jockeys

began a violent and quickly successful effort to force out African American jockeys.

African American jockeys were boxed out, run into the rail, hit with riding crops, and so

on. These attacks prevented African American jockeys from finishing in the money, and

endangered fragile and valuable racehorses. Soon after the attacks on African

American jockeys began, African American jockeys could not get rides.

       The rising tide of racism that produced Jim Crow had important political, cultural,

psychological and economic causes that interacted with one another. Understanding a

                                             26
particular aspect of Jim Crow often requires stressing one or another of these forces. To

understand the wave of disfranchisement in the South in the late 1890s requires that an

historian delve into the complexities of Southern politics. Understanding the physical

separation of the races ­ on railroad cars, in music halls, at drinking fountains, and so

on ­ may require that one focus on cultural or psychological factors, and the role of

Plessy vs. Ferguson (1896). It can be fairly said that untangling these forces is an

ongoing project. Horse racing provides a particularly helpful case study because it was

enormously popular in both North and South, because it was integrated for many years

after the Civil War, and because one can gather quantitative data that reflect underlying

attitudes that are revealed when people put their money on the line.

       In horseracing, anxiety over job insecurity appears to have played an important,

perhaps decisive role in the call to "draw the color line." First, there is the nature of

racing itself. The demand curve for jockeys was highly inelastic, with a limited number of

slots. White jockeys would have benefitted in any circumstances from the exclusion of

black jockeys, but the late 1890s were a time when unease about finding rides was

especially high. First, there was an economic depression. The hard times began in

1893, when the United States experienced a severe financial crisis, and unemployment

rose dramatically.

       There were also factors particular to racing. There was an anti-gambling crusade,

a brother to the campaign for prohibition of alcohol, which was gathering steam. Laws

against gambling created severe problems for horse racing, limiting betting through

moral suasion and producing anti-gambling legislation. Anti-gambling forces existed in

all parts of the country. New York passed anti-gambling legislation in 1895, and New

                                              27
Jersey did so in 1898. Charles Evans Hughes, the reform governor of New York,

thought that the 1895 law did not go far enough, and in 1908 he signed legislation

banning all but verbal contracts at race courses, a law that Hughes enforced vigorously.

As a result, attendance at racetracks declined precipitously. One victim was the

Belmont Stakes, which was not run in 1911 or 1912. Overall, the number of racetracks

in the U.S dropped from 314 in 1897 to 25 by 1908 (Sauer 2001, 8). In short, anti-

gambling social pressure and laws hit racing hard, and jockeys found the demand for

their services contracting.

       Native-born white jockeys also faced increasing competition from immigrants.

Joe Drape (2006, 54) tells the story of "Father" Bill Daly ­ by no means a priest ­ an

Irish-American owner and trainer based in New York. Daly trafficked (Drape's term) in

young Irish-American jockeys, whom he brutalized but pushed to success. Perhaps his

two best known jockeys were Winnie O'Connor and Hall of Famer Danny Maher.



       Competition for jobs in hard times, and the politics based on it, reinforced the

extremes of racial hatred that produced demands for segregation and racial deference.

Recall that, in describing the attacks on African American Jockeys, Charles B. Parmer

claimed the White jockeys' retaliated for African American jockeys' becoming "a trifle

cocky in the jockey rooms." Today, such response would be deemed abhorrent, but it

was a familiar reaction in the Jim Crow era, when a perceived lack of deference could

provoke a violent response. Once African American Jockeys were pushed out, a racist

explanation for the disappearance of the African American Jockeys ­ they just could not

ride as well as White jockeys ­ quickly took hold. In a 1905 column in the Washington

                                            28
Post (August 20, p. S3) titled "Negro Riders on the Wane: White Jockeys' Superior

Intelligence Supersedes," the author catalogued the achievements of African American

jockeys but then reported that

       "Horsemen ascribe the passing of the colored riders to the fact that it is no longer
       considered ignoble to be a jockey, and the money to be made in the profession
       has drawn boys of good family to essay to learn the art of riding, So the white
       jockey is now crowding out the colored riders, as the paleface is pressing back
       the red men on the plains."

       This story was published widely. One poignant example is from the Louisville

Courier-Journal (July 24, 1905). where this paragraph also appeared. Yet about 10

years earlier in the obituary for Isaac Murphy the Courier-Journal (February 13, 1896)

had told its readers that Murphy, among other virtues, was "the finest judge of pace ever

seen in a saddle on our tracks. His seat was good and his hands perfect." this

explanation for the disappearance of African American jockeys appeared just a few

years after Jimmy Winkfield's great run in the Derby: third in 1900, first in 1901, first in

1902, and second in 1903. The comparison with Native Americans is telling: no mention

of the violence used to drive African American jockeys from the track or to drive Native

Americans from the plains. In all, C. Vann Woodward (1955) might well have included

the stories about African American jockeys as examples in the Strange Career of Jim

Crow to show how quickly people came to believe things about African Americans that

they had not believed a few years earlier.

       The only discussion of the expulsion of the African American Jockeys we have

found in the contemporary economics literature was in Alfred Holt Stone's 1906 essay

"The Economic Future of the Negro: The Factor of White Competition" in the American

Economic Review. Stone ­ apparently unaware of or uninterested in the successes of

                                              29
African American jockeys just a few years earlier ­ argued that they were being

displaced for the same reason that African American coachmen were being displaced:

African Americans were not as good as Whites when it came to handling horses!

       Some journalists got it right. Leroy Williams was one of the last great African

American jockeys, but as the Washington Post (January 11, 1907, p. 8.) explained.

       Williams has a hard row to hoe every time he mounts a horse, for not only has he
       to force every ounce of speed out of his horse, but he has to steer clear of the
       "pockets" and snares that the white boys set to trap him in.


       In short, we find that African American jockeys were victims of discrimination at

multiple levels and were eventually forced out by rival white jockeys. This last finding

adds to the case for believing that anxiety about jobs was an important contributing

factor to the rising tide of racism that produced Jim Crow.




                                            30
                        Appendix. Sources and Methods


      Our data set includes horses entered, times, jockeys, ethnicity of the jockey, final

position in the race, odds on each entry, payouts, and so on from a variety of sources.

The websites of the Triple Crown races provided considerable amounts of data. Each of

the websites has form charts for all of the races. However, the charts in the media

guides do not always have the odds on all the entries or other data that we needed so

we had to supplement the charts with data from other sources. O'Connor's (1921)

history of the Kentucky Derby and Sowers's (2014) authoritative history of the Triple

Crown were especially important. Accounts of the races in newspapers were important

for filling in and double-checking. We made considerable use of the New York Times,

The Baltimore Sun (especially important for the Preakness when run at Pimlico), several

Brooklyn papers (especially important when the Preakness was run at Gravesend in

Brooklyn), and other papers when they reported on a particular race in detail.

      We also needed information on the ethnicities of the jockeys. The contemporary

media guides were extremely valuable because they each include a discussion of

African American jockeys who have ridden in the race. In addition, Weeks (1898) and

Hotaling (1999) were extremely helpful. We also located stories about individual jockeys

in newspaper reports and other sources.

      Betting was structured in a variety of ways that changed over time. In the early

years, the only odds available are from "auction pools." Each auction consisted of a

series of rounds of bidding. The winner of the first round could choose whichever horse

he wanted. The winner of second round could choose from the remaining horses and so

on until all the entrants had been taken. Those who had "bought" the winning horse
                                           31
received the pool, less the pool-seller's commission, typically, five percent (Riess 2011,

Kindle Locations 453-455). In many pools, entrants from the same stable were paired in

the bidding; that is, you could choose two or more horses with a single winning bid. The

reason might be that the owners, who were major participants in the pools, did not want

to create the impression that they favored one of their horses. They might be favoring

one of their entrants through honest evaluation, but a decision to favor one of their

entrants might raise the suspicion that they had instructed one of their jockeys to

cooperate in pushing through one of their entries. In some cases, one could bet on "the

field," several horses with little chance of winning. One problem with the auction pools

was that the favorites tended to get picked by the bettors with the deepest pockets.

Indeed, it was hard for someone of limited means to bet at all. That led to the

introduction of other forms of betting that allowed for greater participation.

       The auction pools were followed by the more familiar bookies who would post

odds and then pay the winners at those odds after taking a commission. Sometimes the

odds reported in different papers differed because they reported the odds of different

auction pools or bookmakers, but all reported odds are usually quite close. In fact, when

both are available, the odds from the pools and from the bookies are quite close.

       Still later, the tracks began using the modern parimutuel system. Bettors buy

tickets on the horse they think will win -- to take the simplest example, they can also bet

on a horse to place (second) or show (third) or bet on more exotic combinations. The

payout is determined by how many tickets are bought for a particular horse.

       In all these cases we converted the odds reported in the papers into "implied

probabilities." One reason for doing so is that a chart based on the odds used by bettors

                                             32
is hard to read: the races won by long shots obscure all the other races. The "implied

probabilities" on the other hand, fall between 0 and 1. Probabilities, moreover, are more

familiar to economists. As explained below, we also converted odds to probabilities

because we needed to adjust for changes in the track's share of the betting pool.

       The conversion of odds given by bookies or parimutuel machines is

straightforward. For example, odds of 5:1 mean that, if the horse wins, the owner of a

ticket for a bet of $1.00 will receive $6.00, the original stake of $1.00 plus $5 of

winnings. The formula connecting the odds to the implied probability is


(1) P = 1/(O +1)

Where P = the "implied probability" a horse will win.

       O = the track odds on the horse expressed as a ratio

Suppose the odds are 3:2. Then the "implied probability" is P = 1/[(3/2)+1] = 0.40.

       The frequency interpretation is that if the race were run 5 times, we would expect

this horse to win twice and lose three times.

       However, we must adjust the probabilities given by (1) for the amount taken from

the betting pool by the track. An example will make clear how we do this. Suppose the

pool consisted of a total of $100 bet on the race and $40 dollars was bet on horse X.

Also assume that if X won, the people who had bet on X would win the whole pool,

receiving a profit of $60 on their $40 bet. The odds, or the payoff ratio as some betters

think of it, would be $60/$40 or 3:2. The implied probability of winning, calculated

according to (1) would be 0.40. But this would be the odds in a fair pool. Normally, the

track or the bookies take a share off the top, the vigorish or the "vig" as bettors and


                                              33
bookies call it.14 The vig reduces the odds offered the bettor. In our example, if the track

took 20% off the top, those who had bet on X would receive only $80, and the odds

would be $40/$40 or 1:1. The implied probability, according to (1) would be higher than

with a fair pool, 0.50 rather than 0.40. We therefore adjusted for the vigorish by dividing

each individual implied probability by the sum of the implied probabilities, ensuring that

the adjusted probabilities summed to 100%. This adjustment allows us to compare

races across time, even as the vigorish changed.

        In the case of the pools, we simply divided the price for each horse by the sum of

the prices for all of the horses in the race. Since the prices were reported gross of the

pool-seller's cut, there was no need to adjust the probabilities. When a bettor in a pool

took a stable or the field, we divided the price paid for the group by the number of

horses in the group to get an implied probability for each horse separately.

        For the Kentucky Derby we used odds from auction pools for 1875 to 1886 with

the exception of 1884, from bookmakers for 1884 and 1887-1907, and from mutuels in

subsequent years. For the Preakness we used odds from auction pools for 1879-1887,

from bookmakers for 1888-1889, and from mutuels in subsequent years. For the

Belmont Stakes we used odds from auction pools for 1867-1876, from bookmakers for

1877-1897, and from mutuels in subsequent years.

        The odds given by auction pools, bookmakers, or by the track in the case of

parimutuel betting reflected a wide variety of variables: a horse's performance in recent

races, its bloodlines, the jockey's record, the weather, rumors about the mental or



14
  The term is also used to describe the amount charged by "loan sharks" a fact that probably tells us
something about how track goers thought about the people with whom they bet.
                                                  34
physical health of the horse, theories about horse racing, and many other factors. We

do not have enough data to extract the impacts of all these factors. Nevertheless, the

odds shed light on the nature and sources of discrimination. If owners discriminate,

African American jockeys will have to settle for longshots. If bettors are prejudiced, the

odds will be inaccurate, and African American jockeys will beat the odds.




                                            35
                                          References

Ayers, Ian. 2002. Outcome Tests of Racial Disparities in Police Practices. Justice Research and
Policy, vol. 4, no. 1-2, Fall, pp. 131-142.

Becker, Gary.1993. Nobel Lecture: The Economic Way of Looking at Behavior. Journal of
Political Economy, vol. 101 no. 3, June, pp. 385-409.

Bergin, C. A. 1917. "When Apollo Won The Kentucky Derby: Story of the Race as Described by
the Former Jockey Who Rode Him to Victory." Daily Racing Form, May, 10.

Brown, Alasdair, and Fuyu Yang. 2015. "Does Society Underestimate Women? Evidence from
the Performance of Female Jockeys in Horse Racing." Journal of Economic Behavior and
Organization 111, 106-118.

Cook, Lisa D. 2014 "Violence and Economic Activity: Evidence from African American
Patents, 1870-1940." Journal of Economic Growth, vol. 19, no. 2, , pp. 221­257.,

Craig, Lee A. 2013. Josephus Daniels: His Life and Times. Chapel Hill: The University of North
Carolina Press.

Drape, Joe. 2006. Black Maestro: The Epic Life of an American Legend. New York: Harper
Collins.

"Few Negro Jockeys Left: Williams, Who Won Four Races Yesterday, Is Cleverest Son of Ham
Riding." Washington Post, January 11, 1907, p. 8.

Hanssen, Andrew. 1998. "The Cost of Discrimination: A Study of Major League Baseball."
Southern Economic Journal, vol. 64, no. 3, pp. 603-627.Historical Statistics of the United States
Millennial Edition Online. 2006. Retrieved from http://hsus.cambridge.org/.

Higgs, Robert. 1982 "Accumulation of Property by Southern Blacks Before World War I." The
American Economic Review, vol. 72, no. 4, pp. 725­737.
_________. 1984. "Accumulation of Property by Southern Blacks Before World War I: Reply."
The American Economic Review, vol. 74, no. 4, pp. 777­781.

Hotaling, Edward. 1999. The Great Black Jockeys: The Lives and Times of the Men who
Dominated America's First National Sport. Rocklin, Calif.: Forum.

__________. 2005. Wink: The Incredible Life and Epic Journey of Jimmy Winkfield. New York:
McGraw-Hill.



                                               36
Knowles, John, Nicola Persico, and Petra Todd. 2001. Racial Bias in Motor Vehicle Searches:
Theory and Evidence. Journal of Political Economy, vol. 109, no. 1, February, pp. 203-229.

Kousser, J. Morgan. 1974. The Shaping of Southern Politics: Suffrage Restriction and the
Establishment of the One-party South, 1880-1910. Yale Historical Publications. Miscellany; 102.
New Haven: Yale University Press.

Kranish, Michael. 2019. The World's Fastest Man: The Extraordinary Life of Cyclist Major
Taylor, America's First Black Sports Hero (First Scribner hardcover ed.). New York: Scribner.

Leeds, Michael and Hugh Rockoff. 2019. "Beating the Odds: Black Jockeys in the Kentucky
Derby." In John K. Wilson and Richard Pomfret (eds.) Historical Perspectives on Sports
Economics: Lessons from the Field. Edgar Elgar, 136-150.

Leigh, Duane. 1978. "Racial Discrimination and Trade Unions: Evidence from a Sample of
Middle-Aged Men," Journal of Human Resources, 13(4), Autumn: 568-577.

Margo, Robert A. 1984. "Accumulation of Property by Southern Blacks Before World War I:
Comment and Further Evidence." The American Economic Review, vol. 74, no. 4, 1984, pp.
768­776.

McDaniels III, Pellom. 2013. Prince of Jockeys: The Life of Isaac Burns Murphy, Lexington:
University of Kentucky Press.

Madden, Janice Fanning. 2004. "Differences in the Success of NFL Coaches by Race, 1990­
2002: Evidence of Last Hire, First Fire," Journal of Sports Economics, 5(1), February: 6­19.

Madden, Janice Fanning and Matthew Ruther. 2011. "Has the NFL's Rooney Rule Efforts
`Leveled the Field' for African American Head Coach Candidates?" Journal of Sports
Economics vol. 12, no. 2, April, pp. 127-42.

Margolick, David. 2005. Beyond Glory: Joe Louis vs. Max Schmeling and a World on the Brink.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf.

Marshall, Anne E. 2000. Kentucky's Separate Coach Law and African American Response:
1892-1900. The Register of the Kentucky Historical Society, vol. 98, no. 3, Summer, pp. 241-
259.

McCambridge, Michael. 2005. America's Game. New York: Anchor Books.

McDaniels, Pellom. 2013. The Prince of Jockeys: The Life of Isaac Burns Murphy. University
Press of Kentucky.


                                               37
Mooney, Katherine C. 2014. Race Horse Men: How Slavery and Freedom were made at the
Racetrack. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.

"Negro Jockeys Shut Out: Combination of White Riders to bar them From the Turf." New York
Times, July 29, 1900, p. 19.

"Negro Rider on Wane: White Jockeys' Superior Intelligence Supersedes." Washington Post,
August 20, 1905, p. S3.

Nicolson, James C. 2012. The Kentucky Derby: How the Run for the Roses Became America's
Premier Sporting Event. University of Kentucky Press.

O'Connor, John Lawrence. 1921. History of the Kentucky Derby, 1875-1921. New York, Rider
Press.

Parmer, Charles B. 1939. For Gold and Glory: The Story of Thoroughbred Racing in America.
New York: Carrick and Evans Inc.

Riess, Steven. 2011. The Sport of Kings and the Kings of Crime: Horse Racing, Politics, and
Organized Crime in New York 1865 ­1913. Syracuse, New York: Syracuse University Press.
Ritchie, Andrew. 2017. Major Taylor: The Fastest Bicycle Rider in the World. Third Edition.
San Francisco: Cycle Publishing, Vander Plas Publications.
Sauer, Raymond D. 2001. "The Political Economy of Gambling Regulation." Managerial and
Decision Economics, 22, no. 1/3: 5-15.

Seymour, Harold. 1960. Baseball: The Early Years. New York: Oxford University Press.
Smart, Scott and Joel Waldfogel. 1996. A Citation-Based Test for Discrimination at Economics
and Finance Journals. No. w5460, National Bureau of Economic Research, February.

Somers, Dale A. 1974. "Black and White in New Orleans: A Study in Urban Race Relations,
1865-1900." The Journal of Southern History, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 19­42.
Sowers, Richard. 2014. The Kentucky Derby, Preakness and Belmont Stakes: A Comprehensive
History. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland and Company, Inc.

Stone, Alfred Holt. 1906. "The Economic Future of the Negro. The Factor of White
Competition." Publications of the American Economic Association, 3rd Series, 7, no. 1 (1906):
243-94.
Sundstrom, William A. 1994. "The Color Line: Racial Norms and Discrimination in Urban
Labor Markets, 1910-1950." The Journal of Economic History, vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 382­396.
Szymanski, Stefan. 2000. "A Market Test for Discrimination in the English Professional Soccer
Leagues." The Journal of Political Economy, vol. 108, no. 3, pp. 590-603.
                                              38
Timmer, Ashley S., and Jeffrey. G. Williamson. 1996. "Racism, Xenophobia or Markets? The
Political Economy of Immigration Policy Prior to the Thirties," NBER Working Paper 5867,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA, December.

Ward, Geoffrey. 2004. Unforgivable Blackness: The Rise and Fall of Jack Johnson. New York:
Vintage Books.

Whatley, Warren C. 1993. "African-American Strikebreaking from the Civil War to the New
Deal." Social Science History, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 525­558.
Warren, Robert Penn. 1966 [1939]. Night Rider. Nashville, Tennessee: J.S. Sanders & Company.
Weeks, Lyman Horace. 1898. The American Turf: an Historical Account of Racing In the United
States: With Biographical Sketches of Turf Celebrities. New York: The Historical Company.
Woodward, C. Vann. 1938. Tom Watson: Agrarian Rebel. New York: Macmillan.
_____. 2002 [1955]. The Strange Career of Jim Crow. Commemorative Edition. New York:
Oxford University Press.

Wright, George C. 1990. Racial Violence in Kentucky, 1865-1940: Lynchings, Mob Rule, and
"Legal Lynchings." Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press.




                                             39
Figure 1. Triple Crown Races Won by African American Jockeys,
1870-2018.




Sources and Methods: See the Appendix




                                40
Figure 2. Odds (as a probability) on the Winning Horse in the
Kentucky Derby by Ethnicity of the Jockey, 1875-1905.



80.00


70.00


60.00


50.00


40.00


30.00


20.00


10.00


 0.00
        1875
        1876
        1877
        1878
        1879
        1880
        1881
        1882
        1883
        1884
        1885
        1886
        1887
        1888
        1889
        1890
        1891
        1892
        1893
        1894
        1895
        1896
        1897
        1898
        1899
        1900
        1901
        1902
        1903
        1904
        1905
                       African American Jockey   White Jockey




Sources and Methods: See the Appendix




                                        41
Figure 3, Odds as a probability) on the Favorites in the Kentucky
Derby by Ethnicity of the Jockey, 1875-1905


80.00


70.00


60.00


50.00


40.00


30.00


20.00


10.00


 0.00
        1875
        1876
        1877
        1878
        1879
        1880
        1881
        1882
        1883
        1884
        1885
        1886
        1887
        1888
        1889
        1890
        1891
        1892
        1893
        1894
        1895
        1896
        1897
        1898
        1899
        1900
        1901
        1902
        1903
        1904
        1905
                       African American Jockey   White Jockey




Sources and Methods: See the Appendix




                                        42
Figure 4. Belmont Stakes Won by African American Jockeys.




Sources and Methods: See the Appendix




                                43
Figure 5a. The Share of African American Jockeys in All Races, 1867-
1915.


1.2




 1




0.8




0.6




0.4




0.2




 0
  1860   1865   1870   1875   1880   1885    1890   1895   1900   1905   1910   1915




Sources and Methods: See the Appendix




                                        44
Figure 5b. The Share of African American Jockeys in the Kentucky
Derby, 1875-1911.




Sources and Methods: See the Appendix




                                 45
Figure 5c. The Share of African American Jockeys in the Preakness
Stakes


0.6



0.5



0.4



0.3



0.2



0.1



 0
  1870   1875   1880   1885   1890        1895   1900   1905   1910   1915




Sources and Methods: See the Appendix




                                     46
Figure 5d. The Share of African American Jockeys in the Belmont
Stakes, 1867-1915,


0.8


0.7


0.6


0.5


0.4


0.3


0.2


0.1


 0
  1860   1865   1870   1875   1880   1885    1890   1895   1900   1905   1910   1915




Sources and Methods: See the Appendix




                                        47
Figure 6a. Payouts in the Kentucky Derby (dollars).

6000




5000




4000




3000




2000




1000




   0
    1870   1875   1880   1885   1890   1895   1900    1905   1910   1915




Sources and Methods: See the Appendix




                                  48
Figure 6b. Payouts in the Preakness Stakes (dollars).



3000




2500




2000




1500




1000




 500




   0
    1870   1875   1880   1885   1890        1895   1900   1905   1910   1915




Sources and Methods: See the Appendix




                                       49
Figure 6c. Payouts in the Belmont Stakes (dollars).



30000




25000




20000




15000




10000




 5000




   0
    1860   1865   1870   1875   1880   1885   1890   1895   1900   1905   1910   1915




Sources and Methods: See the Appendix




                                        50
Table 1. African American Jockeys in the Kentucky Derby, 1875-1911


Year          Number of   Number of       Number of       Share of Black   Improvements
              Entries     White jockeys   Black jockeys   jockeys (as a    (or setbacks)
                                                          percent)         in the final
                                                                           position of
                                                                           Black jockeys


       1875        15           2              13              87               8.5

       1876        11           6               5              45              -3.0

       1877        11           7               4              36               2.5

       1878        9            8               1              11              -1.0

       1879        9            6               3              33               4.5

       1880        4            2               2              50               2.0

       1881        6            5               1              17               0.0

       1882        14           7               7              50               5.0

       1883        7            5               2              29              -4.0

       1884        9            7               2              22              -1.5

       1885        10           7               3              30               1.0

       1886        10           6               4              40               0.0

       1887        7            4               3              43               3.5

       1888        7            5               2              29              -1.5

       1889        8            5               3              38               0.5

       1890        6            2               4              67               3.5

       1891        4            1               3              75               1.0

       1892        3            0               3              100              ...

       1893        6            3               3              50               0.0

                                    51
     1894              5               2               3              60              0.5

     1895              4               1               3              75              0.0

     1896              8               3               5              63             -2.0

     1897              6               4               2              33             -1.0

     1898              4               2               2              50              1.0

     1899              5               3               2              40              0.0

     1900              7               5               2              29              0.0

     1901              5               4               1              20              1.0

     1902              4               4               2              50              3.5

     1903              6               5               1              17             -1.0

     1904              5               5               0               0              ...

     1905              3               3               0               0              ...

     1906              6               6               0               0              ...

     1907              6               5               1              17             -1.0

     1908              8               7               1              13             -2.5

     1909             10               9               1              10              0.0

     1910              7               7               0               0              ...

     1911              7               6               1              14              2.0

   Average            7.08           4.57            2.57            36.30            .67


Note: In some cases, horses were paired in the betting. In those cases we assigned an
average rank for the pair of horses. Hence the half steps shown in the last column of the
table.

Sources and Methods: See the Appendix




                                            52
Table 2. African American Jockeys in the Preakness Stakes


  Year     Track       Number     Number       Average          Average       Improvements
                       of White   of African   probability of   Probability   in the final
                       Jockeys    American     Winning, White   of Winning,   placement of
                                  Jockeys      Jockeys (%)      African       African
                                                                American      American
                                                                Jockeys       Jockeys
                                                                (%)
  1889     Pimlico        1           1              4.76          95.24           0

  1890   Morris Park      2           2              30.62        19.38            0

  1896   Gravesend        2           2              39.82        10.18            0

  1898   Gravesend        3           1              22.99        33.33            1




Sources and Methods: See the Appendix.




                                                53
Table 3. African American Jockeys in the Belmont Stakes



                                                                Average
                                                  Average                     Improvements
                                                                Probability
                                      Number of   probability                 in the final
                            Number                              of Winning,
             Value to the             African     of Winning,                 placement of
 Race                       white                               African
             Winner                   American    White                       African
                            jockeys                             American
                                      Jockeys     Jockeys                     American
                                                                Jockeys
                                                  (%)                         Jockeys
                                                                (%)
    1869        3,350           6         2          14.2           7.4           -2.0
    1870        3,750           6         1           9.6          42.2           0.0
    1871        5,450           10        1           8.8          11.7           0.5
    1874        4,200           8         1         12.23         2.174            0
    1875        4,450           13        1           6.7          13.4           0.5
    1889        4,960           2         1          25.6          48.8           -1.0
    1890        8,560           5         4           9.3          13.3           -2.0
    1891        5,070           3         3           9.5          23.9           -1.0
    1893        5,314           3         2          26.5          10.2           2.0
    1894        6,680           1         2           7.4          46.3           1.0
    1895        2,700           4         1          20.9          16.5           -0.5
    1896        3,025           3         1          13.9          58.3           -1.0
    1897        3,350           4         2          16.4          17.3           -0.5
    1908       12,285           3         1          32.4           2.9            0

                                       Average          15.2       22.5           -0.3



Note: Only years in which an African American jockeys rode are included.


Sources and Methods: See the Appendix.




                                          54
Table 4. Summary Statistics of Key Variables




Variable                        Mean           Std.Dev.   Minimum   Maximum

% Black Jockeys ­ All           0.1834         0.2434     0         1

% Black Jockeys ­ Derby         0.3794         0.2502     0         1

Proximity to 1892 ­ All         0.9953         0.0027     0.9894    1

Proximity to 1892 - Derby       0.9955         0.0027     0.9910    1

Populist Vote - All             0.1905         0.2030     0.00001   1

Populist Vote - Derby           0.2098         0.2098     0.00001   1

Voter Suppression Laws - All    1.3333         1.2601     0         4.3333

Voter Suppression Laws - Derby 1.3333          1.2472     0         4.33

Number of Horses ­ All          6.1531         2.9370     2         15

Number of Horses - Derby        7.1212         2.8696     3         15

Payout ­ All                    3639.71        2637.82    904       15,381.76

Payout ­ Derby                  3596.43        499.43     2216.42   4560.00




Sources and Methods: See the Appendix.




                                         55
Table 5. Determinants of the Representation of African American Jockeys


Variable            All Races-1      All Races-2     Derby Only-1   Derby Only-2

Number of Horses    0.0131           0.0164          0.0108         0.0417*
                    (1.07)           (1.47)          (0.66)         (3.13)

Proximity to 1892   43.6160*                         42.1710*
                    (3.67)                           (2.28)

Post-1900           -0.2130*         -0.3114*        -0.2176*       -0.2571*

                    (-2.61)          (-3.63)         (-2.05)        (-3.26)

Kentucky Derby      0.4001*          0.4672*
                    (5.28)           (5.95)

Preakness           -0.1698          -0.0275
                    (-1.93)          (-0.26)

Payout ($000s)                       -0.0166                        -0.1195*
                                     (-0.99)                        (-2.05)

Populist vote                        0.5774*                        0.7081*
                                     (3.68)                         (4.16)

Voter suppression                    0.1027*                        0.0678*
Laws
                                     (3.69)                         (2.79)

Constant            -43.4862*        -0.4526*        -41.6256       0.3344
                    (-3.66)          (-3.19)         (-2.25)        (1.26)

Number              116              116             37             33
Observations

Likelihood Ratio 2 80.34*            91.69*          23.87*         41.66*


Sources and Methods: See the Appendix.




                                         56
Table 6a. The Likelihood that African American Jockeys finish "In the Money":
All Races

Variable

Number of Horses         -0.1048***         -0.1044***       -0.1036***
                         (-5.66)            (-5.63)          (-5.57)
Probability of Winning   0.0478***          0.0456***        0.0446***
                         (9.73)             (9.19)           (8.72)
Black Jockey             0.2027                              -0.1667
                         (1.42)                              (-0.68)
Black Jockey x                              0.0242**         0.0340*
Probability of Winning                      (2.20)           (1.85)
Constant                 -0.0113            0.0064           0.0227
                         (-0.06)            (0.04)           (0.13)
Observations             720                261              720
Likelihood Ratio (2)     236.66***          240.12***        240.60***




                                       57
Table 6b. The Likelihood that African American Jockeys finish "In the Money":
Kentucky Derby Only

 Variable

 Number of Horses          -0.0859***            -0.0789**       -0.0784**
                           (-2.73)               (-2.51)         (-2.45)
 Probability of Winning    0.0484***             0.0429***       0.0426***
                           (6.27)                (5.46)          (5.08)
 Black Jockey              0.3261*                               -0.0264
                           (1.76)                                (-0.09)
 Black Jockey x                                  0.0308**        0.0322*
 Probability of Winning                          (2.27)          (1.54)
 Constant                  -0.2799               -0.2614         -0.2583
                           (-0.91)               (-0.85)         (0.84)
 Observations              261                                   720
 Likelihood Ratio ( )
                    2
                           80.79***              83.39***        83.40***
Sources and Methods: See the Appendix.
*Significant at 10%; **Significant at 5%; ***Significant at 1%




                                            58
