 THE IMPACT OF ORGANIZATIONAL BOUNDARIES
ON HEALTHCARE COORDINATION AND UTILIZATION
                  Leila Agha
             Keith Marzilli Ericson
                  Xiaoxi Zhao
           WORKING PAPER 28179
                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE IMPACT OF ORGANIZATIONAL BOUNDARIES ON HEALTHCARE COORDINATION
                          AND UTILIZATION

                                        Leila Agha
                                   Keith Marzilli Ericson
                                        Xiaoxi Zhao

                                    Working Paper 28179
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w28179


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2020




The authors gratefully acknowledge research support by NIH grant P30AG012810. We thank
Mohan Ramanujan, Len McCain and Elizabeth Adams for their assistance obtaining and
managing the data. We thank Jason Abaluck, Amitabh Chandra, Kimberley Geissler, Thomas
Koch, Jennifer Kwok, James Rebitzer, Adam Sacarny, Jonathan Skinner, Jessica Van Parys, and
Annetta Zhou for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Leila Agha, Keith Marzilli Ericson, and Xiaoxi Zhao. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Organizational Boundaries on Healthcare Coordination and Utilization
Leila Agha, Keith Marzilli Ericson, and Xiaoxi Zhao
NBER Working Paper No. 28179
December 2020
JEL No. D23,I11,L14

                                          ABSTRACT

Patients often receive healthcare from providers spread across different firms. Transaction costs,
imperfect information, and other frictions can make it difficult to coordinate production across
firm boundaries, but we do not know how these challenges affect healthcare. We define and
measure organizational concentration: the distribution across organizations of a patient's
healthcare. Medicare claims show that organizational concentration varies substantially across
physicians and regions, and that patients who move to more concentrated regions have lower
healthcare utilization. Further, we show that when primary care physicians (PCPs) with higher
organizational concentration exit the local market, their patients switch to more typical PCPs with
lower organizational concentration and then have higher healthcare utilization. Patients who
switch to a PCP with 1 SD higher organizational concentration have 10% lower healthcare
utilization. This finding is robust to controlling for the spread of patient care across providers.
Increases in organizational concentration have no detectable effect on emergency department
utilization or hospitalization rates, but do predict improvements in diabetes care.

Leila Agha                                             Xiaoxi Zhao
Department of Economics                                Boston University
Dartmouth College                                      xiaoxiz@bu.edu
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
leila.agha@dartmouth.edu

Keith Marzilli Ericson
Boston University Questrom School of Business
595 Commonwealth Avenue
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
kericson@bu.edu
Introduction
Transaction costs and imperfect information can make it difficult to coordinate production
across firm boundaries (Coase 1937; Williamson 1985). The determinants of firm boundaries
have been the subject of substantial theoretical and empirical investigation, particularly in
the literature on vertical integration (Lafontaine and Slade 2007). Yet, we know less about
how firm boundaries affect the firm performance (Mullainathan and Scharfstein 2001). and
empirical studies from different industries find mixed results.1
    In healthcare, the challenges of cross-firm coordination are particularly salient; patient
care is often produced with the input of many healthcare providers working in separate orga-
nizations. Geographically and over time, there is substantial variation in the organizational
structures those providers operate in. An increasing fraction of US physicians is employed by
large practices or hospitals (Welch et al. 2013), which may mitigate these coordination chal-
lenges. Integrated care organizations such as the Mayo Clinic, Intermountain Healthcare,
and Kaiser Permanente are often held up as models of clinical efficiency and coordinated care
(Enthoven 2009). Yet empirical evidence on how organizational boundaries affect healthcare
productivity is limited.
    In this paper, we investigate how organizational boundaries affect healthcare utilization.
Existing evidence has shown that when coordination of care is more difficult, healthcare uti-
lization tends to be higher. These coordination challenges can emerge when healthcare for
an individual patient is spread across many individual providers (Agha et al. 2019; Frandsen
et al. 2015), or when provider teams have fewer repeat interactions (Agha et al. 2018; Kim
et al. 2020; Chen 2020). Cebul et al. (2008) argue that fragmentation across organizations
may also be an important source of healthcare inefficiency. Organizational boundaries can
affect the coordination costs; e.g., healthcare firms often restrict information transmission to
external providers by limiting transfer across electronic medical record systems. Providers
may invest in firm-specific relationships and infrastructure that improve productivity (Huck-
man and Pisano 2006). Finally, organizational fragmentation can affect incentives for clini-
cal process improvement and other efficiency-enhancing investments due to common agency
problems and spillovers that prevent firms from reaping the full benefit of their investments
(Frandsen et al. 2019).
    We introduce the concept of "organizational concentration," which measures the distribu-
tion of a patient's outpatient visits across organizations. A patient's healthcare has maximal
organizational concentration if all of their outpatient care is billed by the same organization.
  1
   For example, see Seru (2014); Pierce (2012); Stroebel (2016); Forbes and Lederman (2010); Forman and
Gron (2011).



                                                  1
This construct builds on earlier work studying provider concentration (Pollack et al. 2016;
Agha et al. 2019). Organizational concentration describes the realized experience of a given
patient, and so is distinct from market concentration measures used in antitrust research,
which instead measure provider market power for pricing. Patients who receive all their
healthcare from one firm will have high organizational concentration even if there are many
firms in the market. Conversely, a patient may have low organizational concentration in a
highly concentrated market if they receive healthcare from many different specialty practices,
even if each practice has a monopoly in that specialty.
    To our knowledge, we are the first paper to measure organizational concentration system-
atically, so we begin with a detailed descriptive analysis. Using a 20% sample of insurance
claims for Medicare fee-for-service enrollees from 2007-2016, we construct a measure of each
patient's experienced organizational concentration. There is substantial heterogeneity across
regions in organizational concentration, even conditional on the spread of patient care across
providers. Studying patients who move across regions, we find that moving to a location
with a higher level of organizational concentration is associated with lower healthcare utiliza-
tion. While these results suggest that organizational concentration leads to lower healthcare
spending, they should be interpreted with caution because other attributes of regional prac-
tice style and place effects may be correlated with the level of organizational concentration.
    To isolate variation in organizational concentration from other aspects of the local prac-
tice environment, we exploit quasi-experimental variation in patient assignment to physicians
generated by physician exits. We examine the experiences of patients whose primary care
provider (PCP) exits the local market, either due to a move or retirement, following recent
work by Fadlon and Van Parys (2020) and Kwok (2019). Since patients may endogenously
sort to new PCPs on the basis of changes in their health status, we use an instrumental
variable strategy that leverages mean reversion to predict the change in a patient's as-
signed PCP's average organizational concentration, adapting the approach used by Laird
and Nielsen (2017) and Abaluck et al. (2020). When PCPs with low organizational con-
centration exit the market, their patients switch to more typical PCPs with higher average
concentration and subsequently experience lower healthcare utilization. Using this variation,
we estimate that patients who switch to a PCP with 1 SD higher organizational concentra-
tion have 10% lower healthcare utilization in our preferred, most controlled specification.
This finding is robust to controlling for the number and types of providers that the patient
visits.
    Our results indicate that organizational boundaries contribute additional frictions that
lower the efficiency of healthcare provision, and this pattern does not simply reflect the
challenges of spreading care across multiple providers. Although we cannot fully isolate


                                               2
a PCP's tendency for organizational concentration from every other possible dimension of
PCP practice style, our estimated effect remains large in specifications that control for the
spread of patient care across providers, the size of the PCP's practice group, as well as other
PCP characteristics (residency training, experience, gender). To the extent that observable
variables are informative about selection on unobservables, this supports the claim that
organizational concentration is an important independent contributor to spending variation
(Oster 2019).
    Finally, we investigate how organizational concentration influences quality of care. We
use several measures related to distinct dimensions of healthcare quality, spanning gaps in
primary care, appropriate management of chronic conditions, and repeated testing. We find
no strong evidence that changes in PCP organizational concentration predict changes in
inpatient or emergency department visits, or labs. However, for patients with a chronic con-
dition (diabetes), switching to a PCP with higher levels of organizational concentration leads
to better adherence to recommended care guidelines. This finding from diabetes care pro-
vides suggestive evidence that greater organizational concentration may facilitate improved
management of chronic conditions. We also find suggestive evidence that spending higher
organizational concentration reduces claims for diagnostic imaging.
    High levels of organizational concentration arise when most of the providers a patient con-
sults are integrated within the same firm. Our research is motivated by earlier work finding
the effects of firm integration on productive efficiency are theoretically ambiguous. Bring-
ing transactions into the same firm could improve communication (Arrow 1975) and reduce
contracting barriers (Hart and Moore 1990; Hart and Holmstrom 2010). On the other hand,
integration may also lead resources within the firm to be allocated less efficiently (Alonso
et al. 2008; Friebel and Raith 2010). Moreover, integration may improve coordination in
stable environments but lead to worse adaptation to change (Dessein 2014).
    Empirical evidence from other industries on how integration affects firm performance
has found mixed results. Mullainathan and Scharfstein (2001), Seru (2014), and Pierce
(2012) document downsides to integration including less efficient capacity management, lower
innovation, and insufficient knowledge sharing. By contrast, Stroebel (2016), Forbes and
Lederman (2010), Forman and Gron (2011) find benefits of firm integration including superior
information, better performance, and faster technology adoption. Atalay et al. (2014) argue
that integration facilitates the efficient intrafirm transfer of intangible inputs, such as high
quality managerial oversight and planning. We build on this literature by studying how firm
boundaries affect health care delivery, a setting where the potential benefits of improved
coordination, knowledge-sharing, and management are high, and rich insurance claims data
allows us to track the production process.


                                               3
     Within healthcare, there is limited evidence on how the integration of healthcare providers
affects care delivery. Although large consolidated practice groups argue they can deliver
lower cost, higher quality healthcare through improved coordination, leveraging returns to
specialization, and facilitating fixed cost investments, empirical evidence of these benefits is
limited (Cutler and Scott Morton 2013). Recent work suggests that hospital mergers and
acquisitions of physician practices do not spur improvements in clinical quality or health
outcomes (Beaulieu et al. 2020; Koch et al. 2018).2 We build on this research by studying
changes in the extent to which individual patient care crosses firm boundaries, rather than
focusing on short-run effects of mergers and acquisitions. Care coordination depends on the
ease of communication across multiple providers who treat the same patient, but mergers
may simply bring competing providers--who rarely would have treated the same patient--
into the same firm. Further, the process of organizational transformation is often slow.
Because this paper does not focus on short-run effects of mergers, the effects we study may
reflect longer-run operational changes associated with integration.
     This paper is also related to a growing literature investigating differences in practice
patterns across individual physicians. Across a variety of care contexts, individual physician
quality and practice style have important effects on care outcomes.3 Recent work by Kwok
(2019) and Fadlon and Van Parys (2020) documents that primary care physicians in partic-
ular have substantial influence on patients' healthcare spending. We build on this insight by
investigating one important dimension of PCP practice environment and referral patterns,
i.e. the PCP's tendency to concentrate patient care within organizations.
     The paper is organized as follows. Section 1 introduces our measure of organizational
concentration. Section 2 describes our data and sample selection. Section 3 reports descrip-
tive statistics on regional variation in organizational concentration and uses movers between
regions to explore how regional variation in organizational concentration may contribute to
regional variation in healthcare utilization. Section 4 lays out our main empirical strat-
egy exploiting PCP exits to explore the impact of organizational concentration. Section 5
presents the results on how healthcare utilization and quality outcomes change when a pa-
tient switches to a PCP with a different level of organizational concentration. Section 6
concludes.
   2
      These acquisitions may even raise healthcare spending, as physicians shift the site of care from doctors'
offices to hospital outpatient settings (Koch et al. 2017) and exploit reimbursement rules that allow hospital-
owned physician practices to charge additional facility fees (Capps et al. 2018).
    3
      For example, see Gowrisankaran et al. (2017); Molitor (2018); Chan et al. (2019); Currie and MacLeod
(2017); Currie et al. (2016); Sahni et al. (2016).




                                                      4
1         Defining Organizational Concentration
In this project, we study the coordination frictions that arise when healthcare is spread
across organizational boundaries. To do so, we define organizational concentration, adapt-
ing a concentration index that has been used in prior literature to measure the spread of
patient care across providers.4 Specifically, we use a Herfindahl­Hirschman Index (HHI)
that calculates how outpatient healthcare received by a patient is spread across organiza-
tions. We measure organizational concentration using outpatient care, following previous
literature defining continuity of outpatient care across individual physicians (Nyweide and
Bynum 2017; Nyweide et al. 2013). This allows us to consider the impact of outpatient orga-
nizational concentration on the likelihood that a patient requires an emergency department
visit or hospitalization.
    We calculate patient i's share of outpatient visits at each organization j , in a year t.
Organizational concentration is then defined as the sum of squared shares across all the
organizations:
                                  OrgConcit =      share2 ijt .                          (1)
                                                            j

In general, organizational concentration is higher when a patient visits fewer organizations.
When a patient's outpatient visits are uniformly distributed across N organizations, this
measure is simply 1/N . When a patient receives all the visits from one organization, this
concentration measure will be 1. Lower values correspond to patient care that is spread more
diffusely across organizations.
    For some analyses, we aggregate organizational concentration up to at the hospital re-
ferral region (HRR) level. In our primary empirical strategy, we aggregate organizational
concentration up to the PCP level.

Defining provider concentration

To distinguish our findings from prior analyses, we study variation in organizational con-
centration conditional on provider concentration: the spread of patient healthcare across
providers. Following Agha et al. (2019), we construct a measure of provider care concentra-
tion where the shareipt measures the share of patient i's outpatient visits in year t for each
provider p:
                              P roviderConcit =      share2ipt .                           (2)
                                                                p

    4
        Pollack et al. (2016) provides an overview and comparison of commonly used measures of care continuity.




                                                        5
This measure will capture the challenges of coordinating healthcare across many providers,
thus allowing us to distinguish them from the frictions that are specific to crossing organi-
zational boundaries.


2       Data and Sample Construction
2.1     Patient sample selection
Our primary source of data is a 20% sample of Medicare Fee-For-Service (FFS) Part A
and Part B claims data from 2007-2016. The 10-year panel data allows us to observe both
patient moves and PCP exits. We use the Carrier, Inpatient, and Outpatient claims files
to measure care utilization and spending.5 Patient demographics (age, sex, zip code) and
chronic conditions are extracted from the Master Beneficiary Summary file with the Chronic
Condition segment. In the remainder of this section, we describe the sample restrictions
implemented to construct our main analytic samples.

Initial sample restrictions

We restrict our sample to Medicare beneficiaries who are 66­99 years old (inclusive) and
continuously enrolled in Medicare FFS. After these restrictions, our data covers 9,356,144
beneficiaries. Our organizational concentration measure is defined based on outpatient site
of care visits billed in the Carrier claims files, so we drop 223,822 beneficiaries who did not
have any visits of this type. This comprises our Broad Sample. From this broad sample, we
define two separate analytic samples for different purposes. First, we define a "Patient Mover
Sample" for a descriptive analysis studying regional variation in organizational concentration.
Second, we define a "PCP Exit Sample" for our primary analysis studying the relationship
between PCPs' organizational concentration and patient care utilization. We describe each
of these samples below.

Patient Mover Sample

We construct a Patient Mover Sample for our initial descriptive analysis. Sample restrictions
defined here follow the construction process outlined in Agha et al. (2019). We assigned each
patient to a hospital referral region (HRR) on an annual basis, using the zip code reported in
    5
     The Inpatient file contains institutional inpatient claims, and the Outpatient file contains claims from
institutional outpatient providers such as hospital outpatient departments or community mental health
centers. The Carrier file contains non-institutional claims billed by individual providers such as physicians,
and these claims can result from services provided at either outpatient or inpatient settings.



                                                      6
the Beneficiary Summary File. Further, we require that the patient received at least 75% of
billed claims within that HRR; we drop beneficiaries who do not meet this requirement. To
be included as a mover, the patient's HRR must have changed once (and only once) in our
10-year period. Further, the beneficiary must be continuously in the sample from two years
before their move to two years after. Our sample includes all moving patients who meet these
criteria as well as a 25% random sample of non-movers (whose HRR never changed during
this time period); non-movers contribute toward covariate identification. The final Patient
Mover Sample includes 25,592 mover beneficiaries and 1,364,198 non-mover beneficiaries.

PCP Exit Sample

Next, we construct our PCP Exit Sample for our main analysis. This analysis focuses
on beneficiaries who change their attributed PCP due to the original PCP's relocation or
retirement. We use provider taxonomies to distinguish primary care specialties from other
types of providers. The provider taxonomy codes used for this categorization are reported
in Table A1 and include codes for internal medicine, family medicine, pediatrics, geriatrics,
and general practice. Provider taxonomy codes are the primary specialty code from the
National Plan and Provider Enumeration System (NPPES), which is linked to our sample
by providers' National Provider Identifier (NPI). We attribute each patient to their plurality
PCP in each year, defined as the provider who bills a plurality of the patient's Evaluation
& Management (E&M) visits that year; ties are broken randomly. We exclude patients who
have no E&M visits and thus cannot be matched to a provider, as well as patients whose
plurality provider does not report a primary care specialty. If a patient cannot be matched
to a PCP according to this algorithm, they will be excluded from the PCP Exit Sample.
    We limit this analysis to patients whose initial attributed PCP either moved (i.e. relo-
cated once to a different HRR) or retired (i.e. bills no further Medicare claims). We also
exclude patients who move across HRRs themselves or who have ever changed their PCP in
our sample period prior to the exit of their assigned original PCPs. The PCP Exit Sample
includes 62,924 beneficiaries and 335,868 beneficiary-year observations. These patients are
initially attributed to one of 4365 relocating PCPs or 11,437 retiring PCPs; including both
the exiting PCPs and the destination PCPs, this sample covers 52,981 PCPs.


2.2    Measuring organizational concentration
Measuring Organizations

The next step is to construct our measure of organizational concentration. We begin by
identifying provider organizations delivering outpatient care to each patient. We limit to

                                              7
provider services billed in the Carrier claims file and provided in an outpatient setting. The
outpatient setting is identified using the place of service code listed on the Carrier file claims;
a complete list of places of service codes is in Appendix Table A2. We then define a visit
by aggregating claims to a unique provider-date pair. About 85% of visits measured in the
Carrier claim file are classified as outpatient visits.
     We use the federal tax ID numbers (TINs) associated with each Carrier file claim to
identify provider organizations. Our sample covers 447,009 TINs. TINs provide a measure
of financial organization, with integrated physician practices typically billing under a unique
TIN, although some large provider groups may organize themselves into subsidiaries, billing
under separate TINs (Baker et al. 2016). In these cases, TINs may still delineate organi-
zational boundaries within the firm, even though they are not a perfect measure of firm
boundaries.
     We calculate organizational concentration at the patient-year level following the definition
in equation 1 and the descriptions in Section 1. To construct these regional and shrunk PCP-
level averages, we include our full initial sample of Medicare beneficiaries before implementing
any of the specialized restrictions for the Mover or PCP Exit analysis samples.
     We find that our baseline TIN-based measure of organizational concentration is highly
correlated with an alternative definition based on physicians' reported organizational ties in
the CMS Physician Compare database. Physician Compare data is only available for the
final three years of our sample (2014-2016), so we cannot use it as our baseline analysis
which tracks organizational concentration over a longer time period. In years where both
measures are available, we use the affiliations reported in Physician Compare to construct
an alternative measure of organizational ties, and compare this to our baseline TIN-based
definition. The organizational concentration measures are correlated at 0.95 when averaged
at the HRR level, and are correlated at 0.85 when averaged at the PCP level (prior to any
shrinkage).
     Earlier work by Baker et al. (2014), Austin and Baker (2015) and Baker et al. (2020)
has also used TINs to measure local competition across physician provider groups. This
research has shown that areas with higher market concentration pay higher prices for physi-
cian services. While this prior work suggests that providers sharing the same TINs are able
to leverage oligopoly power in areas with high market concentration, our paper will test
whether TIN-based measures of business organization are predictive of clinical integration
that may yield offsetting benefits for patients and payers.




                                                8
Aggregating organizational concentration to the HRR-level and PCP-levels

To characterize the pattern of organizational concentration at the hospital referral region
(HRR) level we average the patient-level measures across all patients within the relevant
region.
    Our primary empirical strategy exploits variation in PCPs' tendencies towards organi-
zational concentration. The average patient in our sample is seen by a PCP who has 35
other attributed patients in the same year. To account for statistical noise in PCP organi-
zational concentration, we apply a conventional empirical Bayes correction (Morris 1983).
This correction shrinks the estimated PCP concentration towards the year-specific mean, in
proportion to the amount of estimation error.6
    To investigate the degree of shrinkage, we calculate "pseudo shrinkage coefficients" for
organizational concentration, defined as each physician's demeaned Bayesian posterior di-
vided by the demeaned raw (not shrunk) estimate. A coefficient of one implies no shrinkage.
The median coefficient is 0.89, with the 10th percentile at 0.63 and the 90th percentile at
0.99. This distribution suggests modest shrinkage, consistent with the high correlation (0.97)
between the raw and shrunk measures.
    For regression analyses at the HRR and PCP level, we exclusively rely on jackknifed
versions of these organizational concentration measures that omit the index patient to avoid
bias driven by an individual patient's need for more specialized care.
    Paralleling the procedure for organizational concentration, we calculate regional and
provider level measures of provider concentration to include as a control in some regres-
sions. This measure is also jackknifed, and the PCP level provider concentration is also
shrunk with an empirical Bayes procedure.


2.3     Outcome measures
Our primary outcome variable is a patient's annual healthcare utilization, which aggregates
a patient's spending across the Medicare Inpatient, Outpatient and Carrier claim files. Uti-
lization measures are constructed using a fixed set of annual Medicare prices expunged of
regional price adjusters.7
   6
     To implement the empirical Bayes correction, we estimate a random effects model where patient-level
organizational concentration depends on year fixed effects and PCP-year random effects. To achieve jack-
knifing, we omit the index patient from this regression. We recover empirical Bayes estimates of PCP-year
organizational concentration as the sum of the year fixed effect and the best linear unbiased predictor of the
PCP-year random effect.
   7
     Medicare prices include some regional adjustments on the basis of local wage indices, and we do not
want this source of regional variation in wage indices to confound the relationship between organizational
concentration and spending. Following Finkelstein et al. (2016), we adjust total spending to strip away



                                                      9
    We also study the relationship between organizational concentration and several utilization-
based measures of healthcare quality. We study two measures related to the use of hospital
care: a binary indicator for any inpatient hospitalization, and a binary indicator for any
emergency department (ED) visit. Following Venkatesh et al. (2017), we define ED visits as
any Carrier claim with a HCPCS code for E&M care in an ED setting. One potential cost
of poorly coordinated care is additional low-value or duplicative imaging tests. We define
an imaging test as repeated if it follows a prior test on the same body part with the same
imaging modality within 30 days. Lastly, we examine the effects of organizational concen-
tration on the indicators of healthcare quality for patients with diabetes: HbA1c test, and
LDL test. These outcomes are only defined for the sub-sample of patients with diabetes, as
defined by the Chronic Condition Warehouse; tests are identified with HCPCS codes.


3     Descriptive Evidence on Organizational Concentra-
      tion
3.1     Summary statistics
Table 1 provides summary statistics for the Broad Sample (column 1), the Patient Mover
Sample (column 2), and the PCP Exit Sample (column 3). Summary statistics suggest these
samples are broadly similar. The average level of organizational concentration is 0.45, demon-
strating that most patients regularly seek outpatient care across multiple organizations. The
average level of provider concentration is lower than average organizational concentration
at 0.38, as expected given that patients will often see multiple providers within the same
organization. Average care utilization is $8641 per year; utilization is lower in the PCP exit
sample, perhaps in part due to the disruptive impact of PCP exits.
    Appendix Table A3 further reports the mean and standard deviation of the patient-level,
PCP level, and HRR level measures of organizational concentration, provider concentration,
and total utilization. We use the standard deviations reported here to interpret the scale
of our regression results. The empirical Bayes procedure recovers an estimate of the true
standard deviation of organizational concentration across PCPs; as expected the adjusted
standard deviation of 0.13 is slightly lower than that of the raw means (0.16).
    Large variation between regions in healthcare usage suggests that some regions may
be inefficient (Skinner 2011), and prior research has sought to explain why this variation
exists (e.g. Cutler et al. (2019); Molitor (2018); Frakes (2013); Finkelstein et al. (2016)).
variation that is due to regional price adjustments.



                                                       10
We examine how organizational concentration varies across regions in Figure 1. This map
displays residual variation in organizational concentration across regions, after accounting
for the role of provider concentration, age, sex, and race. As shown in the map, the West
and Upper Midwest have higher organizational concentration than would be predicted by
their provider concentration and demographics, while the South and Mid Atlantic have lower
organizational concentration.
    Figure 2 shows binned scatter plots relating organizational concentration and total health-
care spending. In Panel A, the observation is the regional (HRR) average, while in Panel B,
the observation is the average of patients attributed to the same PCP. Panel A illustrates
that regions with higher organizational concentration have lower levels of care utilization on
average; we will investigate this relationship in more detail with our analysis of patients who
move across regions, while Panel B shows that patients of PCPs with higher organizational
concentration have lower levels of healthcare utilization. These patterns motivate our study
of PCP exits in Section 4.
    The patterns uncovered in these descriptive graphs motivate our analytic approach. First,
they suggest a link between organizational concentration and care utilization, which we will
investigate for the remainder of this paper. Second, it will be important to separate organiza-
tional concentration from variation in provider concentration; we focus on residual variation
in organizational concentration conditional on provider concentration. Finally, given the
possible endogenous link between patient health status and organizational concentration, we
focus on econometric strategies which allow us to plausibly isolate the supply-side variation
in organizational concentration from variation in patient demand for care.


3.2    Regional variation in organizational concentration and patient
       moves
Previous work has examined patients who move between regions to identify the effect of
regional practice variation on spending (Finkelstein et al. 2016; Agha et al. 2019). Here,
we use the same mover design to examine how regional organizational concentration corre-
lates with the care received by moving patients. When moving between regions, patients
are exposed to a change in the local pattern of organizational concentration. We provide
descriptive evidence on the possible role of organizational concentration in shaping regional
differences in care. Following prior work, we run regressions of the form:

         Yit =    1 OrgConcregion(i) × postit + 2 P roviderConcregion(i) × postit
                  +xit  + i + t + (i,t) +    it                                            (3)


                                              11
where Yit is the outcome of interest, OrgConcregion(i) is the change in regional organiza-
tional concentration experienced when patient i moves, and P roviderConcregion(i) is the
change in regional provider concentration experienced when the patient moves. We also
include: xit , a vector of age fixed effects (in 5 year bins); i , an individual fixed effect; t , a
year fixed effect; and (i,t) , a vector of event-time fixed effects indicating the year relative to
the patient move.
    Figure 3 presents event study graphs and shows that when patients move to a region with
higher average organizational concentration, they experience an immediate and persistent
increase in their individual organizational concentration. Table 2 reports the regression
results, summarizing how changes in regional average organizational concentration translate
into individual patients' experiences when they move. If all regional variation were due to
differences in the types of patients that lived in each region, then we would expect zero
pass-through, while if movers fully adopted the average patterns of care in each region they
lived, we would expect 100% pass-through. The regression in column 1 shows that about
80% of the regional difference in organizational concentration translates into patient-level
changes in organizational concentration.
    The final columns of Table 2 show how moving to a region with a different level of average
organizational concentration is associated with changes in total care utilization. Column 2
shows that moving to a region with 1 standard deviation (SD) greater regional organizational
concentration (an increase of 0.05) is associated with a 4.6% decline in total utilization.
However, we know that changes in regional organizational concentration are also correlated
with changes in regional provider concentration. Column 3 adds a control for the region's
provider concentration, and finds that the relationship between organizational concentration
and total utilization diminishes only slightly: a 1 SD increase in regional organizational
concentration is associated with a 3.7% decline in total utilization. These results suggest
that the spread of patient care across distinct organizations is an important predictor of
regional variation in health care utilization.


4     Identification Strategy: PCP Exits
In the previous section, we described how regional variation in organizational concentration
predicts spending outcomes. The hurdle for interpreting these findings is that regional orga-
nizational concentration may also be correlated with other features of the local healthcare
environment. To address this concern, we turn to our study of PCP exits. When a PCP
exits a local market, due to a retirement or long-distance move, that PCP's patients must
find new care providers within their local market. This natural experiment allows us to

                                                12
study exogenous variation in PCP practice style holding constant many features of the local
healthcare market.
    Organizational concentration may depend on a patient's PCP for a few reasons. First,
PCPs may deliberately choose to refer preferentially to other providers within a multispe-
cialty practice. In addition, PCPs themselves may be affiliated with a large organization
that is tied to many local specialists, increasing the organizational concentration that would
occur even without preferential referrals. We characterize each PCP's practice pattern with
their average organizational concentration. We then test what happens to patient-level or-
ganizational concentration and healthcare utilization when a PCP exit forces the patient to
switch to a new PCP with a different level of organizational concentration.
    Our study of PCP exits thus analyzes how changes in the organizational concentration
of a patient's assigned PCP affects the patient's outcomes. Because we observe patients
who switch PCPs, we can include patient fixed effects in our regression model to control for
any fixed patient attributes that influence their healthcare utilization. However, patients
may endogenously sort to new PCPs on the basis of changes in their demand for care. For
instance, patients who have gotten sicker may deliberately seek out multispecialty practices
or well-known health systems when their original PCP exits. This type of sorting would
bias our estimation of how organizational concentration affects healthcare spending within a
difference-in-differences framework, since patient fixed effects would not adequately capture
changes over time. As a result, we focus our analysis on an instrumental variables strategy
adapted from Laird and Nielsen (2017) and Abaluck et al. (2020).
    Our instrumental variables (IV) approach exploits the statistical property of mean rever-
sion to predict the change in the organizational concentration of a patient's assigned PCP
after their original PCP exits. Patients whose initial PCP was highly concentrated will on
average experience a decrease in their PCP's organizational concentration when they switch
providers. Patients whose initial PCP had low concentration will on average experience an
increase in their PCP's organizational concentration.
    The exclusion restriction for this identification strategy requires that changes in patient
demand for care are not endogenously related to the level of organizational concentration of
the original PCP. While we cannot test this assumption directly, we investigate event-study
graphs to assess whether patients with different original PCP organizational concentration
are on differential trends prior to that PCP's exit. The monotonicity assumption for this
strategy requires that having an original PCP with high organizational concentration can
only increase the probability that the patient experiences a decline in the PCP organizational
concentration after the original PCP exits. This should hold when patients use a similar
approach to selecting their second PCP as they applied when searching for the original PCP.


                                              13
We discuss these IV assumptions in more detail in the next section.


4.1     Estimating equations
To fix ideas, we consider first a simple difference-in-difference regression, noting that the
change in PCP organizational concentration is potentially endogenous. We then lay out our
IV regression equations. Letting i index patients, t index calendar years, and  index years
relative to the exit of an patient's PCP, the difference-in-difference equation we estimate is:

               Yit =     1 OrgConcP CP (i) × postit + xit  + i + t + (i,t) +            it           (4)

where Yit denotes a patient-level, time-varying outcome; in our baseline specifications, we
consider two outcomes, the patient's total healthcare utilization and the patient's experi-
enced organizational concentration. We define OrgConcP CP (i) as the difference between
the destination PCP's organizational concentration in the year after the move minus the
origin PCP's organizational concentration in the year before the move : OrgConcP CP (i) =
OrgConcdestinationP CP (i, +1) - OrgConcoriginP CP (i, -1) . The new PCP is defined as the pa-
tient's plurality provider in the year following his original PCP's exit. This is interacted with
the indicator variable, postit , equal to 1 in periods after a patient's original PCP has exited,
and zero otherwise. As a result, the coefficient 1 identifies how changes in care utilization
before and after PCP exit relate to changes in PCP organizational concentration practice
style. 8
    The regression controls for individual patient fixed effects i and year fixed effects t , as
well a time-varying patient characteristic (age) in xit . The regression also includes a vector
of event time fixed effects (i,t) indicating the year relative to the PCP exit event; these
controls will account for any differential trends or disruption in care when PCPs exit that
are experienced uniformly by all patients whose physician exits, regardless of the exiting
physician's specific practice style.
    The challenge to interpreting this difference-in-differences regression is that patients may
endogenously sort to new PCPs on the basis of changes in their health status. To over-
come this identification challenge, we do not estimate the difference-in-differences regression
directly, but instead focus on an instrumental variables strategy.
    When a patient's PCP exits the market due to a retirement or long-distance move, the
patient is forced to find a new provider. On average, patients tend to switch to more typical
providers. This pattern implies that a patient's lagged PCP exit will predict their care
   8
    Recall, the PCP's organizational concentration measures are defined in a jackknifed manner that omits
the index patient from the calculation to avoid mechanical endogeneity.


                                                   14
utilization differentially depending on the organizational concentration of their exiting PCP.
This insight underlies our instrumental variables strategy, which builds on recent work with
similar instruments by Abaluck et al. (2020) and Laird and Nielsen (2017). Our first stage
equation uses the initial PCP's organizational concentration, denoted OrgConcP CP (i),initial ,
to predict the change in organizational concentration when the initial provider exits:

                                                        o
                   OrgConcP CP (i) × postit =           1 OrgConcP CP (i),initial × postit
                                                        +xit  o + i
                                                                  o   o
                                                                    + t   o
                                                                        + i,t +       o
                                                                                      it .               (5)

With the fitted values from this first stage equation, we construct a two-stage least squares
estimate of equation 4.
    Interpreting 1 from our instrumental variable estimates as the average causal impact of
the PCP's organizational concentration on individual outcomes requires several assumptions,
which we describe here. Under the assumption of constant treatment effects, assumptions
1 and 2 below suffice to recover treatment effects of being treated by a PCP with higher
organizational concentration. If there are heterogeneous treatment effects, then assumptions
3 and 4 are needed to ensure that we recover average treatment effects.9 Finally, assumption
5 is needed to interpret PCP organizational concentration (rather than another correlated
dimension of PCP practice style) as the underlying reason for the differences in patient care
utilization.

  1. First stage: The original PCP's level of organizational concentration must predict
     the patients' change in PCP organizational concentration after the original PCP exits,
     conditional on included covariates. This assumption is directly testable; we report first
     stage F-statistics along with our IV results.

  2. Exclusion restriction: This assumption requires parallel trends among patients with
     different initial exposure to PCP organizational concentration. Specifically, patients
     who are initially attributed to PCPs with high levels of organizational concentration
     must be on the same counterfactual utilization trajectory as patients whose initial PCP
     has a lower level of PCP organizational concentration. We assess the plausibility of
     this assumption with event study graphs.

  3. Monotonicity: Having an origin PCP with high organizational concentration can
     only increase the probability that the patient experiences a decline in the PCP or-
     ganizational concentration after the original PCP exits. This is satisfied if patients
  9
      Assumptions 3 and 4 together are similar to the fallback condition described in Abaluck et al. (2020).



                                                      15
      use similar selection strategies to find a replacement PCP as they used to find their
      original PCP. For example, this assumption would be violated if some patients of high
      organizational concentration PCPs deliberately seek out a PCP with an even higher
      concentration due to their experience with the original PCP.

  4. No differential selection on gains: Conditional variation in the original PCP's orga-
     nizational concentration must not predict the degree of selection on gains in choosing
     a new provider. The treatment effect of switching PCPs is independent of the exit
     timing and the practice styles of the exiting PCP.

  5. Organizational concentration selection on observables only: Other factors that
     influence a PCP's effect on patient care utilization must be uncorrelated with organiza-
     tional concentration, after controlling for observed patient and provider characteristics.
     Without randomized manipulation of referral patterns, this is a strong assumption, and
     we discuss it in more detail below. When this assumption is violated, our estimate can
     be interpreted as the causal effect of switching to a higher organizational concentra-
     tion PCP, rather than isolating the effect of organizational concentration from other
     dimensions of practice style.

    Although the PCP exit strategy approach holds the regional practice environment fixed,
PCP practice style is still multidimensional. A PCP's organizational concentration may be
correlated with other aspects of the PCP's practice style, which would violate assumption
5 (selection on observables only) described above. In particular, physicians who make more
referrals, ceding more of their patients' care to other internists and specialists, will have more
opportunities to reduce the organizational concentration. Prior research has documented
that concentrating patient care within a narrow set of providers (provider concentration) is
associated with lower levels of utilization (Agha et al. 2019; Hussey et al. 2014; Frandsen
et al. 2015).
    To establish that the impact of organizational concentration is distinct from the well-
studied phenomenon of provider concentration, our main regression specifications include
both measures. Moreover, we instrument for the change in provider concentration us-
ing an analogous approach to how we instrument for the change in organizational con-
centration: with the provider concentration practice style of the exiting PCP. Defining
P roviderConcP CP (i) as the difference between the new PCP's provider concentration and
old PCP's provider concentration, we estimate a new first stage for organizational concen-




                                               16
tration as follows:

                                              o
           OrgConcP CP (i) × postit =         1 OrgConcP CP (i),initial × postit
                                               o
                                              +2 P roviderConcP CP (i),initial × postit
                                              +xit  o + i
                                                        o   o
                                                          + t   o
                                                              + i,t +      o
                                                                           it .             (6)

We also estimate a parallel first stage equation for P roviderConcP CP (i) . Finally, we esti-
mate the second stage equation, instrumenting for both endogenous variables:

          Yit =       1 OrgConcP CP (i) × postit + 2 P roviderConcP CP (i) × postit
                      +xit  + i + t + i,t +   it .                                          (7)

    Further, we test the robustness of our findings to adding controls for PCP characteristics
and practice environment. These specifications control for PCP gender, experience, residency
training, and the size of the PCP's practice organization. Larger firms may hire higher quality
staff, have greater capital investment, or different managerial quality; by controlling for the
size of the PCP's practice organization, we can separate any general benefits of having a
PCP who is employed by a large firm from the effects of organizational concentration.


5     Results
This section uses our instrumental variables strategy to show how PCP organizational con-
centration affects healthcare utilization. After discussing our baseline findings, we consider
several alternative specifications, and then explore the relationship between organizational
concentration and care quality.


5.1    PCP organizational concentration and utilization
To analyze how care patterns respond when a patient's PCP exits, we begin by examining
Figure 4. These graphs exploit the same variation underlying our instrumental variables ap-
proach, but instead of including a single indicator variable for the post period, they include a
vector of fixed effects for each year relative to the PCP exit event. The endogenous variables
of interest are the interaction of these relative event time fixed effects with the change in
PCP organizational concentration, and the instrumental variables are the vector of interac-
tions between these relative event time fixed effects and the original PCP's organizational
concentration.


                                                17
    The figure illustrates that when a patient's PCP exits the local market, the patient's care
outcomes shift sharply towards the practice style of their new PCP. In Panel A, we show that
if the new provider is predicted to have higher organizational concentration (so their patients
receive care at fewer distinct organizations), the patient's experienced organizational con-
centration also increases. This establishes that PCP organizational concentration plays an
important role in shaping patient-level organizational concentration, even when the patient
remains in the same geographic location. In Panel B, we show that if the new provider is pre-
dicted to have greater organizational concentration, the patient's total healthcare utilization
declines.
    In both panels of this graph, we note an absence of pre-trends prior to the move. This
demonstrates that patients whose original PCPs have different levels of organizational con-
centration are not on differential trends of care utilization prior to the original PCP's exit.
This pattern supports the exclusion restriction, described as assumption 2 above. We also
see that in year 1, the first full calendar year after their PCP has exited, patients have
the largest year-over-year change on both experienced organizational concentration and uti-
lization. The new PCP's influence may grow over time, as she gradually shapes the set of
referred providers that the patient consults. In subsequent years 2 through 5, patients' care
evolves to conform more closely to the practice style of their new PCP.
    Our IV regressions in Table 3 show that the effects of organizational concentration on
utilization that are large and robust to accounting for other dimensions of PCP practice
style, training, and practice setting. We instrument for the change in organizational con-
centration with the level of organizational concentration at the original PCP. The estimated
first stage equation in column 5 is strong, and shows that coming from an origin PCP with
a 0.1 higher organizational concentration predicts a 0.043 greater decrease in the new PCP's
organizational concentration. The associated second stage with this specification in Column
1 finds that about 29% of the variation in PCP organizational concentration practice style
translates into the patient's individually experienced organizational concentration.
    Columns 2-4 contain our main results relating organizational concentration to spending,
while columns 6-8 below each second stage result contain the associated first stage equation
for that set of controls.10 Column 2 shows that a 0.1 instrumented for increase in orga-
nizational concentration leads to an 11% decline in healthcare utilization. The estimated
standard deviation of organizational concentration across PCPs after applying Bayesian
shrinkage is 0.13 (see Appendix Table A3), suggesting that a 1 SD increase in PCP orga-
nizational concentration leads to a 14% decline in utilization. Column 3 shows that this
  10
    Note that columns 5 and 6 share a common first stage since they differ only in the choice of the dependent
variable, so column 6 simply repeats column 5.



                                                     18
effect persists and is attenuated only slightly by the inclusion of provider concentration as
an additional endogenous variable. Though the standard error on the estimate doubles, the
relationship between organization concentration and care utilization remains statistically
significant at the 1% level. This result shows that the frictions that arise when care crosses
firm boundaries are distinct from previously studied concepts of provider concentration.
    The main hurdle to interpreting this relationship as the causal effect of organizational
concentration is that PCPs with more concentrated practice styles may differ along other
dimensions besides their organizational concentration. By focusing on PCP exits experienced
by patients who are not themselves moving, we are able to hold constant many features of
the local healthcare environment. Nevertheless, PCPs' training, practice environment, and
taste for aggressive care may covary with the PCP's tendency to concentrate care within
an organization. To address this concern, we introduce controls for PCP gender, residency
training, and experience (based on medical school graduation year). Further, we control for
the size of the PCP's practice organization, as measured by the number of distinct providers
billing to the TIN, as well as the number of claims billed to the TIN. By controlling for
the organization size, we can account for the possibility that physicians working in larger
practice groups have different quality, practice style, or access to capital inputs.
    Reassuringly, we find no attenuation of the relationship between the PCP's organizational
concentration and patient utilization once we account for PCP characteristics and practice
size. Our preferred, most controlled specification (Column 4) shows that a 1 SD increase
in PCP organizational concentration is predicted to reduce health care spending by 10%.
The robustness of our findings to these controls provides evidence that our results are driven
by differences in organizational ties, and are not an artifact of different practice settings,
physician training, or experience.


5.2    Robustness and alternative specifications
Difference in differences results. These findings can be contrasted with the difference
in differences specifications reported in Appendix Table A4. Without the instrumental vari-
able approach, we estimate a smaller effect of PCP organizational concentration on care
utilization. We believe these results are attenuated due to confounding. Patients who find
themselves in worsening health are more likely to seek out care at large, integrated practices
that include a wide array of specialists. PCPs affiliated with these practices are likely to have
higher organizational concentration, but the patients who endogeneously select them may
have increasing demand for health care services. This comparison highlights the motivation
behind the instrumental variables approach. Specifically, a patient's choice of new PCP after


                                               19
their original PCP exits is likely to be endogenous to changes in the patients' demand for
care. By isolating the variation in PCP organizational concentration that is predictable due
to mean reversion, the IV approach avoids relying on these endogenous selection patterns to
estimate the impact of organizational concentration.

Exploring the role of PCP provider concentration. Appendix Table A6 provides
more detail on our results, specifically reporting our instrumental variable results on how
PCPs' provider concentration practice style affects care utilization. In column 1, we estimate
an alternative specification that only includes PCP provider concentration as an endogenous
variable, omitting organizational concentration from the model. As expected, patients whose
PCPs tend to concentrate their patients' care within a smaller set of providers also have
lower spending. This finding corroborates the pattern found in the earlier literature on
provider fragmentation (Agha et al. 2019; Frandsen et al. 2015; Austin and Baker 2015),
and shows that the finding holds under a new identification strategy­ our instrumental
variables approach. However, once we add PCP organizational concentration as an additional
endogenous variable in our IV framework, the estimated effect of provider concentration
attenuates and becomes statistically insignificant, as seen in columns 2 and 3. These results
suggest that some of the spending previously attributed to the spread of care across providers
may have actually reflected the challenges of coordination across organizations. Accounting
for the role of organizational coordination diminishes the role of provider concentration.

Accounting for patient demand for specialized care. Appendix Table A5 establishes
that the relationship we uncover is also robust to including detailed controls for the number
and type of providers the patient consults. Specifically, we extend our instrumental variables
specification to include additional controls for the number of generalist providers the patient
sees, as well as the number of specialist providers the patient sees. The estimated effect of
organizational concentration remains large and statistically significant; the point estimate is
actually larger than that reported in Table 3. The larger coefficient suggests these results may
in fact overstate the relationship between organizational concentration and care utilization.
Specifically, patients with high organizational concentration PCPs who consult many doctors
may have less underlying demand for care than patients who see more doctors with a low
organizational concentration PCP. This could occur, for example, if large practices with
greater organizational concentration (because they cover a wider breadth of specialists) also
tend to rotate patients across providers more commonly.




                                              20
Decomposing the source of utilization changes Appendix Table A7 disaggregates our
findings on care utilization to identify how different types of care respond. Specifically, we
consider three categories of utilization: Carrier file claims, which cover professional billings;
Outpatient file claims, which cover institutional claims for outpatient care; and Inpatient file
claims, which cover hospital billings. Patients treated by PCPs with higher organizational
concentration have lower spending on professional services (carrier) and outpatient institu-
tional care. Taken together, these results confirm that outpatient care utilization is lower
when the PCP has high organizational concentration. The estimated effect on inpatient
spending (conditional on having an inpatient admission) is also negative, but has a large
standard error and is not statistically significant.


5.3    Organizational concentration and quality of care
In this section, we explore the relationship between organizational concentration and quality
of care. While the quality of ambulatory care is multidimensional and difficult to quantify
empirically, we present evidence on a variety of measures related to the provision of low-
value care (duplicate imaging), high-value care (recommended monitoring of patients with
diabetes), and use of intensive care settings (inpatient or emergency department) which may
signal deficiencies in outpatient care. Results are reported in Table 4. In this table, we
report our most controlled specification from Table 3, including PCP provider concentration
as an endogenous variable and controlling for the full set of PCP characteristics and PCP
organization size.
    An important pathway by which organizational concentration could reduce total spending
is by reducing the use of inpatient care. Recall that we define organizational concentration
solely using outpatient provider interactions. As a result, there is no direct, mechanical
relationship between organizational concentration and the PCP's propensity to recommend
hospitalization, since care delivered in the hospital setting will not contribute to the concen-
tration measure. We do not find statistically significant effects of changes in organizational
concentration on hospital-related outcomes, though standard errors are large.
    Next, we investigate process of care measures for patients with diabetes. We rely on two
quality of care measures, adapted from the HEDIS guidelines: receiving a regular HbA1c test
and LDL test. Switching to a physician with 0.1 higher organizational concentration leads to
a 4.5 percentage point increase in HbA1c testing and a 5.8 percentage point increase in LDL
tests; these relationships are statistically significant at the 5% and 1% level, respectively.
Patients with diabetes are more likely to receive guideline-concordant care when their PCP
has greater organizational concentration. Recall that this specification does not simply reflect


                                               21
the benefits of being treated in a large practice group (which might proxy for investment
in clinical decision support or other electronic reminder system), because we control for
the size of the PCP's practice organization. Rather, this finding suggests that keeping the
patient's primary and specialty care integrated may lead to fewer gaps in care for chronically
ill patients.
     Finally, we turn to testing and imaging. Using BETOS codes, we identify Carrier claims
for laboratory tests and diagnostic imaging. Changes in organizational concentration do
not lead to statistically significant changes in the use of lab tests. By contrast, switching
to a more concentrated PCP decreases the number of claims for imaging tests, with a 0.1
increase in organizational concentration reducing imaging claims by 5% (a decline of 0.2
claims from a base of 4.4, P = 0.056). We also specifically investigate a measure of repeated
imaging, which we define as imaging of the same body part with the same imaging modality
repeated within 30 days. While some duplication of this sort is clinically indicated, the
measure will be sensitive to repeated imaging that occurs when patients seek care across
different organizations that lack seamless systems for image transfer. The coefficient on
repeated imaging is very imprecisely estimated relative to the mean and not significantly
different from zero. These findings suggest that while reduced imaging may contribute to
the utilization reductions, these reductions are not primarily driven by changes to repeated
imaging tests.
     Appendix Table A8 further investigates the relationship between organizational concen-
tration and measures of preventive care provision. We find no consistent pattern between
organizational concentration and preventive care. Higher organizational concentration pre-
dicts increases in mammogram and prostate cancer screenings, declines in colorectal cancer
screenings, and little change in the provision of pap smears, pelvic exams, flu shots, and
cardiovascular screenings.


6    Conclusion
In this paper, we explore the coordination challenges that arise when clinical care is split
across firm boundaries. Firms may facilitate both informal relationships among care providers,
as well as firm-specific investment in coordination technology. In the healthcare setting, co-
ordination technology could include messaging systems, investments in health information
technology, and established norms for passing off patient information across providers.
    Studying patients who move regions, we document that regions with higher levels of
organizational concentration also have lower levels of care utilization. This pattern suggests
a role for organizational concentration in explaining regional variation in healthcare spending.

                                              22
     Our main analysis studies patients who stay in the same area after their PCP exits
the local market due to a retirement or move. Patients who switch to a PCP with higher
organizational concentration experience reductions in care utilization, relative to patients
who switch to a PCP with lower organizational concentration. These relationships persist
after conditioning on detailed measures of how many generalist and specialist providers the
patient sees, and how concentrated the patient's care is across those providers. This evidence
indicates that the organizational ties between a patient's healthcare providers have an impact
on their total healthcare utilization.
     Our estimated effect (10% decrease in utilization from a 1 SD increase in PCP organiza-
tional concentration) is large relative to other healthcare interventions. By way of compari-
son, Agha et al. (2019) find that moving to a region with 1 SD higher provider fragmentation
increases care utilization by 10%. Clemens and Gottlieb (2014) estimate that a 2 percent
increase in payment rates leads to a 3 percent increase in healthcare utilization. The in-
troduction of a major policy initiative, Accountable Care Organizations and the Medicare
Shared Savings Program, led to comparatively small reductions (less than 5%) in spending
(McWilliams et al. 2018).
     Although switching to a PCP with greater organizational concentration is associated
with lower total utilization of physician services, we see no evidence that higher organi-
zational concentration reduces quality of care. In fact, PCPs with greater organizational
concentration perform better on these measures of effective care for patients with diabetes.
     Taken together, these findings point to a potential mechanism by which higher organiza-
tional concentration lowers utilization. When providers share an organizational affiliation,
they are likely to have lower barriers to information sharing and greater trust. These bene-
fits may reduce gaps in care--e.g. resulting in better monitoring of diabetes patients--and
improve hand-offs between providers. In turn, these improvements may allow providers to
avoid unnecessary referrals, ensure that referred patients have already completed the requi-
site workup, and centralize follow-up care with the patient's PCP. Each of these effects may
reduce low-value visits that generate repeated contact with specialists.
     It is also worth considering alternative explanations of these findings. Large organizations
may hire higher-quality physicians. If this were the case, we would expect that our result
would attenuate when we account for the size of the PCP's organizational affiliation, but our
empirical estimates show no such attenuation. Another possibility is that it may be more
difficult to get a timely appointment in a large, multi-specialty practice, leading to lower care
utilization. If this were the primary explanation, we might expect patients to substitute to
more intensive forms of care that do not require appointments, such as emergency department
visits; but, we find no evidence of substitution along this margin.


                                               23
    While our results suggest potential savings associated with care delivered at integrated
multispecialty practices, any gains from reduced utilization would need to be weighed against
the higher prices likely paid by private insurance providers to larger practices that have more
bargaining power. The Medicare claims we study are paid at administratively set prices, so
an investigation of countervailing price effects is beyond the scope of this paper. These results
also raise the question of whether horizontal mergers that create multispecialty physician
practices generate the savings from reduced utilization described here. If these gains occur,
they may take time to develop as providers adapt to changing communication systems and
adopt new referral patterns.
    Our findings illuminate the role that firm boundaries play in organizing economic activity.
Future research examining the detailed mechanisms of how these boundaries affect teamwork
and care coordination may be able to show how some of the benefits of organizational
concentration could be replicated without financial integration­ for example, through better
integration of health information technology systems, or by co-locating distinct provider
groups.


References
Abaluck, J., M. M. C. Bravo, P. Hull, and A. Starc (2020, July). Mortality effects and choice
 across private health insurance plans. Working Paper 27578, National Bureau of Economic
 Research.

Agha, L., K. M. Ericson, K. H. Geissler, and J. B. Rebitzer (2018, February). Team formation
  and performance: Evidence from healthcare referral networks. Working Paper 24338,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Agha, L., B. Frandsen, and J. B. Rebitzer (2019). Fragmented division of labor and health-
  care costs: Evidence from moves across regions. Journal of Public Economics 169, 144­159.

Alonso, R., W. Dessein, and N. Matouschek (2008, March). When does coordination require
  centralization? American Economic Review 98 (1), 145­179.

Arrow, K. J. (1975). Vertical integration and communication. The Bell Journal of Eco-
  nomics 6 (1), 173­183.

Atalay, E., A. Horta¸
                    csu, and C. Syverson (2014). Vertical integration and input flows.
  American Economic Review 104 (4), 1120­48.



                                               24
Austin, D. R. and L. C. Baker (2015). Less physician practice competition is associated with
 higher prices paid for common procedures. Health Affairs 34 (10), 1753­1760.

Baker, L. C., M. K. Bundorf, and D. P. Kessler (2020). Does multispecialty practice enhance
  physician market power? American Journal of Health Economics 6 (3), 324­347.

Baker, L. C., M. K. Bundorf, and A. Royalty (2016, October). Measuring physician practice
  competition using Medicare data. In A. Aizcorbe, C. Baker, E. R. Berndt, and D. M.
  Cutler (Eds.), Measuring and Modeling Health Care Costs, pp. 351­377. University of
  Chicago Press.

Baker, L. C., M. K. Bundorf, A. B. Royalty, and Z. Levin (2014). Physician practice com-
  petition and prices paid by private insurers for office visits. JAMA 312 (16), 1653­1662.

Beaulieu, N. D., L. S. Dafny, B. E. Landon, J. B. Dalton, I. Kuye, and J. M. McWilliams
  (2020). Changes in quality of care after hospital mergers and acquisitions. New England
  Journal of Medicine 382 (1), 51­59.

Capps, C., D. Dranove, and C. Ody (2018). The effect of hospital acquisitions of physician
  practices on prices and spending. Journal of Health Economics 59, 139­152.

Cebul, R. D., J. B. Rebitzer, L. J. Taylor, and M. E. Votruba (2008). Organizational
  fragmentation and care quality in the US healthcare system. Journal of Economic Per-
  spectives 22 (4), 93­113.

Chan, David C, J., M. Gentzkow, and C. Yu (2019, November). Selection with variation
 in diagnostic skill: Evidence from radiologists. Working Paper 26467, National Bureau of
 Economic Research.

Chen, Y. (2020). Team-specific human capital and team performance: Evidence from doc-
 tors. Working Paper .

Clemens, J. and J. D. Gottlieb (2014). Do physicians' financial incentives affect medical
  treatment and patient health? American Economic Review 104 (4), 1320­49.

Coase, R. (1937). The theory of the firm. Economica 4 (16), 386­405.

Currie, J. and W. B. MacLeod (2017). Diagnosing expertise: Human capital, decision
 making, and performance among physicians. Journal of labor economics 35 (1), 1­43.

Currie, J., W. B. MacLeod, and J. Van Parys (2016). Provider practice style and patient
 health outcomes: the case of heart attacks. Journal of Health Economics 47, 64­80.

                                            25
Cutler, D., J. S. Skinner, A. D. Stern, and D. Wennberg (2019). Physician beliefs and patient
 preferences: a new look at regional variation in health care spending. American Economic
 Journal: Economic Policy 11 (1), 192­221.

Cutler, D. M. and F. Scott Morton (2013). Hospitals, market share, and consolidation.
 JAMA 310 (18), 1964­1970.

Dessein, W. (2014). Incomplete contracts and firm boundaries: New directions. Journal of
  Law, Economics, & Organization 30, i13­i36.

Enthoven, A. C. (2009). Integrated delivery systems: the cure for fragmentation. American
  Journal of Managed Care 15 (12), S284.

Fadlon, I. and J. Van Parys (2020). Primary care physician practice styles and patient care:
  Evidence from physician exits in medicare. Journal of Health Economics 71, 102304.

Finkelstein, A., M. Gentzkow, and H. Williams (2016). Sources of Geographic Variation
  in Health Care: Evidence From Patient Migration. The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics 131 (4), 1681­1726.

Forbes, S. J. and M. Lederman (2010). Does vertical integration affect firm performance?
  Evidence from the airline industry. The RAND Journal of Economics 41 (4), 765­790.
  DOI: 10.1111/j.1756-2171.2010.00120.x.

Forman, C. and A. Gron (2011). Vertical integration and information technology investment
  in the insurance industry. Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization 27 (1), 180­218.

Frakes, M. (2013). The impact of medical liability standards on regional variations in physi-
  cian behavior: Evidence from the adoption of national-standard rules. American Economic
  Review 103 (1), 257­76.

Frandsen, B., M. Powell, and J. B. Rebitzer (2019). Sticking points: common-agency
  problems and contracting in the US healthcare system. The RAND Journal of Eco-
  nomics 50 (2), 251­285.

Frandsen, B. R., K. E. Joynt, J. B. Rebitzer, and A. K. Jha (2015). Care fragmentation,
  quality, and costs among chronically ill patients. Am J Manag Care 21 (5), 355­362.

Friebel, G. and M. Raith (2010, May). Resource allocation and organizational form. Amer-
  ican Economic Journal: Microeconomics 2 (2), 1­33.



                                             26
Gowrisankaran, G., K. A. Joiner, and P.-T. L´eger (2017, December). Physician practice
 style and healthcare costs: Evidence from emergency departments. Working Paper 24155,
 National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hart, O. and B. Holmstrom (2010, May). A theory of firm scope. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 125 (2), 483­513.

Hart, O. and J. Moore (1990, December). Property rights and the nature of the firm. Journal
  of Political Economy 98 (6), 1119­1158.

Huckman, R. S. and G. P. Pisano (2006). The firm specificity of individual performance:
 Evidence from cardiac surgery. Management Science 52 (4), 473­488.

Hussey, P. S., E. C. Schneider, R. S. Rudin, D. S. Fox, J. Lai, and C. E. Pollack (2014).
 Continuity and the costs of care for chronic disease. JAMA internal medicine 174 (5),
 742­748.

Kim, S.-H., H. Song, and M. Valentine (2020). Staffing temporary teams: Understanding
  the effects of team familiarity and partner variety. Available at SSRN 3176306 .

Koch, T. G., B. W. Wendling, and N. E. Wilson (2017). How vertical integration affects
 the quantity and cost of care for medicare beneficiaries. Journal of Health Economics 52,
 19­32.

Koch, T. G., B. W. Wendling, and N. E. Wilson (2018). The effects of physician and
 hospital integration on medicare beneficiaries' health outcomes. Review of Economics and
 Statistics , 1­38.

Kwok, J. H. (2019). How do primary care physicians influence healthcare? Evidence
 on practice styles and switching costs from Medicare. Working Paper . https://www.
 jenniferkwok.com/s/JenniferKwok_PrimaryCarePhysicians_JMP.pdf.

Lafontaine, F. and M. Slade (2007, September). Vertical integration and firm boundaries:
  The evidence. Journal of Economic Literature 45 (3), 629­685.

Laird, J. and T. Nielsen (2017). Physician prescribing behaviors on prescription drug use
  and labor supply : Evidence from movers in denmark. Working paper.

McWilliams, J. M., L. A. Hatfield, B. E. Landon, P. Hamed, and M. E. Chernew (2018).
 Medicare spending after 3 years of the medicare shared savings program. New England
 Journal of Medicine 379 (12), 1139­1149. PMID: 30183495.


                                            27
Molitor, D. (2018). The evolution of physician practice styles: evidence from cardiologist
 migration. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 10 (1), 326­56.

Morris, C. N. (1983). Parametric empirical Bayes inference: theory and applications. Journal
 of the American Statistical Association 78 (381), 47­55.

Mullainathan, S. and D. Scharfstein (2001, May). Do firm boundaries matter? American
 Economic Review 91 (2), 195­199.

Nyweide, D. J., D. L. Anthony, J. P. Bynum, R. L. Strawderman, W. B. Weeks, L. P.
 Casalino, and E. S. Fisher (2013). Continuity of care and the risk of preventable hospital-
 ization in older adults. JAMA Internal Medicine 173 (20), 1879­1885.

Nyweide, D. J. and J. P. Bynum (2017). Relationship between continuity of ambulatory care
 and risk of emergency department episodes among older adults. Annals of Emergency
 Medicine 69 (4), 407­415.

Oster, E. (2019). Unobservable selection and coefficient stability: Theory and evidence.
  Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 37 (2), 187­204.

Pierce, L. (2012, February). Organizational Structure and the Limits of Knowledge Sharing:
  Incentive Conflict and Agency in Car Leasing. Management Science 58 (6), 1106­1121.

Pollack, C. E., P. S. Hussey, R. S. Rudin, D. S. Fox, J. Lai, and E. C. Schneider (2016).
  Measuring care continuity: a comparison of claims-based methods. Medical care 54 (5),
  e30.

Sahni, N. R., M. Dalton, D. M. Cutler, J. D. Birkmeyer, and A. Chandra (2016). Surgeon
  specialization and operative mortality in united states: retrospective analysis. BMJ 354,
  i3571.

Seru, A. (2014, February). Firm boundaries matter: Evidence from conglomerates and R&D
  activity. Journal of Financial Economics 111 (2), 381­405.

Skinner, J. (2011, January). Causes and Consequences of Regional Variations in Health Care.
  In M. V. Pauly, T. G. Mcguire, and P. P. Barros (Eds.), Handbook of Health Economics,
  Volume 2 of Handbook of Health Economics, pp. 45­93. Elsevier.

Stroebel, J. (2016). Asymmetric information about collateral values. The Journal of Fi-
  nance 71 (3), 1071­1112. DOI:10.1111/jofi.12288.



                                            28
Venkatesh, A. K., H. Mei, K. E. Kocher, M. Granovsky, Z. Obermeyer, E. S. Spatz,
  C. Rothenberg, H. M. Krumholz, and Z. Lin (2017). Identification of emergency depart-
  ment visits in medicare administrative claims: Approaches and implications. Academic
  Emergency Medicine 24 (4), 422­431.

Welch, W. P., A. E. Cuellar, S. C. Stearns, and A. B. Bindman (2013). Proportion of
 physicians in large group practices continued to grow in 2009­11. Health Affairs 32 (9),
 1659­1666.

Williamson, O. (1985). The Economic Institutions of Capitalism: Firms, Markets, Relational
 Contracting. Free Press.




                                           29
                     Figure 1: Residual of organizational concentration




   (.034,.211]
   (.009,.034]
   (-.012,.009]
   (-.027,-.012]
   [-.054,-.027]



Notes: This map shows the mean residuals of patients' organizational concentration after regression
adjustment for regional differences in average provider concentration, age, sex, and race. Organiza-
tional concentration and provider concentration are calculated as Herfindahl­Hirschman Index based
on patients visits across healthcare organizations and providers, respectively. Hospital Referral Re-
gions (HRRs) in darker gray have higher residual organizational concentration. Data is from the initial
analytic sample, covering 9,132,322 beneficiaries.




                                                  30
Figure 2: Relationship between Organizational Concentration and Healthcare Utilization.
          (A) HRR level



                         9500  9000
             Total utilization
                  8500   8000
                         7500




                                           .4   .45          .5          .55          .6   .65
                                                  Organizational care concentration


          (B) PCP level
              8000 9000 10000 11000
            Total utilization
                       7000
                       6000




                                      .3         .4             .5            .6           .7
                                                Organizational care concentration


Notes: These binned scatterplots show the relationship between organizational concentration and total
healthcare utilization. Panel (A) shows the relationship between these measures averaged at the Hospital
Referral Region level, while Panel (B) shows the relationship between these measures averaged at the PCP
level.
                                                             31
                                                                             Figure 3: Event study figures. Based on patient movers.
                (A) Response of patients' organizational concentration to changes in regional
                organizational concentration



                                                                             1
                   Patient organizational care concentration (coefficient)
                                                                             .8
                                                                             .6
                                                                             .4
                                                                             .2
                                                                             0




                                                                                    -5   -4   -3   -2   -1        0        1    2   3   4   5
                                                                                                        Year relative to move



                (B) Response of patients' total utilization to changes in regional organiza-
                tional concentration
                                                                             .5
                   Patient log(total utilization) (coefficient)
                                                                             0
                                                                             -.5
                                                                             -1
                                                                             -1.5




                                                                                    -5   -4   -3   -2   -1        0        1    2   3   4   5
                                                                                                        Year relative to move



Notes: The two subplots show the estimates and 95% confidence intervals from two separate regressions.
The dependent variables of subplot A and B are patients' organizational concentration and log utilization,
respectively. Plots coefficient on the change in regional organizational concentration interacted with relative
year. Both regressions control for patient age (five-year binned), calendar year fixed effects, and patient fixed
effects. Standard errors are clustered at HRR and patient level.



                                                                                                             32
                                                                              Figure 4: Event study figures. Based on PCP exit.
                (A) Response of patients' organizational concentration to changes in PCP
                organizational concentration



                                                                       .6
                  Patient organizational concentration (coefficient)
                                                                       .4
                                                                       .2
                                                                       0
                                                                       -.2




                                                                              -5   -4   -3   -2    -1        0       1    2   3   4   5
                                                                                                  Year relative to exit



                (B) Response of patients' total utilization to changes in PCP organizational
                concentration
                                                                       .5
                  Patient log utilization (coefficient)
                                                                       0
                                                                       -.5
                                                                       -1
                                                                       -1.5




                                                                              -5   -4   -3   -2    -1        0       1    2   3   4   5
                                                                                                  Year relative to exit



Notes: The two subplots show the estimates and 95% confidence intervals from two separate regressions.
The dependent variables of subplot A and B are patients' organizational concentration and log utilization,
respectively. Regression specification matches the instrumental variable regressions in Table 3 column 1 (for
Panel A) and column 2 (for Panel B), except that the post variable is now a vector of fixed effects for relative
year. Both regressions control for patient age (five-year binned), calendar year fixed effects, and patient fixed
effects. Standard errors are clustered at PCP and patient level.

                                                                                                        33
                      Table 1: Summary statistics of different samples

                                  (1)               (2)              (3)
                             Broad Sample Patient Mover Sample PCP Exit Sample
Organizational concentration     0.45              0.42             0.46
                                (0.27)            (0.25)           (0.25)
Provider concentration           0.38              0.34             0.38
                                (0.27)            (0.24)           (0.25)
Total utilization ($)            8641              8673             6512
                               (17,487)          (17,127)         (12,722)
Age                              76.1             76.34            77.19
                                (7.48)            (7.38)           (7.18)
Sex: Female                      0.59              0.59             0.63
Race: White                      0.86              0.87             0.86
Has Diabetes                     0.28              0.29             0.33
Has Hypertension                 0.62              0.65             0.73
Has Heart disease                0.32              0.34              0.3

N patient-year obs                   48,436,521             7,576,900                 335,868
N patients                           9,132,322              1,389,790                  62,924
N assigned PCPs                                                                        52,981
Notes: This table reports summary statistics for the various analytic subsamples. Column 1 describes
the Broad Sample. Column 2 reports the sample underlying our mover analysis, including both patients
who move and the 25% random sample of non-movers. Column 3 reports summary statistics only
for patients who move. Column 4 reports summary statistics for the analytic sample underlying our
analysis of PCP exits. This sample restricts to patients whose PCP exits the local market. The number
of assigned PCP in column 4 includes exiting PCPs as well as the PCPs patients switched to.




                                                  34
            Table 2: Patient movers and regional organizational concentration

                                               (1)       (2)          (3)
                                           OrgConcit Log (total utilization)it
           OrgConcregion(i) × postit        0.797*** -0.916*** -0.735***
                                             (0.021)  (0.099)       (0.113)
           Regional provider concentration                             X
Notes: All regressions control for patient age (five-year binned), calendar year fixed effects, relative year
fixed effects, and patient fixed effects. Regional organizational concentration is jackknifed. Standard
errors are clustered at HRR and patient level. Sample: Movers Analysis Sample, N=7,576,900 patient-
year observations.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1




                                                     35
    Table 3: Organizational concentration and spending, identified from PCP exits

       Instrumental Variables
       Second stage                           (1)             (2)         (3)         (4)
                                           OrgConcit           Log (total utilization)it
       OrgConcP CP (i) × postit             0.293***      -1.058*** -0.729*** -0.794***
                                             (0.021)       (0.118)   (0.251)   (0.246)

       First stage                              (5)        (6)          (7)               (8)
                                                        OrgConcP CP (i) × postit
       OrgConcP CP (i)t-1 × postit          -0.432***     -0.432*** -0.295*** -0.299***
                                              (0.006)       (0.006)  (0.007)   (0.007)
       F-test                                1.0  105      1.0  10 5
                                                                      20,703    23,845

       PCP provider concentration                                            X            X
       PCP characteristics                                                                X
       PCP organizational size                                                            X
Notes: Each column represents an instrumental variables regression, where instrumental variable is the
exiting PCP's jackknifed organizational concentration multiplied by a post indicator. In specification
(1), the outcome variable is the individual patient's realized organizational concentration and in
specifications (2)-(4) the outcome variable is the patient's log of total utilization. All regressions
control for patient age (five-year binned), calendar year fixed effects, relative year fixed effects, and
patient fixed effects. Specifications (3) and (4) include PCP provider concentration as an additional
endogenous variable, instrumented by the original PCP's provider concentration multiplied by a post
indicator. Specification (4) controls for PCP characteristics: gender, experience quartile indicators,
residency training indicators (internal medicine vs. family practice), and the PCP's organization size
(log total number of claims billed to the PCP's TIN, and the log number of unique providers billing to
the PCP's TIN). Standard errors have two-way clustering at PCP and patient levels. Cragg-Donald
Wald F-test reported for first-stage. The PCP Exit Sample has 335,868 patient-year observations.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1




                                                   36
              Table 4: Organizational concentration and measures of quality

                                                        (1)                  (2)
                                                      Mean of          Coefficient on
                                                 dependent variable OrgConcP CP (i) × postit
 Dependent variable:
 A. Hospital outcomes
    Any inpatient visit                                  0.155                        -0.001
                                                                                     (0.072)
    Any emergency department visit                       0.259                        -0.022
                                                                                     (0.083)
 B. Diabetes care outcomes
    Any HbA1C test                                       0.631                       0.452**
                                                                                     (0.189)
    Any LDL test                                         0.590                      0.578***
                                                                                     (0.195)
 C. Imaging use outcomes
    Number of lab test claims                            14.245                       0.358
                                                                                     (3.356)
    Number of imaging test claims                        4.417                       -2.127*
                                                                                     (1.112)
    Number of repeated imaging tests                     0.263                        0.163
                                                                                     (0.294)
Notes: Each row corresponds to a regression. The specifications match that reported in column (4)
of Table 3, but with alternative dependent variables. Specifically, all regressions control for changes in
PCP provider concentration, PCP characteristics, PCP organization size, as well as patient age (five-
year binned), calendar year fixed effects, relative year fixed effects, patient fixed effects. Both changes
in PCP organizational concentration and changes in PCP provider concentration are instrumented for
using the exiting PCP's practice style. Standard errors are clustered at PCP and patient level. Panels
A and C use the full PCP Exit Sample (335,868 patient-year observations). Panel B uses the subset
of the PCP Exit Sample of patients identified with diabetes as chronic condition (105,940 patient-year
observations).
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1




                                                    37
The Impact of Organizational Boundaries on Healthcare
Coordination and Utilization
Leila Agha, Keith Marzilli Ericson, Xiaoxi Zhao

December 2, 2020




A    Online Appendix: Additional Tables and Figures




                                      1
            Table A1: Mapping from provider taxonomy codes to specialties

          Specialty               Provider taxonomy codes
          PCP       207Q00000X, 207QA0000X, 207QA0505X, 207QG0300X,
                    207R00000X, 207RA0000X, 207RG0300X, 208000000X,
                    2080A0000X, 208D00000X
Notes: These codes are used to define primary care specialties from the National Plan and Provider
Enumeration System (NPPES).




                                                2
           Table A2: List of place of service codes included as outpatient care

      Place of Service Code                Place of Service Name
                05          Indian Health Service Free-standing Facility
                07          Tribal 638 Free-standing Facility
                11          Office
                17          Walk-in Retail Health Clinic
                20          Urgent Care Facility
                22          On Campus-Outpatient Hospital
                49          Independent Clinic
                50          Federally Qualified Health Center
                53          Community Mental Health Center
                57          Non-residential Substance Abuse Treatment Facility
                58          Non-residential Opioid Treatment Facility
                62          Comprehensive Outpatient Rehabilitation Facility
                65          End-Stage Renal Disease Treatment Facility
                71          Public Health Clinic
                72          Rural Health Clinic
Notes: These codes are used to identify claims in the Medicare Carrier File for services that take place
in an outpatient facility.




                                                   3
                Table A3: Summary stats of key variables at different levels

                                                                              (1)    (2)
                                                                             Mean Std. Dev.
   Patient level (N=9,132,322)
     Organizational concentration                                            0.50       0.24
     Provider concentration                                                  0.43       0.25
     Total utilization                                                       9116      14,800
   PCP level (N=190,616)
    Organizational concentration (raw)                                       0.49       0.16
    Organizational concentration (adjusted for statistical noise)            0.48       0.13
    Provider concentration (raw)                                             0.39       0.15
    Provider concentration (adjusted for statistical noise)                  0.38       0.11
    Total utilization                                                        9377      11,263
   Regional level (N=306)
    Organizational concentration                                             0.47        0.05
    Provider concentration                                                   0.38        0.03
    Total utilization                                                        8465        918
Notes: This table summarizes provider concentration, organization concentration, and utilization out-
comes at different levels of aggregation. The top panel has one observation per patient, and reports
the means and standard deviations across all patients. The middle panel has one observation per PCP
(averaged across patient-year observations), and reports the mean and standard deviation across PCPs.
The bottom panel has one observation per Hospital Referral Region (averaged across patient-year ob-
servations) and reports the mean and standard deviation across regions.




                                                  4
                  Table A4: Difference in differences analysis of PCP exits

                                                 (1)             (2)        (3)      (4)
                                              OrgConcit         Log (total utilization)it
          OrgConcP CP (i) × postit             0.340***      -0.623*** -0.088 -0.132
                                                (0.010)       (0.057) (0.084) (0.086)
          PCP provider concentration                                     X       X
          PCP characteristics                                                    X
          PCP organizational size                                                X
Notes: This table shows the difference in differences estimates of equation 4 without using the
instrumental variable strategy to predict variation in the change in organizational concentration after
a PCP exit. In specification 1, the outcome variable is the individual patient's realized organizational
concentration and in specifications 2-4 the outcome variable is the patient's log of total utilization in
specifications. All regressions control for patient age (five-year binned), calendar year fixed effects,
relative year fixed effects, and patient fixed effects. Specifications 3 and 4 include PCP provider
concentration as an additional endogenous variable, instrumented by the original PCP's provider
concentration multiplied by a post indicator. Specification 4 controls for PCP characteristics: gender,
experience quartile indicators, training indicators (internal medicine vs. family practice), and the
PCP's organization size (log total number of claims billed to the PCP's TIN, and the log number of
unique providers billing to the PCP's TIN). There are 335,868 patient-year observations. Standard
errors have two-way clustering at PCP and patient levels.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1




                                                    5
Table A5: Instrumental variable analysis of PCP exits, controlling for number of physicians
the patient consults

               Instrumental Variables
               Second stage                                     (1)            (2)
                                                              Log (total utilization)it
               OrgConcP CP (i) × postit                      -0.794***        -1.451***
                                                              (0.246)          (0.195)



               First stage                                    (3)           (4)
                                                             OrgConcP CP (i) × postit
               OrgConcP CP (i)t-1 × postit                   -0.299***        -0.310***
                                                              (0.007)          (0.007)
               F-test                                          23,845           23,733

               PCP provider concentration                         X               X
               PCP characteristics                                X               X
               PCP organizational size                            X               X
               Spline N generalists seen by patient                               X
               Spline N specialists seen by patient                               X
 Notes: See notes to Table 3. For reference, specifications (1) and (3) replicate the results reported
 in (4) and (8) of Table 3. In specification (2) and (4), the regression adds new control variables that
 account for the number of distinct providers each patient sees. Specifically, these specifications control
 for a 4-knot spline in the number of generalist providers (as defined in Table A1: family practice,
 internal medicine training, or geriatrics training) and a 4-knot spline in the number of specialist
 providers (with any other training type). Standard errors have two-way clustering at PCP and patient
 levels.
 *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1




                                                     6
     Table A6: Impact of organizational concentration and provider concentration

                                                         A. Baseline estimates
          Instrumental Variables
          Second stage                                   (1)         (2)         (3)
                                                           Log(total utilization)it
          OrganizationConcP CP (i) × postit                     -0.729*** -0.794***
                                                                 (0.251)   (0.246)
          P roviderConcP CP (i) × postit              -1.072***   -0.453    -0.279
                                                       (0.108)   (0.248)   (0.243)
          PCP characteristics                                                 X
          PCP organization size                                               X
Notes: This table reports the results of instrumental variables regressions similar to those reported
in Table 3, but now providing further detail on the relationship between PCP provider concentration
and care utilization. Column 1 reports a specification similar to that in column 2 of Table 3, but
replacing the endogenous and instrumental variables related to PCP organizational concentration
with analogous variables describing PCP provider concentration. Columns 2 and 3 are identical to
the specifications reported in columns 3 and 4 of Table 3, which include both PCP organizational
concentration and PCP provider concentration as endogenous variables, but here we report the
coefficient on PCP provider concentration. There are 335,868 patient-year observations. Standard
errors have two-way clustering at PCP and patient levels. See notes to Table 3 for further details.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1




                                                  7
     Table A7: Instrumental variable analysis of PCP exits, spending decomposition

                                                        (1)          (2)           (3)
                                                 Mean of dependent Sample    Coefficient on
                                                 variable (not log) size  OrgConcP CP (i) × postit
Dependent variable:
  Log of carrier spending (professional)                2663       335,868          -0.426**
                                                                                     (0.189)
  Log of outpatient spending (institutional)            1364       335,868          -1.397**
                                                                                     (0.586)
  Log of inpatient spending (hospital, if > 0)          16,507      35,002            -0.402
                                                                                     (0.538)
Notes: See notes to Table 3. This table replicates the instrumental variable specification reported
in Table 3 columns (4) and (8) with alternative outcome variables that decompose Medicare billing
depending on the type of bill. Inpatient billings are only defined among patients with at least one
hospitalization. Sample size is 335,868 for carrier and outpatient claims; sample size is 35,002 for
inpatient claims.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1




                                                    8
                Table A8: Organizational concentration and preventive care

                                                              (1)                  (2)
                                                            Mean of          Coefficient on
                                                       dependent variable OrgConcP CP (i) × postit
Dependent variable:
A. Preventive care for women (N = 211, 823)
   Mammogram                                                  0.567                   0.423**
                                                                                      (0.174)
  Pap smear                                                   0.165                    -0.209
                                                                                      (0.129)
  Pelvic exam                                                 0.142                    -0.006
                                                                                      (0.114)
B. Preventive care for men (N = 124, 042)
   Prostate cancer screening                                  0.273                   0.648***
                                                                                       (0.227)
C. Preventive care for full sample (N = 335, 868)
   Flu shot                                                   0.671                    0.048
                                                                                      (0.119)
  Colorectal screening                                        0.157                  -0.581***
                                                                                      (0.097)
  Cardiovascular screening                                    0.909                    -0.239
                                                                                      (0.258)
Notes: Each row corresponds to a regression. The specifications match that reported in column
(4) of Table 3, but with alternative dependent variables. Specifically, all regressions control for
changes in PCP provider concentration, PCP characteristics, PCP organization size, as well as patient
age (five-year binned), calendar year fixed effects, relative year fixed effects, patient fixed effects.
Both changes in PCP organizational concentration and changes in PCP provider concentration are
instrumented using the exiting PCP's practice style. Standard errors are clustered at PCP and patient
level.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1




                                                   9
