                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 DID COVID-19 CHANGE LIFE INSURANCE OFFERINGS?

                                      Timothy F. Harris
                                        Aaron Yelowitz
                                    Charles J. Courtemanche

                                      Working Paper 28172
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28172


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020




We thank Compulife for generously providing life insurance pricing data. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Timothy F. Harris, Aaron Yelowitz, and Charles J. Courtemanche. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Did COVID-19 Change Life Insurance Offerings?
Timothy F. Harris, Aaron Yelowitz, and Charles J. Courtemanche
NBER Working Paper No. 28172
December 2020
JEL No. D81,I13

                                         ABSTRACT

The profitability of life insurance offerings is contingent on accurate projections and pricing of
mortality risk. The COVID-19 pandemic created significant uncertainty, with dire mortality
predictions from early forecasts resulting in widespread government intervention and greater
individual precaution that reduced the projected death toll. We analyze how life insurance
companies changed pricing and offerings in response to COVID-19 using monthly data on term
life insurance policies from Compulife. We estimate event-study models that exploit well-
established variation in the COVID-19 mortality rate based on age and underlying health status.
Despite the increase in mortality risk and significant uncertainty, we find limited evidence that
life insurance companies increased premiums or decreased policy offerings due to COVID-19.


Timothy F. Harris                               Charles J. Courtemanche
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
Illinois State University                       Gatton College of Business and Economics
College of Arts and Sciences                    University of Kentucky
Stevenson Hall 425                              Lexington, KY 40506-0034
Normal, IL 61790                                and NBER
tfharr1@ilstu.edu                               courtemanche@uky.edu

Aaron Yelowitz
University of Kentucky
Department of Economics
335 Business and Economics Building
Lexington, KY 40506-0034
aaron@uky.edu
2


                                  I.   Introduction


    Since the 2019 novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) first emerged, there has been
substantial uncertainty regarding the magnitude of the increase in mortality risk.
In March 2020, a highly cited study from Imperial College (Ferguson et al., 2020)
reported that uncontrolled spread of coronavirus in the U.S. could lead to 2.2 million
fatalities, based on key assumptions such as 80 percent of the population ultimately
getting COVID-19 and an infection fatality rate (IFR) of 0.9 percent. The modeling
led to widespread action by policymakers in the U.S. and other countries to reduce
transmission; within three days of the publication, California implemented the first-
in-the-nation shelter-in-place order (Friedson et al., 2020), and most other states
followed quickly thereafter.
    As of November 2020, the COVID-19 death toll in the U.S. has been an order
of magnitude below this projection. The difference between the most pessimistic
forecasts and actual fatalities is likely due to changes in behavior--such as better
handwashing, staying home more, and wearing facemasks or social distancing when
outside the home--that are partly voluntary and partly induced by government
suppression and mitigation policies (Courtemanche et al., 2020; Hsiang et al., 2020;
Lyu and Wehby, 2020). While the average IFR has been the subject of debate
in the literature due to different methods of accounting for undetected mild or
asymptomatic infections, most studies put it in the range of 0.5 to 1 percent--
similar to the rate used by the Imperial College report, and an order of magnitude
deadlier than the flu (Abbott and Douglas, 2020).
    The duration and magnitude of increased mortality risk from COVID-19 are con-
tingent on many uncertain events, such as the availability and efficacy of vaccines
(Corum and Zimmer, 2020), the ability to implement technological innovations like
pooled testing (Mandavilli, 2020), at-home testing, and contact tracing, and inno-
vations in treating those who contract COVID-19 with therapeutics like Remdesivir
(Beigel et al., 2020). In addition to these factors, health messaging has been con-
flated with political considerations, contributing to more uncertainty.
                                                                                                          3


  Underlying uncertainty about the direct and indirect effects of the virus, policy
missteps, incorrect forecasts, and uncertainty about longer-run consequences all
provide challenges for the life insurance industry, which relies on accurate estimates
of mortality risk. In this study, we use monthly data on approximately 800,000
policies from 95 distinct companies listed on Compulife, a key distributor of life
insurance quotes, to analyze the influence of COVID-19 on both term life insurance
pricing and policy offerings. One key prediction that comes from models like Ericson
and Sydnor (2017) is that insurance premiums should respond to exogenous changes
in overall risk, which is precisely what happened due to COVID-19. Such short-run
changes are well documented for automobile insurance, where reductions in driving
and accident claims led to premium refunds early during the pandemic (Scism, 2020).
  To analyze the influence of increased mortality risk on life insurance premiums
and offerings, we exploit well-known and widely-accepted variation in mortality risks
from COVID-19 originating from age and comorbidities.1 Those with chronic condi-
tions or advanced age are far more likely than others to be hospitalized or die from
the virus (CDC, 2020). Early evidence from mainland China estimated IFR of 7.8
percent for those aged over 80 and over, 4.28 percent for those aged 70-79, and 1.93
percent for those aged 60-69, compared to 0.03 percent for young adults aged 20-29
(Verity et al., 2020). As a consequence, the direct health consequences of the virus
(such as through mortality) and indirect effects (such as through foregone preven-
tative care, mental health consequences, or rising obesity) are far more pronounced
for older, less-healthy individuals than for younger, healthier individuals, especially
for mortality in the short-run.2
  This variation in mortality risk allows for the construction of treatment and control
groups that we analyze using event-study models. Specifically, we estimate hedonic

   1 There also appear to be stark COVID-19 disparities in the U.S. by race and ethnicity (Benitez, Courte-
manche and Yelowitz, Forthcoming; Selden and Berdahl, 2020), where the causes are only partially explained
by current economic, health, and transmission factors.
   2 That said, some other possible health consequences arising from the spread of the virus include reduced
economic activity, less pollution, fewer car accidents, more drug use, more domestic violence, and less
capacity in the health care system for non-COVID-19 issues, some of which certainly affects younger and
healthier groups. Almond (2006) shows long-lasting consequences from the 1918 influenza pandemic. In
addition, some of the precautions that individuals take against COVID-19 might also reduce the harm from
other illnesses like influenza (Luhnow and Uribe, 2020).
4


insurance pricing models by comparing the changes in premiums of policies offered
to older individuals to those of policies offered to younger individuals. In addition,
we compare the response of policies offered to relatively healthy younger individuals
compared to relatively unhealthy older individuals (e.g., individuals in the lowest
health category and those that smoke). This estimation approach allows us to
difference out variation in pricing that might have occurred due to pandemic-induced
changes in the bond and stock markets (which influence the profitability of life
insurance products). In addition to analyzing changes in premiums, we also estimate
the impact of the pandemic on policy offerings. Overall, the analysis shows that life
insurance companies generally did not respond to the changes in mortality risk
by increasing premiums or reducing policy offerings for those that experienced the
greatest change in mortality risk. However, we do find evidence that policies with
the lowest prices did differentially increase premiums for policies offered to older
individuals. This implies that the lack of an overall response is caused in part by
market competition. In addition, we find that policies offered to the oldest of the old
(age 75+) were differentially removed from the market consistent with (Hendren,
2013).
    Although one might initially have expected large effects on life insurance premiums
for the high-risk groups, several explanations--in addition to market competition--
may account for the lack of meaningful overall responses. First, life insurance pre-
miums account for the rise in mortality, unconditional on the infection. Although
the CFR or IFR is much higher than other illnesses like the flu, there have been
unprecedented steps such as lockdowns and behavior changes that should reduce the
probability of infection. Put differently, with extensive underwriting, there should
be very little adverse selection from individuals who currently have COVID-19 be-
ing able to successfully obtain policies (Cawley and Philipson, 1999; Harris and
Yelowitz, 2014) and conditional on not yet receiving the diagnosis, mortality risk
has not significantly increased.3 Second, it is possible that even a "high-risk" life

   3 Early in the pandemic, life insurance companies rapidly changed their underwriting guidelines, post-
poning issuance of life insurance for applicants with a COVID-19 diagnosis or exposure. For example, as of
                                                                                                        5


insurance customer who purchases a policy listed in our data is quite different from
those who are currently dying from COVID-19 in terms of mortality risk. To date,
approximately 40 percent of deaths nationwide are from those residing in nursing
homes (NYT, 2020), individuals who almost certainly would be rejected if apply-
ing for a new term life insurance policy. Recent commentary suggests that even
accounting for excess deaths in New York City, the increased odds of death in 2020
for a 70-year-old are approximately 1 in 30 (Rosenkranz, 2020). Third, even sizable
transitory increases in risk would reflect small increases in annual premium as the
price increase is spread over the term of the policy (e.g., 15 years).
  The paper is organized as follows. Section II gives an overview of the life insurance
market and a theoretical model of pricing. Section III describes the Compulife data.
Section IV presents the empirical specifications and results, and section V concludes.

                                 II.   Background and Theory


  The fundamental purpose of life insurance is to protect family members--often
surviving spouses--against earning losses due to a breadwinner's mortality (Harris
and Yelowitz, 2018), although there are hybrid life insurance products that also
serve other purposes such as tax planning and investing. Life insurance coverage in
the U.S. is widespread, with approximately 70 percent of households having some
form of life insurance coverage in either the individual or group markets (Harris
and Yelowitz, 2017). The two markets differ in that individual market premiums
are experience-rated with extensive underwriting, while group markets typically
have some form of community rating and guaranteed issue. There is considerable
discussion of adverse selection and asymmetric information in the individual term life
insurance market (see Cawley and Philipson (1999); Harris and Yelowitz (2014); He
(2009, 2011); Hedengren and Stratmann (2016)), and there are explicit mechanisms
in contracts to discourage moral hazard (e.g., riders on suicide for the first several
years).

April 2020, AIG would only consider applicants 30 days after a full recovery from COVID-19 and a return to
previous health status (BUA, 2020). See https://www.buaweb.com/news/AIG-underwriting-updates.html.
6


    Life insurance markets have evolved over the years, and many companies offer pre-
mium quotes online, which in turn allows for lower search costs, greater comparison
shopping, and more vigorous price competition (Brown and Goolsbee, 2002). Indus-
try studies find that one-half of all adults sought life insurance information online
in recent years, and nearly one-third attempted to purchase coverage.4 Although
some features of term life insurance--such as a company's reputation and finan-
cial health--may enter into purchasing decisions, the key factors that contribute to
annual premiums are the face value of the policy, term length, and probability of
death proxied by measurable risk factors such as age, sex, underlying health, and
risk behavior. Term life insurance policies would then appear to be much like a
commodity, where policies from different companies are very close substitutes for
each other, and in an online setting with comparison shopping, small premium ad-
justments may lead to leapfrogging, which in turn could dramatically affect demand.
Of course, life insurance companies screen most customers extensively offline in the
individual market (e.g., medical exams), potentially leading to reclassification risk
(Handel, Hendel and Whinston, 2015), which is not observable in the data on policy
offerings. In such a market, where there is clearly an exogenous increase in mortality
for defined groups--such as those who are older and less healthy in 2020 (relative
to earlier years and other groups)--we would expect larger premium increases.5 It
is also possible for insurers to withdraw policies--essentially universal rejection for
various groups--if the regulatory environment, competitive market pressure, or pri-
vate information (Hendren, 2013) made premium increases infeasible. Of course,
given that different companies make different projections about the overall aggre-
gate risk from COVID-19, the magnitude of adjustment might be quite different.
Nonetheless, it is hard to envision another market where the consequences of making
a forecasting mistake are higher or where those making premium adjustments are
more expert on mortality consequences.

    4 https://www.iii.org/fact-statistic/facts-statistics-life-insurance
    5 "Premiums for life insurance and annuity products generally are not subject to regulatory approval,
although regulators may seek to ensure that policy benefits are commensurate with the premiums charged."
See https://www.naic.org/documents/consumer state reg brief.pdf.
                                                                                                   7


  To understand the influence of an increase in mortality risk on premiums, we use a
basic model of term life insurance pricing in a competitive market where companies
set premiums such that the expected net present value (ENPV) of premiums equals
the ENPV of payouts from the company's perspective.6 The following equation
presents the ENPV of total premiums, D, for level annual premiums, d.
                                                                                    
                                                        T -1         t
(1)                            EN P V (D) = d                   t         (1 - j )
                                                        t=0         j =0


T is the term length in years,  is the discount factor, t is the annual probability of
death (with 0 = 0). The equation merely discounts future premium payments and
takes into account that annual premiums are only collected conditional on survival.

  The next equation represents the expected net present value of costs, C , for a
term life insurance policy with face value v .
                                                                                       
                                                    T                    t-1
(2)                          EN P V (C ) = v              t-1 t                (1 - j )
                                                 t=1                     j =1



  Setting equation (1) equal to equation (2) and solving for the annual premium
gives the following expression for term life insurance premiums

                                           T                      t-1
                                           t=1    t-1 t           j =1 (1   - j )
(3)                              d=v
                                             T -1              t
                                             t=0        t      j =0 (1    - j )


  We use this simplified framework and resulting solution to get a sense of how
large the premium response theoretically should be based on the expectation of a
transitory shock to mortality risk. As inputs for one-year probability of death, we
use general actuarial tables from the Social Security Administration.7 Based on the
simplified model, a ten year $100,000 term policy for a 60-year old male, with a three

  6 See   Mao et al. (2004) for an example of a more sophisticated life insurance pricing model.
  7 See   https://www.ssa.gov/oact/STATS/table4c6.html.
8


percent discount rate, would have an annual premium of $1,550.8 If life insurance
companies anticipated a ten percent increase in mortality risk for the first year of
a policy, then the model implies a 0.9 percent increase in premiums (to $1,564).
Consequently, the one-year mortality shock elasticity of premiums is 0.09 for a 10-
year term policy for a 60-year-old male. As the term of the policy increases, the
responsiveness to an increase in the one-year mortality risk lessens. For example,
holding all the other above conditions constant, the elasticity is 1.00, 0.19, 0.06, and
0.04 for 1, 5, 15, and 20-year policies, respectively. The elasticity is nearly identical
for policies sold to different aged individuals.

    If life insurance companies anticipated that the increased mortality risk would
extend past the first year, then the responsiveness of term premiums significantly
increases (e.g., 10-year term policy with two years of increased mortality has an
elasticity of premiums of 0.20). Furthermore, the elasticity of premiums increases
as the discount rate increases, but are unchanged with different face values.

    Overall, the premium response of life insurance companies is contingent on the
projected increase in mortality rates, the anticipated persistence of the increased
risk, the term length, and discounting.

    Using statistics on actual deaths involving COVID-19 and deaths from all causes
as reported by the CDC, the mortality rate for individuals aged 15 to 34 increased by
2.8 percent while the mortality rate for individuals aged 55 to 74 increased by 10.6
percent.9 Taken together with the elasticity, for a 10-year term policy the model
predicts that premiums would increase by 0.95 percent for a 60-year-old and 0.25
percent for a 20-year-old. A back of the envelope calculation implies that an analysis
comparing the old to the young would result in premiums differentially increasing
by 0.70 percent for the old relative to the young.

     8 An annual premium of $1,550 is higher than premiums offered for 60-year old males listed on Compulife,
except for individuals in "regular" health who are smokers. This difference in premiums is likely a result of
life insurance companies not offering policies to individuals in "poor" and "very poor" health who greatly
influence mortality rates for the general population captured in the Social Security actuarial tables.
     9 See https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nvss/vsrr/covid weekly/index.htm#AgeAndSex. Accessed September
4, 2020.
                                                                                                            9


                                               III.    Data


  We use data from Compulife to analyze the influence of the pandemic on life
insurance premiums and offerings.10 Compulife is a quotation software used by life
insurance agents to compare premiums and generate quotes for potential customers.
We use monthly data from January 2014 to October 2020 from 95 companies and
804,242 unique policies.11 The Compulife database has information on at least one
subsidiary for 19 out of the top 25 groups/companies in terms of market share.12
  In addition to company and policy names, these data provide information on the
general characteristics of the policy, including term length, face value, smoking sta-
tus, health category (Regular, Regular Plus, Preferred, and Preferred Plus), gender,
and age at purchase. New purchasers of life insurance taper off drastically for in-
dividuals older than 60, with very few new policies initiated for individuals older
than 70 (Harris and Yelowitz, 2014). Given the distribution of new purchasers, in
the main analysis we specifically use data extracted on premiums and offerings for
individuals from age 20 to 70 in five-year increments (i.e., 20, 25,...,70).13
  Premiums vary both based on the company issuing the policy and policy charac-
teristics. Nonetheless, the vast majority of premium variation is based on general
characteristics. A model that regresses the general characteristics (indicators for
age, health category, term, face value, etc.) on log premiums has an R-squared of
0.98.14
  In the main analysis, we restrict the data to common term lengths, including

   10 See Cawley and Philipson (1999), Hendel and Lizzeri (2003), Cox et al. (2013), and Koijen and Yogo
(2015) for additional studies that conduct analysis using Compulife data.
   11 To enhance the data quality, we make some minor corrections and remove outliers as outlined in
Appendix A.
   12 The National Association of Insurance Commissioners reports on the top groups/companies in terms
of market share for life insurance in 2019. See https://www.naic.org/documents/web market share life
fraternal.pdf?81. Compulife data do not contain information on Dai-Ichi Life Holdings Inc Group, Globe
Life Inc Group, Metropolitan Group, Penn Mutual Group, State Farm Group, or Voya Financial Group
during the main analysis period. The report on market share does not differentiate based on product
type, which explains the omission of, for example, Voya Financial group as it sells employer-sponsored life
insurance but does not sell individual term life insurance.
   13 Policies offered for common term lengths (e.g., 10, 15, and 20 years) dwindle significantly for policies
offered to individuals older than 70 with only one-year term policies available for 85-year-old individuals.
   14 A model that excludes the indicator for smoking has an R-squared of 0.93, and a model that excludes
health status has an R-squared of 0.97. The R-squared is insensitive to the exclusion of observations from
2020.
10


10, 15, and 20-year term policies, which reduces the total policy count to 602,578
policies. Of those unique policies, 394,549 policies started being offered and were
removed in the sample window with only 49,752 policies active for the entire 82
months. For the 216,362 policies that were offered in January 2014, 88 percent were
active one-year later with 70 percent still active after two years. By 2020 only 27
percent of those initially in the sample were offered on Compulife. Overall, the
median duration of a policy being offered is 15 months.
     Firms that actively change their policy offerings might be more likely to be respon-
sive to changes in expected mortality resulting from the pandemic. To gauge the
premium change activity level in a company, we analyze the frequency of premium
adjustments from 2014 to 2019, prior to the pandemic. We analyze policies that are
offered for more than 13 months to capture annual price adjustments. As our metric
for premium change activity, we use the proportion of policies that experienced a
premium change over a year. The median company altered 10.4 percent of their
policies' premiums with an average of 26.4 percent. We define a company as active
if they are in the upper quartile of premium change activity (> 42.2 percent).
     In addition to actively changing premiums, a company might respond to varia-
tions in the market or risk by no longer offering a particular policy and potentially
replacing it with a new one. Hendren (2013) notes that in some contexts, including
life insurance, companies choose not to sell insurance to potential customers who
have certain observable, often high-risk characteristics. Such rejections, potentially
withdrawing policies in our context, can be explained by private information, where
premium adjustments are not sustainable. To measure activity on this extensive
margin, we aggregate the number of times a company changes a policy offering
(i.e., add or drop a policy) annually. We then take the ratio of the median annual
changes to the median number of policies offered.15 Over a year, the median com-
pany altered the equivalent of 14.6 percent of their median policies offerings. We

   15 We do not count initial inclusion or exit from Compulife as changes as we do not know if the policies
were already in effect or if they continue after the company stopped listing with Compulife. In a company
is only listed for a portion of a year, we scale the changes assuming the observed months are typical of the
year.
                                                                                                          11


define a company as being active in offerings if the company is in the top quartile
of alterations (greater than 49.5 percent).16

                                     IV.     Empirical Analyses


                                      A.    Premium Adjustments


  Prior to estimating a formal regression, we first plot changes in premiums over
time. To do this, we first create an index to normalize premiums such that modifi-
cations can be viewed as percent changes. The premium index for policy i in time
t is given by:

                                                  Annual P remiumit
(4)                   P remium Indexit =                             × 100
                                                  Annual P remiumit0

Where t0 is the premium in the first month of the estimation sample. We then get
a measure of premiums at the company level (P remium Indexjt ) by averaging the
premium index (P remium Indexit ) across all policies within a company. The main
reason to use the average index rather than an average of premiums is that policies
with larger premiums (e.g., higher face values) would implicitly receive more weight
in an average of the premiums. A change in the index represents the average percent
change in premiums rather than the change in dollar amounts.
  Figure 1a plots the average of the company premium indexes for a balanced panel
of policies offered from January 2019 until October 2020.17 The figure shows minimal
changes in average premiums from January 2019 to October 2020. There is a small
overall increase in the average premium index in 2020, which would be consistent
with a premium response to COVID-19. Nonetheless, the most substantial increase
in the index occurs from November to December 2019, which predates meaningful
news of the pandemic.18
  16 There is a weakly positive correlation between the two activity metrics (0.15) indicating some companies
that both actively adjust premiums and actively alter offerings with the majority of active companies
primarily focusing on one or the other.
  17 For this balanced panel, there are 62 companies and 103,975 policies.
  18 Premiums for a given month are released the first of the month. Consequently, changes in premiums in
December 2019 would predate the earliest news of COVID-19.
12


     To better understand any change in premium in 2020, we investigate further and
narrow the sample window to December 2019 to October 2020. Of the 74 companies
that continuously offered policies for the shorter window, 55 did not change premi-
ums and only 12 had higher premium indexes in October 2020 relative to December
2019. Table 1 reports the changes for companies that altered premiums from De-
cember 2019 to October 2020. As shown, the increase in premiums is attributed
mainly to the premium changes of three out of 74 companies analyzed for the table.
     Theory would suggest that life insurance companies would be most likely to adjust
premiums for the demographic that experienced the greatest change in mortality risk
and that companies would be less likely to increase premiums for demographics that
do not experience significant changes in mortality risk. With this in mind, Figure
1b plots the change in premiums for the oldest individuals in the main sample in
comparison to younger individuals whose mortality is less affected by the virus.
Mortality rate changes from COVID-19 gradually increase (at an increasing rate)
with age. Consequently, we exclude policies offered to individuals aged 40 to 55 in
these figures as well as the regression analysis to compare individuals that experi-
enced modest changes in mortality risk to individuals that experienced much greater
increases from COVID-19.19 As shown in the figure, the increase in premiums in
2020 occurred more for younger individuals than the older individuals, inconsistent
with a COVID-19 explanation.
     In addition to age, COVID-19 disproportionately increases the risk for individu-
als who have pre-existing conditions or smoke. Figure 1c compares the change in
premiums for older individuals in the worst health category (Regular) that smoke
to younger individuals in the best health categories (Preferred and Preferred Plus)
that do not smoke. As shown, the premiums for high-risk older consumers do not
experience any meaningful change from January to September 2020, whereas there
is a slight increase in the early months of 2020 for low risk younger policies. Overall,
these figures do not provide any compelling evidence of changes in premiums caused

   19 The main empirical findings are not sensitive to this exclusion with only marginal changes to the point
estimates.
                                                                                                           13


by COVID-19.
  Our formal empirical strategy relies on the assumption that premium increases
should differentially occur for older individuals who face higher mortality risk from
COVID-19. To estimate the impact of COVID-19 on life insurance premiums, we
use the following event study specification.




(5)                log (P remiumit ) = i + t +                s Olderi × 1[s = t] + it
                                                          s


where log (P remiumit ) is the log of annual premiums for policy i in month t and
Olderi is an indicator for policies offered to individuals aged 60, 65, or 70. i and
t respectively represent policy and month/year fixed effects. The coefficients of
interest are s , which represent the monthly treatment effects relative to the base
month of December 2019 (directly before the earliest information about COVID-
19). If the monthly treatment effects are positive for months in 2020, then there is
evidence that life insurance companies differentially increased premiums for the old
relative to the young. Any statistical significance for months in 2019 would indicate
potential violations of the parallel trends assumption. Standard errors are clustered
at the company level to account for coordinated pricing strategies inside a company.
  Figure 2 illustrates the finding from the main event study. As shown, there is no
evidence of differential increases in premiums for the old relative to the young. Also,
the point estimates prior to COVID are statistically insignificant, which provides
evidence supporting the parallel trends assumption.
  Table 2 reports the findings of several subsample analyses with the main depen-
dent variables being interactions of months in 2020 with an indicator for the policy
being sold to older individuals (age 60 to 70).20 Specifically, we analyze companies
that have the largest market shares, companies that are the most active in terms of
modifying premiums and offerings, and those with different AM Best ratings. Across

  20 Similar   results are found if we estimate a full event study with interactions for the months in 2019 as
well.
14


each of these subgroups, there is not a statistically significant increase in premiums
for the old relative to the young. (Companies that actively changed premiums ac-
tually marginally decreased prices for the old relative to the young in February and
March.) The latter two columns of Table 2, use additional variation in health status
that theoretically could differentially increase premiums. For both of these specifi-
cations we use policies sold to younger non-smokers in the best health categories as
the control group. For the treatment group we use older individuals in the worst
health category and older individuals in the worst health category that also smoke
for the treatment groups respectively. The only statistically significant premium
effect is observed in September and October of 2020 for the specification that uses
policies sold to relatively unhealthy older smokers as the treatment group. Nonethe-
less, the result is small--less than one percent--and only marginally significant at
the 90 percent level.
     The theoretical model predicts that shorter-term policies should, all else equal,
have larger responses to temporary mortality shocks. Also, it is reasonable to assume
that companies might be more sensitive regarding policies with higher face values
as they represent larger potential losses per policy. Consequently, we analyze and
present policies stratified by term length and face value in Table 3. Across each of
the specifications, there is no evidence that COVID-19 caused differential increases
in premiums for the old relative to the young. Of the 100 event study coefficients
presented in this table, virtually all are "wrong-signed" (negative), with point esti-
mates very close to zero (often changes of 0.4 percent or less), with standard errors
that preclude the possibility of large premium increases.
     One possible explanation for the lack of response in premiums from the pandemic is
that market competition prevents companies from increasing premiums. Conditional
on policy characteristics (face value, term length, etc.) and applicant risk (age, sex,
health, etc.), life insurance very much resembles a commodity, where consumers are
likely to be extremely sensitive to price. To explore this possibility, we analyze if
there are differential responses by low-price leaders and other market participants.
We restrict the sample to companies with either A++ or A+ AM Best Ratings to
                                                                                       15


decrease the chances that differences in premiums are a result of different likelihoods
of default. Within a particular product type (e.g., 15-year term, age 30, male, non-
smoker, preferred health), the median difference between the lowest price and the
second-lowest price is 1.2 percent (mean of 5.2 percent) with 22.6 percent of unique
product types having at least two firms that offer the lowest price. If the low price
leader increased premiums such that their product was no longer the cheapest, then
they could lose a considerable share of price-sensitive customers. Alternatively, it
could be argued that firms with the low price advantage have a small amount of
latitude to increase their premiums without as much concern for losing customers.
  Products that do not have the low price advantage and compete across different
dimensions (e.g., customer service, additional riders, etc.) might have more flexibil-
ity to increase their prices in response to the pandemic. Alternatively, those without
a price advantage might be unwilling to increase their price as there already exists
cheaper options for their potential customers.
  To analyze if life insurance policies with the low price behave differently, we esti-
mate regression models that limit the sample based on the product's price ordering
in December 2019, immediately before the first news of COVID-19. Table 4 presents
results first for policies that did not offer the lowest premium within a given prod-
uct type and shows no statistically significant response. The second column reports
results for analysis using only policies that offer the lowest within product premium.
For this subset of policies, there is a statistically significant increase in premiums for
policies offered to an older group relative to policies offered to younger individuals
with point estimates implying that annual premiums raised by 0.2 to 0.8 percent
between March and October 2020. The last column further restricts the sample to
policies that had the low price advantage, with the next lowest premium being at
least one percent more expensive. Consistent with the gap allowing for more adjust-
ments, the premium for policies offered to older individuals increased more relative
to changes in premiums offered to younger individuals with the highest monthly
effect of a 1.3 percent relative increase in premiums. In both of the lowest price
specifications, there were not statistically significant responses in the early months
16


of 2020 consistent with the timing of information on COVID-19 and its likely effects
on U.S. residents.
     Overall, the results imply that the premium response was minimal due to COVID-
19, with some evidence that price competition inhibited life insurance companies
from adjusting their premiums in response to increased mortality risk.

                                  B.   Policy Offerings

     Rather than changing premiums for a policy that became riskier due to COVID-
19, companies could have responded by not offering the policy to new customers.
There do not appear to be any regulatory hurdles to discontinue offering a policy to
new customers. Given the looming uncertainty surrounding COVID-19 that makes
products difficult to price, this option might be attractive for policies targeting
demographics at a higher risk of death from COVID-19.
     In an innovative study, Hendren (2013) explores circumstances under which insur-
ance companies reject applicants rather than adjusting premiums. In our context,
with the changing mortality risk with COVID-19 in 2020 relative to earlier years,
withdrawing life insurance offerings for applicants with observable characteristics
such as older age or poorer health is creating a new "rejection" group. Hendren
argues that private information known by potential applicants--beyond what can
be captured by their observable characteristics--has a key role in such rejections.
Much like Hendren's motivation with long-term care insurance, there are specific
factors and preferences related to the pandemic--such as the ability or willingness
to be vigilant about COVID-19 safety--that are difficult for an insurance company
to obtain and verify.
     Indeed, underwriting guidelines did change in recognition of the pandemic (BUA,
2020). Companies generally postponed offerings (e.g., created new rejection groups)
based on a combination of age, health status, and face value. For example, AIG
postponed issuance of policies for those over age 75, and for those aged 66-75 inclu-
sive of "medical flat extras" (essentially risks that the standard rating tables do not
cover).
                                                                                                       17


     We once again analyze 10, 15, and 20-year term policies from January 2019 to
October 2020. If a company either starts or stops listing policies on Compulife, we do
not have data on any of their policy offerings. We hesitate to assume that all of the
policies were discontinued if not listed on Compulife. Consequently, we restrict the
analysis to the 78 companies that continuously listed policies on Compulife during
the sample period.21
     Figure 3 plots the proportion of all policies that were active for each month based
on age groups. As shown, there is a slight decrease in offerings for younger individ-
uals over time, whereas there is a larger decrease in offerings to older individuals.
Nonetheless, the decrease in net policies offered to older individuals begins prior to
any news of COVID-19.
     To estimate the impact of COVID-19 on offerings formally, we use an event study
specification analogous to the model used to estimate the pandemic's influence on
premiums.


(6)                   Activeit = i + t +              s Olderi × 1[s = t] + it
                                                  s


Where Activeit is an indicator for a company offering policy i on Compulife at time
t.
     Figure 4a presents the results of the base specification. While the point estimates
are statistically significant (at the 90-percent level) and negative in 2020, consistent
with a COVID-19 effect, there is also evidence of a pre-trend, which violates a main
assumption of the analysis. To control for this pre-trend, we first estimate a model
with Active as the dependent variable and age-group fixed effects (i.e., older and
younger) and age-group by month trends using data from the pre-period, January
2019 to December 2019 (Kleven et al., 2014). We generate residuals for the full time
period using the estimated coefficients and then use these residuals as the dependent
variable for the event study presented in Figure 4b.22 As shown, after controlling for
     21 We
        also require that a policy be offered at least once in the sample period.
     22 We
        use this method rather than directly including a group by month trend in the specification, as the
group by year trend could absorb any potential treatment effect, thus attenuating any result.
18


linear pre-trends, there is no statistically significant evidence of differential policy
removal for the old relative to the young due to the pandemic.
     Table 5 presents the results for several different subsets, with each specification
accounting for a linear pre-trend as described above. In the table, the only subsample
analysis that indicates differential decreases in offerings for the elderly is the subset
of companies that modify premiums most regularly. The largest relative decrease
occurs in July and indicates that offerings decreased by 5.1 percentage points due to
COVID-19. Nonetheless, in the next reported specification that analyzes companies
that actively change offerings, there is evidence that offerings differentially increased
from August to October 2020 for the elderly.
     Table 6 further analyzes changes in offerings based on term length and face value.
Stratifying by term length does not change the main findings. However, there is some
evidence that companies differentially decreased policy offerings for the largest face
value policies ( $1 million). For $1 million term policies, offerings decreased for
the elderly by 1.7, 1.7, and 3.1 percentage points, respectively for May, June, and
July 2020. This decrease in the largest face value policies could represent increased
scrutiny of policies that could represent the biggest losses for a company.
     Overall, the offerings analysis indicates that the pandemic did not cause widespread
adjustments to offerings.

                                C.   The New York Market

     In the main analysis, we use quotes from the entire U.S. In general, companies
offer the same life insurance policy to residents of all or almost all states, which
limits analysis that uses geographic variation in the pandemic's severity. New York,
however, presents an interesting case study as it was harder-hit early on by the pan-
demic and also because the life insurance regulatory structure leads to subsidiaries
being created specifically to offer policies to residents of New York (Pottier and
Sommer, 1998).
     We analyze policies that were offered in New York but not in New Mexico to isolate
policies that have a greater potential to respond to the early effects of COVID-19
                                                                                                              19


specific to New York.23 Table 7 presents the results for both changes in premiums
and offerings. As illustrated, life insurance companies did not increase premiums
or differentially discontinue policies offered to older individuals, consistent with the
main analysis.24 These results indicate that companies did not significantly alter
premiums or offering even in localities that were impacted the most early on in the
pandemic.


                            D.    Policies Listed for the Oldest of the Old


  The main sample includes policies sold to individuals between the ages of 20 and
70, which captures the vast majority of commonly purchased policies (Harris and
Yelowitz, 2014). In this subsection, we analyze the response for policies sold to
individuals aged 75, 80, and 85, who experience the greatest increase in mortality
risk due to COVID-19. Given the large mortality risk, both the number of policies
and companies offering policies are comparatively small for these advanced ages.25
  For analysis of premium changes for policies sold to individuals aged 75 through
85 compared to policies sold to younger individuals (aged 20-35), we find no sig-
nificant response to COVID. However, when we analyze policy offerings, we find
that offerings significantly decreased for the oldest age group starting in May 2020,
as shown in Figure 5. In contrast to the null result for the main specification,
this oldest group experienced significant decreases with point estimates implying
that the oldest policies offerings differentially decreased in July by 15.8 percentage
points for the sample using 10, 15, and 20-year term policy and by 13.6 percentage
points for one, five, and 10-year policies (more typical term lengths for the oldest
age groups). These large results indicate that companies decreased offerings to the
most vulnerable, but it likely influenced a small minority of atypical purchasers.

  23 We  selected New Mexico because it is the default state in the Compulife software.
  24 For  the policy offerings specification in May through July 2019, the point estimates are statistically
significant at the 90 percent level, indicating a potential violation of the parallel trends assumption. Ac-
counting for linear pre-trends, as in the main analysis, exacerbates the issue. When we account for both
linear and quadratic pre-trends, the results continue to indicate a absence of a statistically significant effect
in 2020 (as well as 2019).
   25 Appendix Figure A2 illustrates the distribution of policies and the number of companies that offer
policies by age.
20


                                   V.   Conclusion


     The coronavirus pandemic has created unparalleled short-run disruption across
virtually every segment of society, both in the US and elsewhere. If the earli-
est predictions of the increase in mortality rate from COVID-19 would have come
to fruition, then theory suggests that life insurance companies would have been
forced to significantly adjust life insurance premiums or offerings to account for
the increased risk. Our findings--from an analysis starting with nearly 100 compa-
nies and 800,000 policies--suggest minimal observable adjustments through October
2020. Nonetheless, we do find evidence that low price leaders raised premiums in
response to increased mortality risk, and policies offered to individuals age 75 and
above were differentially removed from the market. Overall, these results are con-
sistent with a combination of market competition in life insurance and anticipation
of meaningful precautionary behavior to contain the spread among the vulnerable,
leading to only modest short-run increases in mortality risk.
     Our expectation is that market-driven adjustments in the life insurance industry
represent some of the most informed expectations on the path of the pandemic.
Nonetheless, our findings of relatively small adjustments in the term life insurance
market--perhaps unexpected--should not be interpreted as dismissing the individ-
ual risk from COVID-19, especially for more vulnerable members of society. Al-
though there are a host of reasons that could explain our results, the most likely
one is that as of early November 2020, there have been approximately 9.7 million
confirmed cases and 235,000 fatalities in the U.S., in a country with 330 million
individuals and 2.8 million annual deaths. The most dire mortality forecasts--using
either the CFR or IFR --rely on much larger percentages of the population being
infected.
     Accompanying the `third surge" in cases is the real promise of widespread dis-
tribution of an effective vaccine in the next few months. The potential vaccine,
along with our findings, suggest that it is unlikely that life insurance companies will
significantly alter policies in the next several months due to COVID-19.
                                                                                21


                                REFERENCES


Abbott, Brianna, and Jason Douglas. 2020. "How Deadly Is COVID-
  19?    Researchers Are Getting Closer to an Answer." The Wall Street
  Journal, https://www.wsj.com/articles/how-deadly-is-covid-19-researchers-are-
  getting-closer-to-an-answer-11595323801?mod=hp lead pos5.

Almond, Douglas. 2006. "Is the 1918 Influenza Pandemic Over? Long-term Ef-
  fects of in Utero Influenza Exposure in the Post-1940 Us Population." Journal of
  Political Economy, 114(4): 672­712.

Beigel, John H, Kay M Tomashek, Lori E Dodd, Aneesh K Mehta,
  Barry S Zingman, Andre C Kalil, Elizabeth Hohmann, Helen Y Chu,
  Annie Luetkemeyer, Susan Kline, et al. 2020. "Remdesivir for the treatment
  of Covid-19preliminary report." New England Journal of Medicine.

Benitez, Joseph, Charles Courtemanche, and Aaron Yelowitz. Forthcom-
  ing. "Racial and Ethnic Disparities in COVID-19: Evidence from Six Large
  Cities." Journal of Economics, Race, and Policy, https://doi.org/10.1007/s41996-
  020-00068-9.

Brown, Jeffrey R., and Austan Goolsbee. 2002. "Does the Internet Make
  Markets More Competitive? Evidence from the Life Insurance Industry." Journal
  of Political Economy, 110(3): 481­507.

BUA. 2020. "COVID-19 Life Insurance Carrier Updates." https://www.buaweb.
  com/pages/COVID-19-Life-Updates.html, accessed November 9, 2020.

Cawley, John, and Tomas Philipson. 1999. "An Empirical Examination
  of Information Barriers to Trade in Insurance." American Economic Review,
  89(4): 827­846.

CDC, U.S. Centers for Disease Control, and Prevention. 2020. "People
  Who Are at Higher Risk for Severe Illness -- CDC." @CDCgov. Last Modified
22


     2020-05-14T05:59:39Z. https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/need-extra-
     precautions/people-at-higher-risk.html.

Corum, Jonathan, Denise Grady Sui-Lee Wee, and Carl Zimmer. 2020.
     "Coronavirus Vaccine Tracker." The New York Times.

Courtemanche, Charles, Joseph Garuccio, Anh Le, Joshua Pinkston, and
     Aaron Yelowitz. 2020. "Strong Social Distancing Measures in the United States
     Reduced the Covid-19 Growth Rate: Study Evaluates the Impact of Social Dis-
     tancing Measures on the Growth Rate of Confirmed Covid-19 Cases across the
     United States." Health Affairs, 39 (7): 1237-1246.

Cox, Samuel H, Yijia Lin, Ruilin Tian, and Luis F Zuluaga. 2013. "Mortality
     Portfolio Risk Management." Journal of Risk and Insurance, 80(4): 853­890.

Ericson, Keith Marzilli, and Justin Sydnor. 2017. "The Questionable Value
     of Having a Choice of Levels of Health Insurance Coverage." Journal of Economic
     Perspectives, 31(4): 51­72.

Ferguson, Neil, Daniel Laydon, Gemma Nedjati Gilani, Natsuko Imai,
     Kylie Ainslie, Marc Baguelin, Sangeeta Bhatia, Adhiratha Boonyasiri,
     ZULMA Cucunuba Perez, Gina Cuomo-Dannenburg, et al. 2020. "Re-
     port 9: Impact of Non-pharmaceutical Interventions (NPIs) to Reduce Covid19
     Mortality and Healthcare Demand."

Friedson, Andrew I, Drew McNichols, Joesph J Sabia, and Dhaval
     Dave. 2020. "Did Californias Shelter in Place Order Work? Early Evidence on
     Coronavirus-related Health Benefits." National Bureau of Economic Research,
     https://doi.org/10.3386/w26992. http://www.nber.org/papers/w26992.

Handel, Ben, Igal Hendel, and Michael D Whinston. 2015. "Equilibria in
     Health Exchanges: Adverse Selection Versus Reclassification Risk." Economet-
     rica, 83(4): 1261­1313.
                                                                              23


Harris, Timothy F., and Aaron Yelowitz. 2014. "Is there Adverse Selection
  in the Life Insurance Market? Evidence from a Representative Sample of Pur-
  chasers." Economics Letters, 124(3): 520­522.

Harris, Timothy F., and Aaron Yelowitz. 2017. "Nudging Life Insurance Hold-
  ings in the Workplace." Economic Inquiry, 55(2): 951­981.

Harris, Timothy F, and Aaron Yelowitz. 2018. "Life Insurance Holdings and
  Well-being of Surviving Spouses." Contemporary Economic Policy, 36(3): 526­
  538.

He, Daifeng. 2009. "The Life Insurance Market: Asymmetric Information Revis-
  ited." Journal of Public Economics, 93(9-10): 1090­1097.

He, Daifeng. 2011. "Is There Dynamic Adverse Selection in the Life Insurance
  Market?" Economics Letters, 112(1): 113­115.

Hedengren, David, and Thomas Stratmann. 2016. "Is there Adverse Selection
  in Life Insurance Markets?" Economic Inquiry, 54(1): 450­463.

Hendel, Igal, and Alessandro Lizzeri. 2003. "The Role of Commitment in Dy-
  namic Contracts: Evidence from Life Insurance." Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  118(1): 299­328.

Hendren, Nathaniel. 2013. "Private Information and Insurance Rejections."
  Econometrica, 81(5): 1713­1762.

Hsiang, Solomon, Daniel Allen, S´
                                ebastien Annan-Phan, Kendon Bell, Ian
  Bolliger, Trinetta Chong, Hannah Druckenmiller, Luna Yue Huang,
  Andrew Hultgren, Emma Krasovich, et al. 2020. "The Effect of Large-scale
  Anti-contagion Policies on the Covid-19 Pandemic." Nature, 1­9.

Kleven, Henrik Jacobsen, Camille Landais, Emmanuel Saez, and Esben
  Schultz. 2014. "Migration and Wage Effects of Taxing Top Earners: Evidence
  from the Foreigners Tax Scheme in Denmark." Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  129(1): 333­378.
24


Koijen, Ralph SJ, and Motohiro Yogo. 2015. "The Cost of Financial Frictions
     for Life Insurers." American Economic Review, 105(1): 445­75.

Luhnow,        David,     and    Alice    Uribe. 2020. "Covid-19 Measures Have
     All but Wiped Out the Flu in the Southern Hemisphere." The Wall
     Street Journal, https://www.wsj.com/articles/covid-19-measures-have-all-but-
     wiped-out-the-flu-in-the-southern-hemisphere-11595440682.

Lyu, Wei, and George L Wehby. 2020. "Shelter-in-place Orders Reduced Covid-
     19 Mortality and Reduced the Rate of Growth in Hospitalizations: Study Examine
     Effects of Shelter-in-places Orders on Daily Growth Rates of Covid-19 Deaths and
     Hospitalizations Using Event Study Models." Health Affairs, 10­1377.

Mandavilli, Apoorva. 2020. "Federal Officials Turn to a New Testing Strategy as
     Infections Surge." The New York Times, https://www.nytimes.com/2020/07/01/
     health/coronavirus-pooled-testing.html.

Mao, Hong, James M Carson, Krzysztof M Ostaszewski, and Luo
     Shoucheng. 2004. "Pricing Life Insurance: Combining Economic, Financial, and
     Actuarial Approaches." Journal of Insurance Issues, 134­159.

NYT. 2020. "More Than 40Nursing Homes." The New York Times, https://www.
     nytimes.com/interactive/2020/us/coronavirus-nursing-homes.html.

Pottier, Steven W, and David W Sommer. 1998. "Regulatory stringency and
     New York licensed life insurers." Journal of Risk and Insurance, 485­502.

Rosenkranz, Robert. 2020. "The Measure of New York's Coronavirus Devas-
     tation." Wall Street Journal, https://www.wsj.com/articles/the-measure-of-new-
     yorks-coronavirus-devastation-11591140254.

Scism,       Leslie.    2020.   "Less    Driving,   Fewer   Accidents:   Car     Insur-
     ers Give Millions in Coronavirus Refunds." The Wall Street Journal,
     https://www.wsj.com/articles/car-insurer-american-family-gives-200-million-in-
     coronavirus-refunds-as-accidents-decline-11586175602.
                                                                             25


Selden, Thomas M, and Terceira A Berdahl. 2020. "COVID-19 and
 Racial/ethnic Disparities in Health Risk, Employment, and Household Compo-
 sition: Study Examines Potential Explanations for Racial-ethnic Disparities in
 Covid-19 Hospitalizations and Mortality." Health Affairs, 10­1377.

Verity, Robert, Lucy C Okell, Ilaria Dorigatti, Peter Winskill, Charles
 Whittaker, Natsuko Imai, Gina Cuomo-Dannenburg, Hayley Thomp-
 son, Patrick GT Walker, Han Fu, et al. 2020. "Estimates of the Severity
 of Coronavirus Disease 2019: A Model-based Analysis." The Lancet Infectious
 Diseases.
26


                       Figure 1. Average Company Premium Changes
                                                                                       (a) Combined




                                                        101
                          Average Company Preimum Index
                          100    100.25 100.5 100.75
                                             99.75




                                                              Jan '19   Apr '19   Jul '19    Oct '19    Jan '20    Apr '20   Jul '20   Oct '20




                                                                                            (b) By Age
                            100 100.25 100.5 100.75 101
                          Average Company Preimum Index
                                             99.75




                                                              Jan '19   Apr '19   Jul '19    Oct '19    Jan '20    Apr '20   Jul '20   Oct '20


                                                                                                       Age 20-35
                                                                                                       Age 60-70




                                                                                     (c) By Risk/Age
                          99.75 100 100.25 100.5 100.75 101
                              Average Company Preimum Index




                                                              Jan '19   Apr '19   Jul '19    Oct '19    Jan '20    Apr '20   Jul '20   Oct '20


                                                                                               Low Risk, Age 20-35
                                                                                               High Risk, Age 60-70



Note: The figure presents the average company premium index from January 2019 to July 2020 originating
from a balanced panel of 10, 15, and 20-year term policies that were continuously offered from July 2019
until October 2020. Low Risk is defined as individuals in the worst health category (Regular) that smoke
and High Risk is defined as individuals in the best health categories (Preferred and Preferred Plus) that do
not smoke.
                                                                                                          27




                                  Figure 2. Event Study, Influence of COVID on Log Premiums
                 .01
   OLDER x DATE Coefficients
    -.005    0      .005
                 -.01




                               Jan '19   Apr '19   Jul '19   Oct '19   Jan '20   Apr '20   Jul '20   Oct '20


                                                              Coeff.
                                                              95% Confidence Interval


Note: The unbalanced panel includes 10, 15, and 20-year term policies listed on Compulife from January
2019 to October 2020 that were offered to individuals aged 20, 25, 30, 35, 60, 65, and 70. There were 207,582
unique policies from 93 companies and 2,733,128 total observations. Controls included policy and month
fixed effects and standard errors were clustered at the company level.
28




                                    Figure 3. Proportion of Policies Offered by Month and Age Group
                     .64      .62
         Policies Offered (%)
     .56      .58      .6
                     .54




                                    Jan '19   Apr '19   Jul '19   Oct '19    Jan '20    Apr '20   Jul '20   Oct '20


                                                                            Age 20-35
                                                                            Age 60-70


Note: The figure shows the proportion of the 197,268 unique policies that were actively offered on Compulife
for the 78 companies that continuously listed policies on the platform from January 2019 to October 2020
by age group.
                                                                                                                               29


                        Figure 4. Event Study, Influence of COVID on Offerings
                                                                      (a) Base Specification




                                         .05
                OLDER x DATE Coefficients
                          0     -.05




                                               Jan '19   Apr '19   Jul '19   Oct '19   Jan '20   Apr '20   Jul '20   Oct '20


                                                                              Coeff.
                                                                              95% Confidence Interval



                                                              (b) Controlling for Linear Pre-Trends
                                .06
                OLDER x DATE Coefficients
                 -.02  0    .02 -.04 .04




                                               Jan '19   Apr '19   Jul '19   Oct '19   Jan '20   Apr '20   Jul '20   Oct '20


                                                                              Coeff.
                                                                              95% Confidence Interval



Note: The sample includes 10, 15, and 20-year term policies for individuals aged 20, 25, 30, 35, 60, 65, 70 that
appeared at least once from January 2019 to October 2020. Only policies from companies that continuously
listed policies on Compulife during the sample period were included. There were 197,268 unique policies
from 78 companies for a total of 4,339,896 observations. Controls included policy and month fixed effects
and standard errors were clustered at the company level. In panel (a), the dependent variable is an indicator
for the policy actively being offered in a given month. In panel (b), the dependent variable is the residuals
that result from an estimation of an indicator of policy offering on age-group (i.e., younger and older) fixed
effects and age-group by date linear trends on the pre-treatment period (2019).
30


         Figure 5. Event Study, Influence of COVID on Offerings for Age 75+
                                                           (a) 10, 15, and 20-year Term Policies




                              .1
                OLDER x DATE Coefficients
                  -.2     -.1 -.3  0




                                            Jan '19   Apr '19   Jul '19   Oct '19   Jan '20   Apr '20   Jul '20   Oct '20


                                                                           Coeff.
                                                                           95% Confidence Interval



                                                            (b) 1, 5, and 10-year Term Policies
                              .1
                OLDER x DATE Coefficients
                     -.1        0
                              -.2




                                            Jan '19   Apr '19   Jul '19   Oct '19   Jan '20   Apr '20   Jul '20   Oct '20


                                                                           Coeff.
                                                                           95% Confidence Interval



Note: The sample includes term policies for individuals aged 20, 25, 30, 35, 75, 80, and 85 that appeared
at least once from January 2019 to October 2020. Only policies from companies that continuously listed
policies on Compulife during the sample period were included. There were 137,405 unique policies from
80 companies for a total of 3,022,910 observations for the specification presented in panel (a). There were
59,373 unique policies from 78 companies for a total of 1,306,206 observations for the specification presented
in panel (b). Controls included policy and month fixed effects and standard errors were clustered at the
company level. The dependent variable is an indicator for the policy actively being offered in a given month.
           Table 1--Premium Changes by Company (Index=100 in December 2019)
                           Dec     Jan     Feb     Mar     Apr     May     Jun      Jul    Aug     Sep     Oct

 John Hancock NY           100.0   100.0   101.3   101.3   101.3   101.3   101.3   101.3   111.8   111.8   111.9
 Pruco Co of New Jersey    100.0   101.4   101.4   101.4   101.4   101.4   101.4   101.4   110.3   110.3   110.3
 Assurity                  100.0   100.0   100.0   100.0   107.2   107.2   107.2   107.2   107.2   107.2   107.2
 Pacific                   100.0   100.3   100.3   100.3   100.3   100.3   100.3   100.3   100.3   100.3   102.9
 United States Life NY     100.0   100.0   100.0   100.0   100.0   100.0   100.0   100.0   100.0   100.0   102.8
 United of Omaha           100.0   100.5   100.5   100.5   102.8   102.8   102.8   102.8   102.8   102.8   102.8
 William Penn Co of NY     100.0   100.0   100.0   102.0   102.0   102.5   102.5   101.9   101.9   101.9   101.9
 Columbian                 100.0   100.0   101.2   101.2   101.2   101.2   101.2   101.2   101.2   101.2   101.2
 AAA                       100.0   100.5   100.8   100.8   100.8   100.8   100.8   100.8   100.8   100.8   100.8
 John Hancock USA          100.0   100.1   100.1   100.1   100.1   100.1   100.1   100.1   100.7   100.7   100.7
 Banner                    100.0   100.0   100.0   100.2   100.2   100.5   100.5   101.0   101.0   100.6   100.6
 Lincoln National          100.0   100.0   100.0    99.7    99.7   100.1   100.1   100.1   100.1   100.2   100.2
 Sagicor                   100.0   100.0   100.0   100.0   100.0   100.0   100.5   100.5   100.5    99.9    99.9
 Pruco                     100.0   100.0   100.0   100.0   100.0   100.0   100.0   100.0    99.6    99.6    99.6
 Protective                100.0   100.0    99.8    99.8    99.8    99.8    99.5    99.5    99.4    99.4    99.4
 Ameritas Corp of NY       100.0   100.0   100.0   100.0   100.0   100.0   100.0    99.1    99.1    99.1    99.1
 American General          100.0   100.0   100.3   100.3   100.3   100.3    98.9    98.9    98.9    98.9    98.9
 Massachusetts Mutual      100.0   100.0   100.0    98.7    98.7    98.7    98.7    98.7    98.7    98.7    98.7
 Ameritas Corp             100.0   100.0   100.0   100.0   100.0   100.0   100.0    94.9    94.9    94.9    94.9

Note: The sample used to generate the table includes policies that were continuously active from December 2019
to October 2020 with premiums normalized to 100 in December 2019. We report the average of these indexed
premiums across companies. We only present the 19 companies that changed their premiums out of 74 companies
analyzed. The table is sorted descending based on the October 2020 premium index.




                                                                                                                   31
32


       Table 2--Premium Response to COVID-19: Dependent Variable Log Premiums
     Sample:         Top           Top Modifier of            AM Best Rating              Young Healthy & Older:

                    Share      Premiums      Offerings    A to A++       B+ to A-      Rg Health       Rg Health/Smoker

 Older ×
     Jan 2020       0.001       -0.004       -0.002          0.000         0.002         0.001               0.003
                   (0.004)       (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.002)       (0.003)       (0.003)             (0.004)
     Feb 2020     -0.004        -0.009       -0.007        -0.002          0.002        -0.000               0.002
                   (0.005)       (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.002)       (0.003)       (0.003)             (0.004)
     Mar 2020     -0.004        -0.010       -0.007        -0.002          0.002        -0.002               0.001
                   (0.005)       (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.002)       (0.003)       (0.004)             (0.004)
     Apr 2020     -0.005        -0.009       -0.008        -0.002        -0.007         -0.002               0.001
                   (0.005)       (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.003)       (0.010)       (0.004)             (0.004)
     May 2020     -0.005        -0.008       -0.008        -0.002        -0.007         -0.002               0.001
                   (0.005)       (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.003)       (0.010)       (0.004)             (0.004)
     Jun 2020     -0.005        -0.008       -0.007        -0.001        -0.007         -0.001               0.002
                   (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.005)       (0.003)       (0.010)       (0.004)             (0.005)
     Jul 2020     -0.005        -0.008       -0.007        -0.001        -0.007         -0.001               0.003
                   (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.003)       (0.010)       (0.004)             (0.005)
     Aug 2020     -0.001        -0.007       -0.007        -0.001        -0.007          0.004               0.007
                   (0.007)       (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.003)       (0.010)       (0.004)             (0.005)
     Sep 2020     -0.001        -0.007       -0.006        -0.001        -0.007          0.004               0.008
                   (0.007)       (0.007)      (0.006)       (0.003)       (0.010)       (0.004)             (0.005)
     Oct 2020     -0.001        -0.007       -0.006        -0.001        -0.007          0.005               0.009
                   (0.007)       (0.007)      (0.006)       (0.003)       (0.011)       (0.004)             (0.005)

 Observations     1,080,208      770,701      962,543      2,208,112      364,600       942,024             724,357
 Policies           96,205       56,166        90,427       171,798       20,540         72,551             56,437
 Companies            29           18            25           62            17            93                  93

Note: The unbalanced panel includes 10, 15, and 20-year term policies listed on Compulife from January 2019 to
October 2020 that were offered to individuals aged 20, 25, 30, 35, 60, 65, and 70. Top Share refers to companies listed in
the top 25 for market share (or whose parent company is listed) by National Association of Insurance Commissioners.
The top modifier of premiums and offerings indicate companies in the top quartile of activity respectively based on
changes from 2014 to 2018. AM Best Ratings are indicators of a companies ability to meet financial obligations. The
second to last column includes policies s to younger individuals (age 20 to 35) who do not smoke in the best health
categories and older individuals in the worst health category. The last column further restrict the policies s to older
individuals to those that smoke. Policy and month fixed effects were included but not reported here. Standard errors
are clustered at the company level and are shown in parentheses          p<0.01,      p<0.05,      p<0.1.
                    Table 3--Log Premium Response by Term Length & Face Value
                            Term Length                                           Face Value

                  10-year     15-year     20-year    $100k     $250k     $500k      $750k        $1m         $5m         $10m

   Older ×
     Jan 2020      0.000       0.000    -0.000       0.001     0.000    -0.000    -0.000       -0.000        0.000       0.001
                  (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.002)   (0.002)
     Feb 2020     -0.002     -0.001     -0.001      -0.000    -0.001    -0.002    -0.002       -0.002    -0.001       -0.001
                  (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.002)   (0.002)
     Mar 2020     -0.002     -0.001     -0.001      -0.003    -0.001    -0.002    -0.002       -0.002    -0.001       -0.001
                  (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)   (0.004)   (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.002)   (0.002)
     Apr 2020     -0.003     -0.002     -0.002      -0.004    -0.003    -0.003    -0.003       -0.003    -0.002       -0.002
                  (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)   (0.004)   (0.003)   (0.002)    (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.003)   (0.003)
     May 2020     -0.003     -0.002     -0.003      -0.004    -0.002    -0.002    -0.003       -0.003    -0.002       -0.002
                  (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)   (0.004)   (0.003)   (0.002)    (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.003)   (0.003)
     Jun 2020     -0.002     -0.002     -0.002      -0.004    -0.002    -0.002    -0.003       -0.002    -0.002       -0.002
                  (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)   (0.004)   (0.003)   (0.002)    (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.003)   (0.003)
     Jul 2020     -0.003     -0.002     -0.002      -0.004    -0.002    -0.002    -0.002       -0.002    -0.002       -0.001
                  (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)   (0.004)   (0.003)   (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.003)   (0.003)
     Aug 2020     -0.003     -0.002     -0.002      -0.004    -0.003    -0.002    -0.003       -0.002    -0.001       -0.001
                  (0.003)     (0.004)     (0.003)   (0.004)   (0.003)   (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.003)   (0.003)
     Sep 2020     -0.003     -0.002     -0.001      -0.004    -0.003    -0.002    -0.002       -0.002    -0.001       -0.001
                  (0.003)     (0.004)     (0.003)   (0.004)   (0.003)   (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.003)   (0.003)
     Oct 2020     -0.003     -0.002     -0.001      -0.003    -0.003    -0.002    -0.002       -0.001    -0.001       -0.001
                  (0.003)     (0.004)     (0.003)   (0.004)   (0.003)   (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.003)   (0.003)

   Observations   958,500     929,729     844,899   333,672   390,679   398,430    396,728     411,938      401,318   400,363
   Policies        73,067     70,664      63,851     22,280    30,042    30,740     30,556      31,761      31,127       31,076
   Companies        90          82          90        80        89        86         83          87           82          80

Note: The unbalanced panel includes 10, 15, and 20-year term policies listed on Compulife from January 2019 to October
2020 that were offered to individuals aged 20, 25, 30, 35, 60, 65, and 70. Policy and month fixed effects were included but




                                                                                                                                   33
not reported here. Standard errors are clustered at the company level and are shown in parentheses          p<0.01,      p<0.05,
   p<0.1.
34


            Table 4--Price Competition: Dependent Variable Log Premiums
                             Not Lowest Price         Lowest price              Lowest Price  1% Gap

      Older ×
        Jan 2020                 -0.000                   0.000                          0.004
                                  (0.003)                (0.001)                         (0.004)
        Feb 2020                 -0.003                   0.000                          0.004
                                  (0.003)                (0.001)                         (0.004)
        Mar 2020                 -0.005                   0.002                          0.006
                                  (0.004)                (0.001)                         (0.004)
        Apr 2020                 -0.005                   0.002                          0.006
                                  (0.004)                (0.001)                         (0.004)
        May 2020                 -0.005                   0.003                          0.007
                                  (0.004)                (0.002)                         (0.004)
        Jun 2020                 -0.005                   0.004                          0.007
                                  (0.004)                (0.002)                         (0.004)
        Jul 2020                 -0.005                   0.007                          0.013
                                  (0.004)                (0.004)                         (0.006)
        Aug 2020                 -0.003                   0.008                          0.013
                                  (0.005)                (0.004)                         (0.006)
        Sep 2020                 -0.003                   0.008                          0.013
                                  (0.005)                (0.004)                         (0.005)
        Oct 2020                 -0.002                   0.008                          0.013
                                  (0.005)                (0.004)                         (0.005)

        Observations             1,044,891               28,761                          9,383
        Policies                   64,527                 1,513                           486
        Companies                    35                    30                              17

     Note: The unbalanced panel includes 10, 15, and 20-year term policies listed on Compulife from
     January 2019 to October 2020 that were offered to individuals aged 20, 25, 30, 35, 60, 65, and 70.
     The sample is restricted to companies with A++ or A+ AM Best Ratings. Premium comparisons
     in December 2019 were used to determine if the policy was the low price leader or not. Policy
     and month fixed effects were included but not reported here. Standard errors are clustered at the
     company level and are shown in parentheses      p<0.01,       p<0.05,      p<0.1.
                                                                                                             35


    Table 5--Subsample Analysis: The Influence of COVID-19 on Policy Offerings
    Sample:         Top          Top Modifier of             AM Best Rating        Young Healthy & Older:

                   Share      Premiums     Offerings   A to A++       B+ to A-   Rg Health   Rg Health/Smoker

 Older ×
   Jan 2020       -0.010        0.003      -0.006         -0.007      -0.008     -0.012          -0.013
                   (0.017)      (0.010)      (0.020)       (0.011)     (0.011)    (0.013)         (0.013)
   Feb 2020       -0.004        0.005      -0.000         -0.004      -0.012     -0.010          -0.011
                   (0.018)      (0.009)      (0.020)       (0.011)     (0.012)    (0.014)         (0.013)
   Mar 2020         0.005       0.005        0.008        -0.001      -0.012     -0.005          -0.005
                   (0.018)      (0.009)      (0.020)       (0.011)     (0.013)    (0.014)         (0.014)
   Apr 2020         0.011       0.000        0.015           0.001    -0.011     -0.002          -0.002
                   (0.018)      (0.006)      (0.020)       (0.011)     (0.013)    (0.014)         (0.013)
   May 2020       -0.005       -0.011        0.010        -0.007      -0.008     -0.008          -0.007
                   (0.020)      (0.014)      (0.020)       (0.012)     (0.012)    (0.014)         (0.014)
   Jun 2020       -0.001       -0.010        0.016        -0.005      -0.007     -0.016          -0.014
                   (0.020)      (0.014)      (0.021)       (0.012)     (0.012)    (0.018)         (0.018)
   Jul 2020       -0.007       -0.051        0.018        -0.019      -0.024     -0.029          -0.028
                   (0.019)      (0.027)      (0.019)       (0.014)     (0.016)    (0.021)         (0.020)
   Aug 2020         0.015      -0.032        0.040        -0.004      -0.025     -0.010          -0.009
                   (0.025)      (0.036)      (0.023)       (0.016)     (0.016)    (0.026)         (0.025)
   Sep 2020         0.018      -0.032        0.045        -0.003      -0.021     -0.006          -0.005
                   (0.025)      (0.036)      (0.023)       (0.016)     (0.016)    (0.026)         (0.025)
   Oct 2020         0.029      -0.032        0.056           0.003    -0.020       0.001          0.002
                   (0.026)      (0.036)      (0.024)       (0.017)     (0.016)    (0.026)         (0.025)

 Observations     2,114,002    1,163,668   2,111,296      3,805,912   427,152    1,510,960       1,178,958
 Policies          96,091       52,894       95,968       172,996      19,416     68,680          53,589
 Companies           25           15            23            57         15         78              78
 Percent Active     0.49         0.61         0.46           0.56       0.81       0.58            0.57

Note: As the dependent variable, the specifications use the residuals that result from an estimation of an
indicator of policy offering on age-group (i.e., younger and older) fixed effects and age-group by date linear
trends on the pre-treatment period. The sample includes 10, 15, and 20-year term policies for individuals aged
20, 25, 30, 35, 60, 65, 70 that appeared at least once from January 2019 to October 2020. Only policies from
companies that continuously listed policies on Compulife during the sample period were included. Policy and
month fixed effects were included but not reported here. Standard errors are clustered at the company level
and are shown in parentheses       p<0.01,      p<0.05,      p<0.1.
36


                     Table 6--Policy Offering Analysis by Term & Face Value
                              Term Length                                           Face Value

                    10-year      15-year       20-year    $100k   $250k    $500k      $750k       $1m      $5m     $10m

Older ×
     Jan 2020      -0.004       -0.008        -0.013     -0.008 -0.008 -0.007 -0.007 -0.009 -0.006 -0.007
                    (0.013)      (0.010)       (0.009)   (0.018) (0.013) (0.012) (0.012) (0.009) (0.007) (0.007)
     Feb 2020      -0.004       -0.004        -0.012     -0.004 -0.005 -0.006 -0.005 -0.011 -0.004 -0.005
                    (0.013)      (0.010)       (0.009)   (0.018) (0.013) (0.012) (0.012) (0.009) (0.007) (0.007)
     Mar 2020      -0.000       -0.001        -0.011      0.004 -0.002 -0.002 -0.001 -0.010 -0.005 -0.006
                    (0.013)      (0.011)       (0.009)   (0.019) (0.013) (0.012) (0.012) (0.009) (0.008) (0.008)
     Apr 2020        0.002        0.002       -0.010      0.008   0.001    0.000      0.001 -0.009 -0.003 -0.005
                    (0.013)      (0.010)       (0.009)   (0.018) (0.013) (0.012) (0.011) (0.008) (0.008) (0.008)
     May 2020      -0.006       -0.007        -0.014     -0.001 -0.004 -0.007 -0.006 -0.017 -0.009 -0.010
                    (0.014)      (0.011)       (0.009)   (0.019) (0.014) (0.013) (0.012) (0.009) (0.009) (0.009)
     Jun 2020      -0.004       -0.004        -0.011      0.002 -0.006 -0.000 -0.001 -0.017 -0.009 -0.010
                    (0.014)      (0.011)       (0.010)   (0.020) (0.015) (0.013) (0.012) (0.010) (0.009) (0.009)
     Jul 2020      -0.018       -0.020        -0.022     -0.020 -0.026 -0.015 -0.013 -0.031-0.017 -0.018
                    (0.014)      (0.014)       (0.013)   (0.021) (0.016) (0.015) (0.014) (0.011) (0.010) (0.010)
     Aug 2020      -0.006       -0.007        -0.010      0.000 -0.010 -0.002 -0.001 -0.019 -0.008 -0.010
                    (0.017)      (0.016)       (0.014)   (0.024) (0.019) (0.016) (0.016) (0.013) (0.012) (0.012)
     Sep 2020      -0.006       -0.005        -0.006     -0.001 -0.005 -0.001 -0.001 -0.019 -0.005 -0.007
                    (0.017)      (0.016)       (0.015)   (0.024) (0.019) (0.016) (0.016) (0.013) (0.012) (0.012)
     Oct 2020      -0.001         0.000       -0.001      0.010   0.002    0.006      0.006 -0.014 -0.004 -0.006
                    (0.017)      (0.016)       (0.015)   (0.024) (0.019) (0.017) (0.016) (0.013) (0.012) (0.012)

Observations       1,514,656 1,496,308 1,328,932 445,896 633,578 649,462 649,858 668,690 646,690 645,722
Policies             68,848      68,014        60,406    20,268   28,799   29,521     29,539     30,395   29,395   29,351
Companies             75           70            75        68      76       73         73         75       70       68
Percent Active        0.59        0.59           0.59     0.69     0.58     0.58       0.58       0.58     0.58     0.58

Note: As the dependent variable, the specifications use the residuals that result from an estimation of an indicator
of policy offering on age-group (i.e., younger and older) fixed effects and age-group by date linear trends on the
pre-treatment period. The sample includes 10, 15, and 20-year term policies for individuals aged 20, 25, 30,
35, 60, 65, 70 that appeared at least once from January 2019 to October 2020. Only policies from companies
that continuously listed policies on Compulife during the sample period were included. Policy and month fixed
effects were included but not reported here. Standard errors are clustered at the company level and are shown in
parentheses        p<0.01,      p<0.05,       p<0.1.
                                                                                        37


       Table 7--Influence of COVID-19 on New York Policies
  Dependent Variable:               Log Premiums                 Policy Offered

  Older ×
    Jan 2019                   -0.001        (0.004)          -0.005        (0.011)
    Feb 2019                   -0.001        (0.004)          -0.005        (0.011)
    March 2019                 -0.001        (0.004)            0.002       (0.007)
    April 2019                 -0.001        (0.004)            0.003       (0.007)
    May 2019                   -0.001        (0.004)            0.008       (0.004)
    June 2019                  -0.002        (0.004)            0.008       (0.004)
    July 2019                  -0.002        (0.004)            0.008       (0.004)
    Aug 2019                   -0.003        (0.004)            0.004       (0.003)
    Sep 2019                        0.001    (0.001)            0.004       (0.003)
    Oct 2019                        0.001    (0.001)            0.004       (0.003)
    Nov 2019                        0.000    (0.000)            0.004       (0.003)
    Jan 2020                        0.000    (0.000)          -0.007        (0.009)
    Feb 2020                   -0.006        (0.006)          -0.008        (0.009)
    Mar 2020                   -0.008        (0.006)          -0.008        (0.009)
    Apr 2020                   -0.009        (0.006)          -0.008        (0.009)
    May 2020                   -0.008        (0.006)          -0.020        (0.015)
    Jun 2020                   -0.008        (0.006)          -0.020        (0.015)
    Jul 2020                   -0.009        (0.007)          -0.036        (0.022)
    Aug 2020                   -0.009        (0.008)          -0.036        (0.022)
    Sep 2020                   -0.008        (0.008)          -0.036        (0.022)
    Oct 2020                   -0.008        (0.008)          -0.036        (0.022)

  Observations                     753,987                    1,142,988
  Policies                         61,265                      51,954
  Companies                          31                          23

Note: The sample is restricted to policies that were offered in New York but not in
New Mexico. The panel includes 10, 15, and 20-year term policies listed on Compulife
from January 2019 to October 2020 that were offered to individuals aged 20, 25, 30,
35, 60, 65, and 70. Only policies from companies that continuously listed policies on
Compulife during the sample period were included in the policy offered specification.
Standard errors are clustered at the company level and are shown in parentheses   

p<0.01,      p<0.05,      p<0.1.
38


             Appendix A: Data Appendix (For Online Publication)

   We clean the Compulife data using straightforward practices to increase the qual-
ity of the sample. Change logs provided with the Compulife software detail instances
where the policies quoted for a given month are misreported due to incorrect or miss-
ing information. The logs typically indicate that these errors are noted and corrected
quickly. The software is updated at least monthly with policy changes, but in some
instances mid-month updates are issued to correct minor errors. Nonetheless, the
historical data do not seem to be corrected as the software is designed for for use
by life insurance agents quoting current policies options. The following steps were
taken to correct for these errors and other irregularities in the data.
  These data start with 902,968 unique policies. In the case of duplicate conflicting
entries for a single policy in a given month, we use the premium based on the
following criteria: First, if one of the premium amounts matches both the previous
and post month premiums then we use that premium. If not, we use the premium
that matches the following month's premium. If the next month's premium is one of
the duplicate entries, we use the previous the observation that matches the month's
premium. If the duplicate premium options do not match either the previous or
subsequent premiums then we omit the policy (not just the observation) from the
sample. These omission consist of 3,331 policies (0.4 percent).
  To remove outliers, we omit policies that have abnormally large month to month
changes in premiums. We exclude observations that had more than a 25 percent
increase or decrease in annual premiums in relation to the previous month's premium
(roughly corresponding to the 1st and 99th percentile of premium changes). We drop
0.2 percent of the remaining sample with this restriction (1,974 policies). Figure A1
presents the distribution of premium changes after the minor restriction.
  Of the term policies in the sample, 88.8 percent turn on and then off at most once
("continuous"), with the remainder turning on and off more than once. Some policies
were not reported for one to two months, likely reflecting a lack of information
provision rather than a discontinuation of the policy and then a new offering of the
policy. For these circumstances, we impute the missing values using the premiums
before and after the missing data. If the premiums before and after are the same, we
merely continue the policy with the same premium. If the premiums change before
and after the missing observation, we use the premium from the month preceding
the missing observation. With the imputations, the proportion of policies that are
continuous increases to 93.0 percent.
                                                                                  39


  Given that our main sample period is 2019 and 2020, we remove the 20 companies
that did not list policies at all during 2019 and 2020. Out of the remaining 100
companies, we drop those in the bottom five percent in terms of policies offered from
2019 to 2020. These restrictions along with limiting the main sample to policies for
individuals age 20 to 70 result in a sample with 804,242 policies and 95 companies.


                                  Figure A1. Premium Changes Histogram
                      .2
                      .15
            Density
                      .1
                      .05
                      0




                            -40           -20           0           20   40
                                                Percentage Change
40




        Figure A2. Distribution of Policies Offerings and Companies by Age
                                          (a) Policies Distribution

                          .08
                          .06
              Density
                          .04
                          .02
                          0




                                20   30     40        50         60   70       80
                                                       Age


                                          (b) Company Frequency
                          80
                          60
              Companies
                          40
                          20
                          0




                                20   30     40         50        60   70       80
                                                       Age


Note: The sample includes term policies and companies using Compulife data from December 2019.
