THE DISTRIBUTIONAL EFFECTS OF STUDENT
          LOAN FORGIVENESS

            Sylvain Catherine
           Constantine Yannelis

        WORKING PAPER 28175
                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         THE DISTRIBUTIONAL EFFECTS OF STUDENT LOAN FORGIVENESS

                                      Sylvain Catherine
                                     Constantine Yannelis

                                      Working Paper 28175
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28175


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020




We are grateful to John Barrios, Vadim Elenev, Adam Looney, Holger Mueller, David Thesmar,
Anne Villamil and Eric Zwick for helpful comments, as well as Greg Tracey for superb research
assistance. Catherine thanks the Cynthia and Bennett Golub Endowment for financial support.
Yannelis gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Booth School of Business at the
University of Chicago. The views expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors, and do
not necessarily reflect the views of any other organization, nor the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Sylvain Catherine and Constantine Yannelis. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Distributional Effects of Student Loan Forgiveness
Sylvain Catherine and Constantine Yannelis
NBER Working Paper No. 28175
December 2020
JEL No. D14,G18,G5,G51,H52,H81,J18,J24

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the distributional consequences of student debt forgiveness in present value terms,
accounting for differences in repayment behavior across the earnings distribution. Full or partial
forgiveness is regressive because high earners took larger loans, but also because, for low earners,
balances greatly overstate present values. Consequently, forgiveness would benefit the top decile
as much as the bottom three deciles combined. Blacks and Hispanics would also benefit
substantially less than balances suggest. Enrolling households who would benefit from income-
driven repayment is the least expensive and most progressive policy we consider.


Sylvain Catherine
Wharton, Finance Department
Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk,
Philadelphia, PA 19104
sylvain.sc.catherine@gmail.com

Constantine Yannelis
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
constantine.yannelis@chicagobooth.edu
1        Introduction

Education debt in the United States stands at $1.6 trillion in 2020, and is growing rapidly.
Growing debt burdens have led to both increased calls for loan forgiveness, as well as recent
policies forgiving debts for some borrowers.1 At the same time, income and wealth inequal-
ity has led to concerns about the distributional effects of debt forgiveness. Many holders of
high loan balances completed graduate and professional degrees, and consequently earn high
incomes. Untargeted debt forgiveness policies could thus disproportionately benefit high earn-
ers. High earners, on the other hand, are likely to pay down debts earlier, and thus might have
lower unpaid balances remaining, making debt cancellation less attractive to them. Which
effect dominates is ultimately an empirical question.
        Alleviating soaring student loan burdens by providing debt relief to borrowers has increas-
ingly been discussed by policymakers, academics and the media. There are a number of ways
in which debt can be discharged, with important distributional implications. For example, for-
giveness can be universal, capped or targeted to specific borrowers. These debt cancellation
policies can benefit different socioeconomic and ethnic groups. This paper explores their distri-
butional impacts. We find that the benefits of universal debt forgiveness policies largely accrue
to high-income borrowers, while forgiveness through expanding income-contingent loan plans
instead favors middle-income borrowers.
        It is well known that student loan balances and income are positively correlated.2 However,
student loan balances do not accurately represent the actual cost of forgiving student debt
nor the distribution of benefits between low and high-income households. Many low-income
families struggle making sufficient payments for their balance to decrease substantially ­or at
all­ over time. However, to the extent that, under current law, their debt will ultimately be
forgiven, their balance can greatly overstate the value of actual future payments, and therefore
how much canceling their debt would benefit these families financially and how much it would
    1
     There have been a number of recent policy proposals relating to student loan forgiveness. For example,
see the New York Times, November 18, 2020 and CNBC, October 30, 2020. Significant student debt forgiveness
also exists under current programs for public sector employees, teachers and for borrowers in income-driven
repayment plans for more then twenty years. Amromin and Eberly (2016) and Avery and Turner (2012) provide
a review of work on student loans.
   2
     For example, the People's Policy Project and the Brookings Institution provide analysis of the relationship
between student loan balances and earnings.



                                                       2
actually cost taxpayers.
       While direct debt discharge has dominated many public discussions, much of the public
discourse misses the fact that significant targeted debt forgiveness already exists in the United
States for some borrowers. Importantly for most borrowers, Income-Driven Repayment (IDR)
plans also offer substantial loan forgiveness to low-income borrowers who have balances re-
maining after twenty to twenty-five years, depending on a borrowers' specific plan.3 In the
meantime, IDR plans link payments to income, so borrowers with persistently low incomes
will only reimburse a fraction of their debt before it is forgiven.4 Increasing enrollment in IDR,
or increasing these plans' generosity is another option for targeted debt forgiveness.
       In this paper, we use the 2019 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) to estimate the present
value of each loan. Specifically, we rely on detailed loan-level data to forecast future payments
and the evolution of a loan's balance until it reaches zero or is forgiven. Our analysis takes into
account the current balance and most recent payments, family size, earnings, and the number
of years left before the loan is forgiven under current law. We define the present value as the
sum of expected payments discounted at the risk-free rate. We use these estimates to explore
the distributional impacts of forgiveness policies.
       We first explore universal and capped forgiveness policies, either discharging all debt, or
all debt amounts up to a cap. Loan forgiveness from these policies disproportionately accrues
to high-income households. Under a universal loan forgiveness policy, in present value terms,
the average individual in the top earnings decile would receive $6,021 in forgiveness, while
the average individual in the bottom earnings decile would receive $1,085 in forgiveness. Indi-
viduals in the bottom half of the earnings distribution would receive one-quarter of the dollars
forgiven. Households in the top 30% of the earnings distribution receive almost half of all
dollars forgiven. Patterns are similar under policies forgiving debt up to $10,000 or $50,000,
with higher-income households seeing significantly more loan forgiveness.
       We then turn to a second form of loan forgiveness, through expanding IDR plans, which tie
loan payments to income and forgive balances after a certain number of years in repayment.
   3
     In addition to forgiveness under IDR, Public Sector Loan Forgiveness (PSLF) offers loan forgiveness to bor-
rowers who work in the public sector or qualified non-profits for ten years, and Teacher Loan Forgiveness offers
partial loan forgiveness to some educators.
   4
     Under current IDR plans, borrowers pay 10-15% of their income above 150% of the federal poverty line.
Outstanding balances are forgiven after twenty to twenty-five years in repayment.


                                                       3
We examine enrolling all borrowers who would benefit from IDR, and increasing the generosity
of IDR by raising the threshold above which borrowers must pay a portion of their income, and
by accelerating loan forgiveness. In contrast to universal forgiveness, expanding IDR leads to
substantial forgiveness for the middle of the earnings distribution. Under a policy enrolling
all borrowers who would benefit from IDR, individuals in the bottom half of the earnings
distribution would receive three-fifths of dollars forgiven and borrowers in the top 30% of the
earnings distribution receive one-fifth of dollars in forgiveness. Raising the threshold above
which borrowers pay a portion of their income and earlier loan forgiveness both lead to a large
increase in forgiveness. However, under accelerating loan forgiveness, these benefits accrue to
the top of the earnings distribution, while increasing the repayment threshold leads to large
benefits for middle-income borrowers.
   This paper primarily joins a literature within household finance on student loans. This
paper presents a simple framework for computing the present value of student loans, and uses
it to present new results on the progressivity of loan forgiveness options. Amromin and Eberly
(2016) and Avery and Turner (2012) discuss the conceptual framework for student loans and
review the literature. Looney and Yannelis (2015) provide an overview of recent empirical
trends in the student loan market, while Lochner and Monge-Naranjo (2011) and Caucutt
and Lochner (2020) present theoretical models of education borrowing. Recent work has
focused on student loans and housing (Goodman, Isen and Yannelis, 2020; Amromin, Eberly
and Mondragon, 2016), the relationship between credit supply and tuition (Lucca, Nadauld
and Shen, 2019; Kargar and Mann, 2018), guaranteed versus direct lending (Lucas and Moore,
2010), enrollment (Solis, 2017; Sun and Yannelis, 2016), raising borrowing limits (Black et
al., 2020), the role of institutional control on outcomes (Eaton, Howell and Yannelis, 2020;
Armona, Chakrabarti and Lovenheim, 2017), loan discharge (Maggio, Kalda and Yao, 2019),
racial gaps (Scott-Clayton and Li, 2016) as well as behavioral aspects of student loans (Cadena
and Keys, 2013; Cornaggia, Cornaggia and Xia, 2019; Cornaggia and Xia, 2020; Marx and
Turner, 2018; Mueller and Yannelis, 2020)
   Within work on student debt, this paper links to a growing literature on IDR plans. Our
paper shows that IDR plans are a useful tool for targeted loan forgiveness, and the benefits of
this forgiveness largely accrue to middle-income individuals. Previous work has largely focused


                                              4
on the insurance benefits of IDR plans to borrowers, and selection into these plans. Mueller
and Yannelis (2019) show that IDR plans provided insurance to borrowers during the Great
Recession. Herbst (2019) studies how IDR plans affect credit bureau outcomes and Britton
and Gruber (2019) study the labor supply effects of IDR. Karamcheva, Perry and Yannelis
(2020) discuss trends in IDR over time, and selection of borrowers in these plans. Despite
significant pushes to increase the utilization of these plans, take-up remains low. Mueller and
Yannelis (2020) show that administrative costs are a significant barrier to enrollment, which is
consistent with college students not having information about financial aid options (Bettinger,
Long, Oreopoulos and Sanbonmatsu, 2012; Hoxby and Turner, 2015).
    The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses institutional back-
ground, the SCF data used in our main analysis and modeling the present value of student loan
balances. Section 3 analyzes the distributional effects of loan forgiveness options, with a focus
on income and ethnic heterogeneity. Section 4 concludes.



2     Value of Student Debt

2.1    Institutional Background

In 2020, there was approximately $1.6 trillion in outstanding student loan debt, according to
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The vast majority of student debt in the United States
is directly disbursed or guaranteed by the federal government. Modern federal student loan
programs began in 1965, with the passage of the Higher Education Act. There have been two
large federal student loan programs in the United States. The first was the Federal Family
Education Loan Program (FFEL), which began in 1965, and which was terminated in 2010.
The FFEL program was a guarantee program, under which private lenders provided capital for
highly regulated loans. These funds were in turn guaranteed by the government. The William
D. Ford Federal Direct Loan Program (DL) was authorized in 1992. Under the DL program,
the US Treasury directly provides funds for student loans. Borrowers take either Subsidized or
Unsubsidized loans. All borrowers are eligible for Unsubsidized loans, while borrowers from
lower-income families are eligible for Subsidized loans. While the loans are quite similar, for



                                               5
Subsidized borrowers, interest does not accrue while borrowers are in school. Loan balances
were historically relatively small, and grew rapidly from 2000 onwards (Looney and Yannelis,
2019).
       Federal student loans are highly regulated, with interest rates and borrowing limits set by
Congress. Pricing does not vary based on risk, and all students of the same level face the same
interest rate.5 Borrowing limits vary by class level, and are higher for upper level and graduate
students. Loans are serviced by private companies, with contracts from the Department of
Education (Amromin and Eberly, 2016). If borrowers default on their loans, 15% of their
their wages are garnished. Unlike other consumer loans, wages are garnished without a court
order and are typically seized directly from payroll. Student loans are nearly impossible to
discharge in bankruptcy, as borrowers have to prove a very stringent legal standard called
"undue hardship."
       Traditionally, most borrowers were in the Standard Plan. This plan is similar to a ten-year
mortgage, and depending on the year could be fixed or variable rate. Some borrowers also
choose the Extended Repayment Plan, which increases the loan maturity to twenty-five years.
There are also a number of IDR plans, which all have the same basic features. IDR plans tie
a borrower's loan payment to their income. Under these plans, borrowers pay ten or fifteen
percent of their discretionary income. After twenty or twenty-five years, outstanding balances
are forgiven. These have increased in popularity since 2009, following the introduction of the
Income-Based Repayment (IBR) Plan.6 Under IBR, borrowers pay 15% of their discretionary
income, defined as income above 150% of the poverty line. Under most IDR plans, payment
amounts are capped by a borrower's payment under the standard plan. Outstanding balances
are forgiven after 25 years. Subsequently a number of more generous IDR plans were in-
troduced, including the Pay As You Earn Plan and the Revised Pay As You Earn Repayment
(REPAYE) Plan. Under these plans borrowers pay 10% of their discretionary income, and out-
standing balances are forgiven after 20 years.7 Most new borrowers in 2020 who choose IDR
   5
     There are slight differences in effective interest rates based on whether borrowers are Subsidized or Unsub-
sidized. Additionally, in some years subsidized borrowers had lower interest rates. Interest rates also differ for
graduate and undergraduate borrowers.
   6
     Prior to the IBR plan, there was one IDR plan available, the Income-Contingent Plan. This was less generous,
with borrowers paying 20% of their discretionary income and take-up was very low.
   7
     The Department of Education provides information of details on various repayment plans.



                                                        6
plans are in the new more generous plans. Borrowers are also able to stop payments through
deferment or forbearance for a number of reasons, including job-loss, returning to school,
joining the military, or at a loan servicer's discretion.


2.2       Data

Our primary data source is the 2019 SCF, a nationally representative survey conducted trienially
by the Federal Reserve Board of Governors. The SCF surveys households on income, balance
sheets, credit use, and financial outcomes including education debt. Crucially for our analysis,
the survey contains information on earnings and demographics, as well as detailed informa-
tion on student loan balances, interest rates and repayment. Importantly, the SCF includes
information on whether borrowers are in IDR plans. Bhutta et al. (2020) provide a detailed
description of the 2019 SCF, with a discussion of student borrowing. We include individuals
between the ages of 22 and 60 in our main analysis sample, and only exclude borrowers at
school or in the grace period. Due to the lack of granularity of the SCF, some households rep-
resent several centiles of the earnings distribution within a cohort and span over two deciles,
in which case we allocate them on a proportional basis. Appendix table A.1 provides a list of
the main analysis variables.8
       Our analysis compares all individuals in the SCF and individuals with student debt. We have
5,777 households in the sample, and 1,052, or 22% after accounting for survey weights, have
education debt. In our analysis of student loan borrowers, we restrict the sample to borrowers
who left college and are between the ages of 22 and 60, and are left with 758 households with
debt. We take this restriction as our method of computing present values relies on observing
initial repayment behavior. All estimates are weighted using SCF survey weights, to ensure
that the estimates are nationally representative. Table 1 shows summary statistics for the main
analysis sample, split by individuals with and without student debt.9 The typical borrower in
   8
     The SCF has some limitations regarding student debt. In particular, it undercounts student debt aggregates
relative to administrative sources as it only counts debt of the core economic unit of the household. Thus some
individuals, such as adult children living with parents, many not be counted in student debt aggregates. This
leads to the aggregate student debt about in the 2019 SCF being $1.2 trillion, which is lower than administrative
sources. Approximately one-third of this debt is held by individuals still in school.
   9
     Due to the sampling design of the SCF, standard procedures for variance estimation cannot be applied. This
does not affect our analysis.



                                                       7
our sample left school in 2011, and their loan has an interest rate of 5.9%. Households with
student debt have an average income of $98,500. For households without student debt, the
average income is slightly higher, but this reflects a highly skewed distribution. The median
income of student loan borrowers is $71,300, while the median income of the full sample
is $59,100. The average student loan balance, conditional on having any education debt, is
$41,800 in the 2019 SCF, up from $36,400 in the 2016 survey. 40% of borrowers are in IDR
plans. We compute age specific per capita earnings deciles, which are shown in appendix Table
A.2.10
       Figure 1 shows the share of households between age 22 and 60 with student debt (Panel
A), the mean balance (Panel B) and yearly payment (Panel C), by decile, along with a 95% con-
fidence interval. While the relationship is non-monotonic, on average higher income house-
holds are more likely to have student debt, and have higher student loan balances conditional
on borrowing. Importantly, yearly payments increase relatively much faster with earnings than
balances. The average balance of borrowers in the top decile is only 17% larger than those
in the bottom decile. But their payments are nearly four times larger. These differences in
repayment behavior motivate our computation of present values to estimate how much low
earners would actually save as a result of debt forgiveness.


2.3       Computing Present Values

The outstanding balance of a loan is not its true present value, which depends on payments,
maturity and discount rates. Put simply, the value of a loan reflects the timing of payments
and how much future dollars are worth today. Assuming that non-repayment is caused by
idiosyncratic risk, the present value of a loan is the sum of expected future payments discounted
at the nominal risk-free rate r f . Specifically, we denote the present value of loan l of household
i in year t :
                                                                [Paymentil k ]
                                  Present valueil t =                            .                            (1)
                                                         k= t
                                                                (1 + r f )k- t
  10
    We focus on earnings because they represent the main way households finance their lifetime consumption.
Households with high student debt in the lower half of the wealth distribution tend to be in the upper half of the
earnings distribution. Table A.3 shows the relationship by both income and wealth quartiles.




                                                        8
Payments are made until the loan is forgiven or the balance reaches zero. The balance evolves
as follows:
                        Balanceil t +1 = Balanceil t (1 + ril ) - Paymentil t ,             (2)

where ril is the loan interest rate. Loans are forgiven after 25 years in repayment if they were
originated before 2014, and 20 years otherwise.
   By default, borrowers reimburse their loan over the ten year following their separation from
school through a fixed-payment schedule under the Standard Plan. This fixed payment is:

                                                  Initial Balanceil × ril
                           Fixed Paymentil =                              ,                 (3)
                                                     1 - (1 + ril )-10

where Initial Balanceil is the total amount they borrowed. Borrowers can also enroll in IDR.
In IDR, they pay a fraction il of their discretionary earnings, which is defined as the share
of their earnings above 1.5 times the federal poverty line, but no more than what they would
have paid in the Standard Plan. If the household has a single student loan, the payment under
IDR is:


  IDR Paymentil t = min il × max Incomei t - 1.5 × Poverty Linei t , 0 , Fixed Paymentil    (4)


If the household has several student loans, the payment is divided across loans. The IDR
payment can be zero. Households can also defer repayment because of economic hardship for
up to five years. We assume  is equal to .1 for borrowers in IDR in cohorts that left school
after 2009, which is consistent with the newer IDR plans, in which borrowers in recent cohorts
tend to enroll. For earlier cohorts in IDR, we assume that  is equal to .15, consistent with the
Income-Based Repayment plan that is available to all borrowers.
   To estimate the present value of each loan in the data, we forecast yearly payments and
iterate over equations (1) and (2) until the balance reaches zero or the loan is forgiven. The
initial balance is set to its observed 2019 value. Our forecast of future payments depends on
whether a loan was in repayment in 2019.


Loans in repayment If we observe a payment in 2019, we assume that, in expectation, house-
holds will keep making the same payment in the future, adjusted for inflation and growth in

                                                  9
real earnings. We make two exceptions. First, payments cannot exceed current balance and
interests due for the year. Second, households will not pay more than in the Standard Plan,
unless they did so in 2019. Hence, the expected future payment in year s > t is:

       · if Paymentil t < Fixed Paymentil , then:


                      [Paymentils ] = min Paymentil t × (1 + g P + g E )s- t , Fixed Paymentil ,
                                                                                                              (5)
                                        Balanceils × (1 + ril )


       · otherwise:


                  [Paymentils ] = min Paymentil t × (1 + g P + g E )s- t , Balanceils × (1 + ril )            (6)


where Paymentil t is the payment observed in 2019, g P is the inflation rate and g E the real
growth of earnings. For example, we would expect IDR payments to increase with a family's
earnings, but only up to the default payment under the standard plan. Some households in
IDR had no earnings above 1.5× the poverty line, and therefore made no payment in 2019
even though they were technically in repayment. We treat them the same way.


Loans in deferment or forbearance              For households who made no payment in 2019 because
they were in forbearance or were in deferment, we assume that payments will start six years
after leaving school. This assumption is motivated by the fact that payments can be deferred
for up to three years and forbearance is allowed for several years. At this point, we assume that
these borrowers will enroll in IDR with  = 0.1 and that interest accrues in the meantime.11
Hence, expected future payment is:

       · if s > Graduation Yeari + 5, then:


             [Paymentils ] = min 0.1 × max Incomei t (1 + g E )s- t - 1.5 × Poverty Linei t , 0
                                                                                                              (7)
                                 (1 + g P )s- t , Fixed Paymentil , Balanceils × (1 + ril )
  11
    Borrowers could also not be making payments because loans are in default. We assume that default leads
to a similar pattern of cashflows. If borrowers default, 15% of their wages are garnished above a threshold.
In practice, some borrowers wages are not garnished if they are self-employed, or it is difficult to contact their
employer. We thus implicitly assume that recovery is imperfect and two-thirds of borrowers have their wages
garnished.


                                                       10
    · otherwise:
                                           [Paymentils ] = 0.                                (8)


Family incomes in the first year are set to their observed value in the SCF. The poverty line
is calibrated based on family size and federal guidelines for 2019. In our main analysis, we
report pre-tax present values and discuss the taxation of forgiveness in Appendix B. The overall
progressivity of loan forgiveness options does not change with the imposition of taxes, while
levels and costs change somewhat.


Calibration    We set the inflation rate to g P = 2%, the nominal risk-free rate to r f = 3%. We
assume that households' earnings grow at a rate of g E = 2%, which combines the nationwide
growth in per capita earnings, and the growth of earnings over the life cycle, which we estimate
to be close to 1% among student debt borrowers in the 2019 SCF.



3    Distributional Impacts of Loan Forgiveness Policies

We next turn to exploring the distributional impacts of loan forgiveness. Table 2 presents our
main analysis of the present vale of loan forgiveness. Specifically, the table reports the total
and per capital present value gains of the policies we valuate by earnings deciles, including
households without any student debt, and ethnic groups. The first eight columns consider the
present value of forgiveness amounts per person, the second eight columns consider aggregate
amounts, and the final eight columns show the share of dollars given to each group.
    We consider three policies related to direct cancellation of debt, canceling all student loan
balances, or only $50,000 or $10,000 per person. We additionally consider three policies that
increase IDR enrollment. First, borrowers pay 10% of their discretionary income, in line with
current IDR rules. Second, loans are also forgiven 10 years after the first repayment. Finally,
discretionary income is limited to earnings above three times the poverty line. The top panel
shows the values by earnings decile, while the bottom panel shows values by ethnicity. The
last two rows of the table report the present value gains and change in balance for the entire
population.



                                               11
3.1       Loan Cancellation

Figure 2 shows student loan balances and present values by earnings decile and race. This fig-
ure effectively shows the benefits of universal loan discharge to borrowers in different groups,
which can be viewed as the present values of the loans forgiven. Households with higher earn-
ings have larger balances because they are more likely to be college graduates. However, the
relationship between earnings and the present value of student debt is even steeper because
low earners are less likely to fully repay their balance before it is forgiven. For the top decile,
the present value is very close to the balance, but it is below 40% for the lowest decile.12
       Figure 2 demonstrates that most of the benefits of universal loan forgiveness would largely
accrue to higher income individuals. The top panel shows balances and present values split
by earnings decile. The figure shows that most of the benefits of universal loan forgiveness
would accrue to high-income individuals. Both balances and present values are increasing for
the first nine earnings deciles. The bottom earnings decile has a balance of $3,028, and a
present value of $1,085, while the ninth earnings decile has a balance of $8,243 and a present
value of $8,397. The highest earnings decile has a balance of $6,300 and a present value of
$6,021, which is slightly lower than that of the ninth earnings decile and comparable to the
seventh earnings decile. The average individual in the highest earnings decile would receive
more than five times more forgiveness than the average individual in the bottom earnings
decile. The solid red line shows the ratio of present value to balance, which is a measure of the
disparity between considering the value of forgiveness based on balances and its true cost. The
ratio is increasing in earnings deciles. This suggests that, while using only balances to analyze
the distributional consequences of loan forgiveness would generate the same basic result­that
higher-income households would see larger benefits, it would overestimate the true value of
loan forgiveness, in particular for low-earners.
       The bottom panel shows balances and present values split by race and ethnicity. In terms
of balances, Blacks have the highest average loan balance, at $10,630. Whites have a lower
average loan balance, at $6,157, and Hispanics and others have a much lower average loan
  12
    To the best of our knowledge, there is no public benchmark to which we can compare our present value com-
putation. However, The Wall Street Journal recently reported that, based on internal estimates, the Department
of Education expected to recover only 68% of the value of federal student debt.13 By comparison, we estimate
the present value of student debt to represent 76% of total balance.



                                                     12
balance of $3,996. Computing present values presents similar overall patterns, but shrinks the
gap between Blacks and Whites, who respectively have present values of $7,407 and $4,962.
The ratio of present value to balance is lower for Blacks than Whites. Thus universal loan
forgiveness would lead to larger average benefits for Whites and Blacks, and significantly lower
average benefits for Hispanics and other groups.
   Figure 3 presents similar analysis to Figure 2, but focusing on more targeted debt forgive-
ness policies which forgive debt below a cap. The figure shows the value of projected debt
forgiveness under two policies, forgiving up to $10,000 of debt and forgiving up to $50,000 of
debt. The top panels show average balances forgiven and present values of loan forgiveness
under the policy forgiving $10,000 of debt. The bottom panels shows average balances for-
given and present values of loan forgiveness under the more generous policy forgiving $50,000
of debt. The left panels show splits by earnings decile, while the right panels show splits by
race and ethnicity.
   Under both limited forgiveness policies shown in Figure 3, the overall relationship between
income and projected forgiveness is very similar to universal forgiveness. Under both policies,
we see much greater levels of loan forgiveness for higher income households relative to lower
income households. With a $10,000 cap, the ratio of average present value forgiveness be-
tween the top and the bottom deciles is 4. With a $50,000 cap, the ratio of average present
value forgiveness between the top and the bottom decile rises to 7. While the general re-
lationship between forgiveness and income is similar under each policy, the overall levels of
forgiveness are much greater with a higher cap. For people in the bottom decile, they receive
$438 in forgiveness with a $10,000 cap, and $1,799 in the top decile. With a $50,000 cap
people in the bottom decile receive significantly more, or $705 in forgiveness as do people in
the top decile, who receive $4,973.
   Finally, we consider a policy in which households with earnings below $75,000 per person
receive $50,000 in balance forgiveness. Above $75,000, forgiveness generosity decreases by
one dollar for each additional dollar of earnings. Hence, households with at least $125,000 of
earnings per person do not benefit from the policy. Under this policy capping forgiveness by
earnings, the bottom deciles receives $669 and the top decile receives $2,360. As reported in
appendix Figure A.1, for the bottom 90%, this policy is similar to canceling $50,000 of debt and


                                              13
is still regressive within this sub-group. But the benefits going to the top 10% are substantially
reduced.
       Turning towards the effects by race, shown in the right panels of Figure 3, we see slightly
lower average present value levels of forgiveness for Blacks relative to Whites with a $10,000
cap. With a $50,000 cap, present value forgiveness levels are roughly equal between Blacks
and Whites. Under both policies, Hispanics and others see lower levels of loan forgiveness
relative to Blacks and Whites. The level relationship between the two policies is similar to that
regarding income.


3.2       Income Driven Repayment

We next turn to an alternative option for loan forgiveness, IDR. IDR plans tie borrowers'
monthly payments to their income. There are a number of IDR plans, with slightly different
parameters.14 Under current IDR plans, borrowers pay 10 or 15 percent of their discretionary
income, above 150 percent of the poverty line. After 20 or 25 years, remaining balances are
forgiven. IDR plans thus have a significant forgiveness component, but unlike more general
forgiveness options, IDR targets forgiveness towards lower income borrowers. Indeed, some
persistently low-income borrowers in IDR plans can end up paying nothing at all. Borrowers
who earn below 150 percent of the poverty line for the duration of repayment will end up
making no payments and receiving full loan cancellation.
       We consider the distributional impact of three options expanding IDR. Policymakers effec-
tively have two methods in terms of expanding IDR. One, more borrowers can be enrolled in
IDR.15 Two, IDR plans can be made more generous, by lowering time to forgiveness or raising
the threshold below which borrowers pay nothing. We consider three specific policies. First,
we consider placing all borrowers in an IDR plan, under which borrowers begin paying on
income above 150% of the federal poverty line and pay 10% of this income. Second, we con-
  14
     The first modern IDR plan, Income Based Repayment (IBR), was introduced in 2009. Under this plan, bor-
rowers pay 15% of this discretionary income and remaining balances were forgiven after 25 years. Under more
recent plans such as the Pay as You Earn and new IBR plan, borrowers pay 10% of their incomes and remaining
balances are forgiven after 20 years. Most borrowers in recent cohorts who choose IDR repayment options are in
these newer, more generous plans, and thus our repayment model uses 10% repayment and 20 year forgiveness.
  15
     This is common in may countries with higher education systems similar to the US. For example, in the UK
and Australia all student loan borrowers are automatically enrolled into IDR plans that are administered by tax
authorities. Chapman (1997) provides a discussion of IDR plans in other countries.


                                                     14
sider putting all borrowers in IDR and forgiving remaining balances after ten years. Finally,
we consider placing all borrowers in IDR and raising the repayment threshold to 300% of the
federal poverty line, as opposed to 150% under current plans.
   Importantly, we assume that this policy is targeted towards borrowers for which it generates
a present value gain. Because interest rates on student loans exceed the risk-free rate, rolling
debt is an NPV negative decision unless a substantial part of the balance is rolled until it is
forgiven. Some middle-class earners have lower payments in IDR than under the ten-year
schedule, but these payments would still be sufficient to fully repay their loan, or most of it.
For them, it is better to repay sooner rather than later and reducing their payments is not a
good idea.
   Figure 4 explores who benefits from the expansion of IDR, in terms of loan forgiveness. The
figure shows a quartet of columns for income and racial or ethnic groups, each one depicting
forgiveness under a different policy. In each quartet of columns, the first column shows pro-
jected forgiveness from enrolling all borrowers in the current most generous IDR plan, PAYE.
The second column shows projected forgiveness from enrolling all borrowers in a plan slightly
more generous than PAYE, under which remaining balances are forgiven after ten rather than
twenty years. The third column shows forgiveness under a plan identical to PAYE, but under
which borrowers begin paying a portion of their income above 300% of the federal poverty
line. The rightmost column shows a plan again identical to PAYE, but under which borrow-
ers. pay 7.5% of their income rather than 10%. The left panel shows projected forgiveness in
earnings deciles, while the right panel shows projected forgiveness by race and ethnicity.
   The leftmost column in each quartet shows projected forgiveness under a loan repayment
system similar to that in the UK or Australia, with all borrowers in IDR. Under this system, we
see most projected forgiveness accrues to borrowers in the middle of the earnings distribution.
Individuals in the lowest earnings decile receive more than four times ($524) as much forgive-
ness relative to borrowers in the top of the earnings distribution ($117). Borrowers in the next
highest and lowest deciles respectively see similar forgiveness, $512 and $240 respectively.
Individuals in the third to seventh deciles each receive substantially more forgiveness than the
top and bottom. Putting all borrowers in IDR thus leads to significant forgiveness for middle
income borrowers, in contrast to universal or capped forgiveness policies which disproportion-


                                              15
ately benefit high income borrowers. Individuals in the third through seventh deciles receive
61% of the total forgiveness, and people in the bottom half of the earnings distribution receive
more than half of the gains. In terms of the racial and ethnic effects of putting all borrowers
in IDR, forgiveness amounts are twice as high for Blacks relative to Whites and the general
population. Hispanics and others see lower loan forgiveness amounts relative to other groups.
   We next turn to the second column, which depicts a more generous IDR plan under which
loan balances are forgiven after ten years, as opposed to twenty under current plans. Un-
surprisingly, earlier loan forgiveness leads to substantially more forgiveness across all groups.
This increase in forgiveness amounts comes at the expense of progressivity, with high earn-
ers seeing larger forgiveness amounts. With ten-year forgiveness, we see the highest earnings
decile receiving $3,755 in loan forgiveness, 3.9 times the amount that the bottom earnings
decile receives, $965. The bottom three income deciles receive roughly twice the forgiveness
in this scenario as they would under a plan with forgiveness occurring after twenty years. This
is likely due to the fact that they are paying very little under either plan, and hence receive
substantial forgiveness after ten or twenty years. Higher earnings deciles see significantly more
forgiveness under this plan. The racial and ethnic patterns of forgiveness under an IDR plan
with forgiveness after ten years are similar to those under a plan with twenty-year forgive-
ness. Relative to Whites, we see higher forgiveness amounts for Blacks and lower amounts for
Hispanics and other groups.
   The third column of each quartet shows projected forgiveness under a different IDR plan
with increased generosity. Rather than borrowers paying a fraction of their income above 150%
of the federal poverty line, under this hypothetical plan borrowers pay a tenth of their income
above 300% of the poverty line. This plan shows a similar pattern to the first option-enrolling
all borrowers in IDR-albeit with higher forgiveness amounts for middle-income households.
Individuals in the lowest and highest earnings deciles again receive $791 and $186 respectively,
which are close to the amounts under the system enrolling all borrowers in IDR. We further
see similar patterns along racial and ethnic lines, with Blacks receiving the most forgiveness
and Hispanics and others receiving less relative to Whites.
   The final column of each quartet shows projected forgiveness under an IDR plan with a dif-
ferent kind of increase generosity. Rather than borrower paying 10-15% of their income above


                                               16
150% of the federal poverty line, they pay 7.5%. This plan again generates more forgiveness
for the middle of the income distribution. Individuals in the lowest and highest earnings deciles
respectively receive $599 and $242. We see similar patterns across ethnic lines, with Blacks
receiving the most forgiveness.
    It is useful to directly compare IDR to other forgiveness policies. Table 2 indicates that
enrolling borrowers in an IDR plan where borrowers pay a tenth of their income above 300% of
the poverty line would lead to $174.3 billion in present value forgiveness. This is slightly lower
in aggregate than the $196.3 billion in forgiveness under a policy forgiving up to $10,000 of
student debt per person, but the bottom 60% of the income distribution would actually receive
higher forgiveness amounts under the more generous IDR plan. The difference in aggregates
arises from the fact that the top 40% of the income distribution receives substantially more
forgiveness under the capped plan than under the more generous IDR plan. We see a similar
pattern when we compare the more generous IDR plan to a policy forgiving up to $50,000
of student debt per person, which would lead to $491.4 billion in present value forgiveness.
However, under the more generous IDR plan the bottom 30% of the income distribution would
receive more forgiveness than under the a plan forgiving up to $50,000 of student debt.
    The results of this section suggest that enrolling more borrowers in IDR, and making IDR
more generous leads to significant loan forgiveness that is somewhat targeted towards middle-
income borrowers. Households in the bottom two earnings deciles receive roughly the same
amounts for forgiveness in a system expanding IDR as they would under a capped or univer-
sal forgiveness plan. However households in the top income deciles see significantly more
forgiveness under capped or universal forgiveness plans relative to expansions of IDR.



4    Concluding Remarks

The ultimate distributional effects of student loan forgiveness depend on the present value
of loans discharged to different individuals. This paper computes the present value of student
loan forgiveness under different options. We find that universal and capped forgiveness policies
are highly regressive, with the vast majority of benefits accruing to high-income individuals. On
the other hand, enrolling more borrowers in IDR plans linking repayment to earnings leads to


                                               17
forgiveness for borrowers in the middle of the income-distribution. These results are important
in studying the distributional consequences of loan forgiveness, and in designing policies aimed
at student debt relief.
    While the distributional effects of student loan forgiveness are an important aspect of stu-
dent loan forgiveness, other factors may play a role in determining the desirability of debt
forgiveness. Student loans may distort career choices (Rothstein and Rouse, 2011), credit con-
straints may hinder entrepreneurship (Barrios, Hochberg and Yi, 2020), debt overhang may
distort labor supply decisions (Donaldson, Piacentino and Thakor, 2019) and debt relief may
have macroeconomic consequences (Auclert et al., 2019). Future work should study tradeoffs
between the distributional impacts of loan forgiveness and other potential benefits of borrower
relief.




                                              18
References
Amromin, Gene and Janice Eberly, "Education Financing and Student Lending," Annual Re-
  view of Financial Economics, 2016, 8, 289­315.
  , Jan Eberly, and John Mondragon, "The Housing Crisis and the Rise in Student Loans,"
  Unpublished Mimeo, 2016.
Armona, Luis, Rajashri Chakrabarti, and Michael F Lovenheim, "How Does For-Profit Col-
  lege Attendance Affect Student Loans, Defaults, and Earnings?," Unpublished Mimeo, 2017.
Auclert, Adrien, Will S Dobbie, and Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, "Macroeconomic Effects of
  Debt Relief: Consumer Bankruptcy Protections in the Great Recession," National Bureau of
  Economic Research, 2019.
Avery, Christopher and Sarah Turner, "Student Loans: Do College Students Borrow Too
  Much­Or Not Enough?," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2012, 26 (1), 165­92.
Barrios, John Manuel, Yael V Hochberg, and Hanyi Yi, "Launching with a Parachute: The
  Gig Economy and Entrepreneurial Entry," Unpublished Mimeo, 2020.
Bettinger, Eric P., Bridget Terry Long, Philip Oreopoulos, and Lisa Sanbonmatsu, "The Role
  of Application Assistance and Information in College Decisions: Results from the HR Block
  FAFSA Experiment," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2012, 127 (3), 1205­1242.
Bhutta, Neil, Jesse Bricker, Andrew C Chang, Lisa J Dettling, Sarena Goodman, Alice Hen-
  riques Volz, Joanne W Hsu, Kevin B Moore, Sarah Reber, and Richard Windle, "Changes
  in US Family Finances from 2016 to 2019: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances,"
  Federal Reserve Bulletin, 2020, 106 (5), 1­42.
Black, Sandra E, Jeffrey T Denning, Lisa J Dettling, Sarena Goodman, and Lesley J Turner,
  "Taking It to the Limit: Effects of Increased Student Loan Availability on Attainment, Earn-
  ings, and Financial Well-Being," Unpublished Mimeo, 2020.
Britton, Jack W and Jonathan Gruber, "Do Income Contingent Student Loan Programs Dis-
  tort Earnings? Evidence from the UK," National Bureau of Economic Research, 2019.
Cadena, Brian C. and Benjamin J. Keys, "Can Self-Control Explain Avoiding Free Money?
  Evidence from Interest-Free Student Loans," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2013,
  95 (4), 1117­1129.
Caucutt, Elizabeth M and Lance Lochner, "Early and Late Human Capital Investments, Bor-
  rowing Constraints, and the Family," Journal of Political Economy, 2020, 128 (3), 1065­1147.
Chapman, Bruce, "Conceptual Issues and the Australian Experience with Income Contingent
  Charges for Higher Education," The Economic Journal, 1997, 107 (442), 738­751.
Cornaggia, Jess, Kimberly Rodgers Cornaggia, and Han Xia, "Grit and Credit Risk," Unpub-
  lished Mimeo, 2019.



                                              19
Cornaggia, Kimberly Rodgers and Han Xia, "Who Mismanages Student Loans and Why?,"
  Unpublished Mimeo, 2020.
Donaldson, Jason Roderick, Giorgia Piacentino, and Anjan Thakor, "Household Debt Over-
  hang and Unemployment," The Journal of Finance, 2019, 74 (3), 1473­1502.
Eaton, Charlie, Sabrina T Howell, and Constantine Yannelis, "When Investor Incentives and
  Consumer Interests Diverge: Private Equity in Higher Education," The Review of Financial
  Studies, 2020, 33 (9), 4024­4060.
Goodman, Sarena, Adam Isen, and Constantine Yannelis, "A Day Late and a Dollar Short:
  Liquidity and Household Formation Among Student Borrowers," Federal Reserve Board Work-
  ing Paper, 2020.
Herbst, Daniel, "Liquidity and Insurance in Student-Loan Contracts: The Costs and Benefits
  of Income-Driven Repayment," Unpublished Mimeo, 2019.
Hoxby, Caroline M and Sarah Turner, "What High-Achieving Low-Income Students Know
  About College," American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (5), 514­17.
Karamcheva, Nadia, Jeffrey Perry, and Constantine Yannelis, "Income-Driven Repayment
  Plans for Student Loans," CBO Working Paper, 2020, (2020-02).
Kargar, Mahyar and William Mann, "Student Loans, Marginal Costs, and Markups: Estimates
  From the PLUS Program," Unpublished Mimeo, 2018.
Lochner, Lance and Alexander Monge-Naranjo, "The Nature of Credit Constraints and Hu-
  man Capital," American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (6), 2487­2529.
Looney, Adam and Constantine Yannelis, "A Crisis in Student Loans? How Changes in the
  Characteristics of Borrowers and in the Institutions they Attended Contributed to Rising Loan
  Defaults," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2015, (Fall), 1­68.
   and    , "The Consequences of Student Loan Credit Expansions: Evidence From Three
  Decades of Default Cycles," FRB of Philadelphia Working Paper, 2019.
Lucas, Deborah and Damien Moore, "Guaranteed Versus Direct Lending: The Case of Student
  Loans," Measuring and Managing Federal Financial Risk, 2010, pp. 163­205.
Lucca, David O, Taylor Nadauld, and Karen Shen, "Credit Supply and the Rise in College
  Tuition: Evidence from the Expansion in Federal Student Aid Programs," The Review of Fi-
  nancial Studies, 2019, 32 (2), 423­466.
Maggio, Marco Di, Ankit Kalda, and Vincent Yao, "Second Chance: Life Without Student
  Debt," Unpublished Mimeo, 2019.
Marx, Benjamin M and Lesley J Turner, "Borrowing Trouble? Human Capital Investment
  with Ppt-in Costs and Implications for the Effectiveness of Grant Aid," American Economic
  Journal: Applied Economics, 2018, 10 (2), 163­201.
Mueller, Holger and Constantine Yannelis, "The Rise in Student Loan Defaults in the Great


                                              20
  Recession," Journal of Financial Economics, 2019, 1 (1), 1­19.
   and    , "Reducing Barriers to Enrollment in Federal Student Loan Repayment Plans: Evi-
  dence from the Navient Field Experiment," Unpublished Mimeo, 2020.
Rothstein, Jesse and Cecilia Elena Rouse, "Constrained after College: Student Loans and
  Early-Career Occupational Choices," Journal of Public Economics, 2011, 95 (1-2), 149­163.
Scott-Clayton, Judith and Jing Li, "Black-White Disparity in Student Loan Debt More than
  Triples After Graduation," Economic Studies, Volume 2 No. 3, 2016.
Solis, Alexis, "Credit Access and College Enrollment," Journal of Political Economy, 2017, 125
  (2), 562­622.
Sun, Stephen and Constantine Yannelis, "Credit Constraints and Demand for Higher Edu-
  cation: Evidence from Financial Deregulation," Review of Economics and Statistics, 2016, 98
  (1), 12­24.




                                             21
                                                     Figure 1: Student Debt and Payments by Earnings Decile
     This figure displays the share of households between age 22 and 60 with student debt (Panel A) and the average per capita balance (Panel B) and yearly
     payment (Panel C), by within-cohort decile of earnings. We estimate debt levels and 95% confidence intervals by running OLS regressions on decile dummies
     using SCF sample weights. The x-axis reports the median earnings within each decile.

                   Panel A. Share with Student Debt                              Panel B. Mean Balance                                      Panel C. Mean Yearly Payment




                                                                    40,000




                                                                                                                                4,000
            30




                                                                    30,000




                                                                                                                                3,000
              20
        Percents




                                                                    USD




                                                                                                                                USD
                                                                 20,000




                                                                                                                              2,000
            10




                                                                    10,000




                                                                                                                                1,000
22




            0




                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                0
                   0        50000          100000       150000               0        50,000         100,000        150,000             0            50,000         100,000        150,000
                             Earnings per person                                       Earnings per person                                            Earnings per person

                           Share with student debt                                Entire sample    Borrowers only                                Entire sample    Borrowers only
                                     Figure 2: Average Student Debt
This figure displays the average student debt per capita in 2019, by within-cohort decile of labor earnings and
ethnic group, including households without student loans. Present values represent the sum of expected future
payments discounted at the risk-free rate. The red line reports the ratio of the average present value to the average
balance for each group.

                                         Panel A. By Decile of Earnings




                                                                                                                  %
                                               Panel B. By Ethnicity




                                                                                                                  %




                                                        23
                                Figure 3: Partial Balance Forgiveness
This figure displays the average change in student debt per capita after a partial balance forgiveness, by within-
cohort earnings decile and ethnic group, including households without student loans. Panel A and B consider
balance reductions of $10,000 and $50,000 respectively. The new present value of each loan is computed as
before but assuming a lower counterfactual balance as of 2019. The red line reports the ratio of the average
present value gain to the average balance reduction in each group.

                                    Panel A. Gains from forgiving $10,000




                                                                                                                %
                                    Panel B. Gains from forgiving $50,000




                                                                                                                %




                                                       24
                                  Figure 4: Targeted Enrollment in IDR
This figure displays the average present value gains from targeted policies of automatic enrollment in income-
driven repayment, by within-cohort earnings decile and ethnic group, including households without student loans.
First, we consider the case in which households would pay 10% of their discretionary earnings, in line with
current IDR rules. We also consider (i) a variation of this policy in which loans are forgiven 10 years after the first
repayment and (ii) a variation in which households pay 10% of their earnings only above three times the poverty
line. In all cases, payments are capped by the default fixed payment. We assume that these policies are targeted
towards households for which they generate present value gains.




                                                         25
                                                              Table 1: Summary Statistics
     This table provides summary statistics for the main variables used in the analysis. The left-hand panel is for our sample, that is, all households
     for which there are education loans and the school attendee has left their education program. The right-hand panel gives summary statistics
     for the full sample including individuals without any student debt. All statistics are weighed using SCF survey weights. The standard deviations
     are derived by regressing a variable x on a constant, taking the square of the difference between x and x  ^ , and regressing the result again on a
     constant to get the variance.
                                     Households with Education Debt                                               Full Population
                              Minimum Median    Mean       SD       Max                     Minimum      Median      Mean        SD           Max

      Have Education Debt                              100%                                                            21%

      Balance                    120       22,000     41,800     56,000     419,000             0           0       8,700      21,000       419,000
26




      Initial Balance            400       32,000     51,900     59,200     555,000             0           0       10,500     22,600       555,000

      Payment                      0        2,000     3,300      4,300       38,400             0           0        600        1,700        38,400

      Interest Rate               0%        5.5%       5.9%       3.3%       29.0%

      Year Left School           1987       2012       2011       5.4         2019

      First Repayment Year       1999       2014       2013       5.2         2019

      Family Income                0       71,300     98,500    139,300    2,433,300            0        59,100    106,300    459,300     703,590,700

      Number of Adults             1          2         1.6       0.5           2               1           2         1.6        0.2            2

      Number of Children           0          1         1.1       1.2           6               0           0         0.7        1.2            7
                                Table 2: Present Value Gains from Forgiving Balances and Targeted IDR Enrollment
     This table reports the total and per capital present value gains of the policies we evaluate, by within-cohort decile of earnings and ethnic group, including households
     without student debt. First, we consider canceling all student loan balances, or only $50,000 or $10,000 per person, or up to $50,000 with a phase out range between
     $75,000 and $125,000 in earnings. Second, we consider enrolling households who would benefit from income-driven repayment. In IDR policy (a), they pay 10% of
     their discretionary income, in line with current IDR rules. In policy (b), loans are also forgiven 10 years after the first repayment. In policy (c), discretionary income
     is limited to earnings above three times the poverty line. In policy (d), payments are reduced to 7.5% of discretionary income. The last two rows report the present
     value gains and change in balance for the entire population. All present values are in pre-tax dollars.

                                      Per person ($)                                                Total ($bn)                                               Share (%)
                    Balance Forgiveness                IDR Enrollment            Balance Forgiveness              IDR Enrollment           Balance Forgiveness            IDR Enrollment
     Earnings
       Decile    Full    50K   10K    Cap       (a)      (b)    (c)     (d)   Full    50K    10K    Cap     (a)    (b)    (c)      (d)    Full   50K   10K    Cap   (a)     (b)    (c)     (d)
         1       1,085   705   438    705      524      965    791      599   12.5    8.1    5.0    8.1     6.0   11.1    9.1      6.9    2.0    1.6   2.6    1.9   8.9     2.7    5.2     6.7
         2       1,364   756   432    756      512     1,155   870      623   17.0    9.4    5.4    9.4     6.4   14.4   10.8      7.8    2.7    1.9   2.7    2.2   9.4     3.5    6.2     7.5
         3       2,398 1,928   690   1,928    1,036 2,000 2,007 1,237         32.1    25.8   9.2    25.8   13.9   26.7   26.8      16.5   5.1    5.2   4.7    5.9   20.5    6.6    15.4 16.1
         4       2,362 2,078 1,037 2,078       350     1,708 1,563      537   31.5    27.7   13.8   27.7    4.7   22.8   20.9      7.2    5.0    5.6   7.1    6.3   6.9     5.6    12.0    7.0
         5       3,954 3,320 1,708 3,320       550     2,840 2,189      849   51.7    43.4   22.3   43.4    7.2   37.1   28.6      11.1   8.2    8.8   11.4   9.9   10.6    9.1    16.4 10.8
         6       6,612 5,116 1,966 5,116       969     4,027 2,385 1,407      89.3    69.1   26.5   69.1   13.1   54.4   32.2      19.0   14.2 14.1 13.5 15.8       19.3 13.3 18.5 18.5
27




         7       6,388 5,676 2,244 5,676       193     3,443   914      376   86.8    77.2   30.5   77.2    2.6   46.8   12.4      5.1    13.8 15.7 15.5 17.7       3.9     11.5   7.1     5.0
         8       8,841 5,782 2,110 5,724       689     5,519 1,630 1,288      117.2   76.6   28.0   75.9    9.1   73.2   21.6      17.1   18.6 15.6 14.2 17.4       13.5 17.9 12.4 16.6
         9       8,397 6,576 2,355 5,889       240     5,323   692      674   113.5   88.9   31.8   79.7    3.2   71.9    9.4      9.1    18.0 18.1 16.2 18.2       4.8     17.6   5.4     8.9
        10       6,021 4,973 1,799 2,455       117     3,755   186      242   79.0    65.2   23.6   32.2    1.5   49.3    2.4      3.2    12.5 13.3 12.0      7.4   2.3     12.1   1.4     3.1


     Ethnicity
       White     4,962 4,046 1,694 3,551       460     3,211 1,207      703   420.2 342.6 143.5 300.7      38.9 271.9 102.2        59.5   66.6 69.7 73.1 68.8       57.5 66.7 58.7 57.8
       Black     7,407 5,167 1,685 4,720      1,165 4,802 2,768 1,654         139.8   97.5   31.8   89.1   22.0   90.6   52.2      31.2   22.2 19.8 16.2 20.4       32.5 22.2 30.0 30.3
     Hispanic 2,825 2,212      838   2,126     178     1,793   755      401   50.9    39.9   15.1   38.3    3.2   32.3   13.6      7.2    8.1    8.1   7.7    8.8   4.7     7.9    7.8     7.0
       Other     2,143 1,248   642    987      393     1,403   680      547   19.6    11.4   5.9    9.0     3.6   12.9    6.2      5.0    3.1    2.3   3.0    2.1   5.3     3.2    3.6     4.9


        All
        PV       4,823 3,759 1,501 3,344       518     3,118 1,333      787   630.5 491.4 196.3 437.2      67.7 407.7 174.3 102.9
      Balance    6,342 4,798 1,857 4,382                                      829.2 627.3 242.8 573.0
A     Additional Tables and Figures

             Figure A.1: Partial Balance Forgiveness - Phased out above $75,000
This figure displays the average change in student debt per capita after a partial balance forgiveness of $50,000 per
person for households with per capita earnings below $75,000. For each additional dollar of per capita earnings,
the amount forgiven per person is reduced by one dollar. The red line reports the ratio of the average present
value gain to the average balance reduction in each group.




                                                                                                                   %




                                                        28
                                  Table A.1: Variable Descriptions

This table describes the main variables used in the analysis. All variables are taken from the Federal Reserve's
2019 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). The actual variable labels from SCF are included in the description.
Any monetary variables are in terms of 2019 dollars.

Name                                  Description
Balance                               Current balance of each education loan. SCF main dataset: x7824
                                      x7847 x7870 x7924 x7947 x7970
Initial Balance                       Original amount borrowed for each education loan, excluding finance
                                      charges. SCF main dataset: x7805 x7828 x7851 x7905 x7928 x7951
Payment                               Yearly payment on each education loan. Converted to annual pay-
                                      ments based on the frequency of payments. SCF main dataset: x7815
                                      x7838 x7861 x7915 x7038 x7961
Interest Rate                         The annual rate of interest charged on each education loan. SCF main
                                      dataset: x7822 x7845 x7868 x7922 x7945 x7968
Year Left School                      The last year that the borrower attends the program that they used
                                      each education loan for. SCF main dataset: x7880 x7885 x7890 x7895
                                      x7900 x7995
First Repayment Year                  The year that a borrower begins making payments on each education
                                      loan. SCF main dataset: x7811 x7834 x7857 x7911 x7934 x7957
Why Zero                              Explains why the payments on an education loan are zero. Options
                                      include being in forbearance or a job or public service loan forgiveness
                                      program, not being able to afford payments, and still being enrolled or
                                      in the post-graduation grace period. SCF main dataset: x9300, x9301,
                                      x9302, x9303, x9304, x9305
IDR                                   Indicates whether the payments on an education loan are affected by
                                      either being in an income-based repayment program or hardship de-
                                      ferral. SCF main dataset: x7422 x7424 x7426 x7428 x7430 x7432
Family Income                         Total income for each household. Taken directly from SCF Survey
                                      Extract data.
Number of Adults                      Number of adults in each household. Value of either one or two de-
                                      pending on whether the reference person is married. Taken directly
                                      from SCF Survey Extract data.
Number of Children                    Number of children in each household. Taken directly from SCF Sur-
                                      vey Extract data.




                                                      29
                                              Table A.2: Income Decile Cutoffs
     This table shows highest level of each earnings decile, by age and earnings decile. Age groups go from youngest to oldest
     vertically, and earnings deciles go from lowest to highest horizontally. Each observation shows the top income in the group.
     All data comes from the Federal Reserve's 2019 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). Any monetary variables are in terms of
     2019 dollars.

      Age                                                    Earnings Decile


                 1          2          3          4           5          6          7          8           9            10
      25         0       12,200     21,900     25,500     28,000     33,600      38,200     40,700      47,900        85,500
      30      12,200     20,400     25,500     32,600     40,700     49,400      56,000     71,300      87,600       214,800
      35      4,400      16,300     20,900     26,500     36,100     47,900      56,000     66,200      73,800       189,400
30




      40      1,000      14,300     23,400     30,000     39,200     49,400      67,200     91,600     119,600       381,800
      45         0       15,300     25,500     34,600     40,700     48,900      58,000     74,300     113,000       743,200
      50      4,100      13,200     18,800     36,700     39,700     46,300      64,100     87,600     115,600      1,730,800
      55         0          0       18,800     30,500     44,300     50,900      66,200     89,100     127,300      7,885,300
      60         0          0       13,200     21,400     31,600     36,700      59,100     69,200     130,300      3,563,400
                           Table A.3: Income and Wealth Quartile Cutoffs
This table reports the average student debt per person by quartile of wealth and earnings, including households
without debts. Wealth is defined using the SCF "networth" variable, which is the sum of all assets minus liabilities.
Quartiles are built within age groups. Panel A reports the average balance while Panel B reports present values.

                               Panel A. Balance


                               Earnings                Wealth quartile
                               quartile         1            2         3         4

                                   1         5,950       1,248      1,887      917
                                   2        12,664       2,338      3,402     2,449
                                   3        30,226       3,634      3,660     3,551
                                   4        45,952      10,907      6,040     3,938


                               Panel B. Present value


                                                1            2         3         4
                                   1         2,348        729        615      1,112
                                   2         5,881       2,124      1,740     1,219
                                   3        21,936       3,587      3,780     3,496
                                   4        38,828      12,148      6,348     4,007




                                                        31
B        Taxation of Loan Forgiveness
In the main analysis, we assume that loan forgiveness under IDR is untaxed and compute deciles based on pre-
tax income. While many experts believe that these rules will be changed before forgiveness under IDR occurs,16
under current law loan forgiveness is treated as taxable income. In this appendix we explore the implications of
taxes on loan forgiveness programs.
       First, we project how much taxes borrowers will pay under the current system. We assume that 2019 tax
brackets (Table B.1) will grow at the same rate as consumer prices. For couples, we multiply the cutoffs by
two, which is equivalent to assuming that they will file jointly. Taxable income is the sum of a family's earnings
and forgiven balances in a given year, minus the standard deduction. Family earnings evolve under the same
assumptions as in Section 2.3. As for tax brackets cutoffs, we assume the standard deduction to be twice as large
for couples and to grow at the same rate as inflation. We define the tax cost related to balance forgiveness as the
increase in taxes resulting from the inclusion of the forgiven balance to its taxable income.
       Figure B.1 shows the average present value of these tax cost. The top panel shows amounts for all households,
the middle panel shows households with student debt and the bottom panel shows households with any projected
tax bill. These tax bills largely mirror the benefits of IDR forgiveness, with the middle of the income distribution
paying the largest tax bills. Effectively, taxing loan forgiveness under IDR undoes some of the benefits of IDR loan
forgiveness. Panel C reports the average balance by decile and per person for households who will have to pay
such taxes. These present values are quite substantial. It is important to note that it is not clear how much the
IRS will actually collect from individuals in the bottom 10% if they owe $14,000.
       Nonetheless, we can assume that these taxes will be paid and estimate the benefits of combining the policies
we previously considered with an end to such taxation. To that purpose, Table B.2 repeats the analysis in Table 2,
but assumes that these taxes are removed and reports the results in post-tax dollars. To be specific, we measure
the present value gain of each policy, under the assumption that borrowers would have paid taxes when their
loan is forgiven under the status-quo, but that all taxes are removed under new policies. The levels of forgive-
ness increases substantially­because it now includes the benefit from eliminating IDR forgiveness taxes­but the
basic patterns regarding progressivity and regressivity of various options do not. Under universal and capped
forgiveness plans, the majority of benefits accrue to the top income deciles, while under IDR plans the majority
of forgiveness accrues to the middle and bottom of the income distribution.




  16
    For example, the Wall Street Journal, June 24, 2018 writes that "the IRS would likely be forced to cut deals
or write off taxable amounts altogether, some experts say."


                                                         32
       Table B.1: 2019 Tax Brackets
This table displays the tax rates applicable to each
income bracket for single individuals. The standard
deduction is $12,200 in 2019.

         Bracket                     Rate
         Up to $9,700                10%
         $9,701 ­$39,475             12%
         $39,476 ­$84,200            22%
         $84,201 ­$160,725           24%
         $160,726 ­$204100           32%
         $204,101 ­$510,300          35%
         Over $510,301               37%




                        33
                    Figure B.1: Present value of taxes on forgiven balances
This figure displays the average present value of projected taxes on balances forgiven in the future, per person
and within-cohort decile of earnings. Panel A reports the mean for the entire sample. Panel B reports the mean
for households with student debts. Panel C reports the mean for households projected to have to pay such taxes.

                                           Panel A. All households




                                   Panel B. Households with student debt




                                 Panel C. Households with projected tax bill




                                                      34
                   Table B.2: Present Value Gains from Forgiving Balances and Targeted IDR Enrollment­ Post-Tax Dollars
     This table reports the total and per capital present value gains of the policies we evaluate, by within-cohort decile of earnings and ethnic group, including households
     without student debt combined with ending taxation on canceled balances. First, we consider canceling all student loan balances, or only $50,000 or $10,000 per
     person, or up to $50,000 with a phase out range between $75,000 and $125,000 in earnings. Second, we consider enrolling households who would benefit from
     income-driven repayment. In IDR policy (a), they pay 10% of their discretionary income, in line with current IDR rules. In policy (b), loans are also forgiven 10 years
     after the first repayment. In policy (c), discretionary income is limited to earnings above three times the poverty line. In policy (d), payments are reduced to 7.5% of
     discretionary income. The last two rows report the present value gains and change in balance for the entire population. Unlike in Table 2, we combine these policies
     with end to forgiveness taxation, including under IDR. All present values are in post-tax dollars and include the benefits of this change in the tax policy.

                                       Per person ($)                                                   Total ($bn)                                               Share (%)
                     Balance Forgiveness                IDR Enrollment            Balance Forgiveness                 IDR Enrollment           Balance Forgiveness            IDR Enrollment
     Earnings
       Decile     Full   50K    10K        Cap    (a)     (b)    (c)     (d)   Full    50K    10K    Cap        (a)     (b)    (c)     (d)    Full   50K   10K    Cap   (a)     (b)    (c)     (d)
         1       2,532   2,152 1,885 2,152       1,844 2,352 2,157 1,937       29.1    24.7   21.7   24.7      21.2    27.0   24.8     22.3   3.5    3.6   5.6    3.9   11.0    4.6    7.4     9.1
         2       2,049   1,441 1,117 1,441       1,024 1,825 1,540 1,241       25.5    18.0   13.9   18.0      12.8    22.8   19.2     15.5   3.1    2.6   3.6    2.8   6.6     3.9    5.8     6.3
         3       4,548   4,079 2,840 4,079       2,739 3,972 4,021 3,000       60.8    54.5   38.0   54.5      36.6    53.1   53.8     40.1   7.4    8.0   9.8    8.5   19.0    9.1    16.2 16.3
         4       4,534   4,250 3,209 4,250       1,439 3,617 3,351 1,862       60.5    56.7   42.8   56.7      19.2    48.3   44.7     24.9   7.4    8.3   11.1   8.9   9.9     8.3    13.4 10.1
         5       5,096   4,461 2,850 4,461       1,195 3,794 3,114 1,568       66.7    58.4   37.3   58.4      15.6    49.6   40.7     20.5   8.1    8.5   9.6    9.1   8.1     8.5    12.2    8.4
35




         6       9,256   7,760 4,610 7,760       3,104 6,483 4,813 3,688       125.0 104.8    62.2   104.8     41.9    87.5   65.0     49.8   15.2 15.3 16.1 16.4       21.7 15.0 19.5 20.3
         7       7,479   6,766 3,335 6,766       688    4,408 1,663 1,064      101.7   92.0   45.3   92.0       9.3    59.9   22.6     14.5   12.4 13.5 11.7 14.4       4.8     10.3   6.8     5.9
         8       10,931 7,871 4,199 7,813        1,903 7,494 3,167 2,817       144.9 104.3    55.7   103.6     25.2    99.3   42.0     37.3   17.6 15.3 14.4 16.2       13.1 17.1 12.6 15.2
         9       9,118   7,297 3,075 6,620       624    5,996 1,172 1,150      123.2   98.6   41.6   89.4       8.4    81.0   15.8     15.5   15.0 14.4 10.7 14.0       4.4     13.9   4.8     6.3
        10       6,437   5,388 2,215 2,870       217    4,118   329      389   84.4    70.7   29.1   37.7       2.9    54.0   4.3      5.1    10.3 10.4    7.5    5.9   1.5     9.3    1.3     2.1


     Ethnicity
       White     6,342   5,426 3,075 4,931       1,392 4,483 2,353 1,758       537.2 459.6 260.4 417.6         117.9 379.7 199.3 148.9        65.4 67.3 67.2 66.5       61.0 65.2 59.9 60.6
       Black     9,949   7,708 4,226 7,261       2,584 7,031 4,773 3,333       187.7 145.5    79.7   137.0     48.8   132.7   90.1     62.9   22.8 21.3 20.6 21.8       25.2 22.8 27.1 25.6
     Hispanic    3,791   3,179 1,804 3,093       847    2,704 1,575 1,150      68.3    57.3   32.5   55.7      15.3    48.7   28.4     20.7   8.3    8.4   8.4    8.9   7.9     8.4    8.5     8.4
       Other     3,123   2,228 1,622 1,967       1,236 2,347 1,659 1,417       28.6    20.4   14.9   18.0      11.3    21.5   15.2     13.0   3.5    3.0   3.8    2.9   5.9     3.7    4.6     5.3


        All
        PV       6,286   5,222 2,964 4,807       1,478 4,456 2,547 1,877       821.8 682.7 387.5 628.4         193.2 582.6 332.9 245.5
      Balance    6,342   4,798 1,857 4,382                                     829.2 627.3 242.8 573.0
