                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         DIVIDED WE FALL:
  INTERNATIONAL HEALTH AND TRADE COORDINATION DURING A PANDEMIC

                                        Viral V. Acharya
                                        Zhengyang Jiang
                                      Robert J. Richmond
                                   Ernst-Ludwig von Thadden

                                      Working Paper 28176
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28176


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020




We thank George Mailath, Volker Nocke, Raghu Sundaram, Michéle Tertilt, and Mathias
Trabandt for comments. Steven Zheng provided excellent research assistance. Von Thadden
thanks the German Science Foundation for support through grant CRC TR 224, C03. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Viral V. Acharya, Zhengyang Jiang, Robert J. Richmond, and Ernst-Ludwig von
Thadden. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Divided We Fall: International Health and Trade Coordination During a Pandemic
Viral V. Acharya, Zhengyang Jiang, Robert J. Richmond, and Ernst-Ludwig von Thadden
NBER Working Paper No. 28176
December 2020
JEL No. F1,F4,H87,I1

                                          ABSTRACT

We analyze the role of international trade and health coordination in times of a pandemic by
building a two-economy, two-good trade model integrated into a micro-founded SIR model of
infection dynamics. Uncoordinated governments with national mandates can adopt (i)
containment policies to suppress infection spread domestically, and (ii) (import) tariffs to prevent
infection coming from abroad. The efficient, i.e., coordinated, risk-sharing arrangement
dynamically adjusts both policy instruments to share infection and economic risks internationally.
However, in Nash equilibrium, uncoordinated trade policies robustly feature inefficiently high
tariffs that peak with the pandemic in the foreign economy. This distorts terms of trade dynamics
and magnifies the welfare costs of tariff wars during a pandemic due to lower levels of
consumption and production as well as smaller gains via diversification of infection curves across
economies.

Viral V. Acharya                                 Robert J. Richmond
Stern School of Business                         Leonard N. Stern School of Business
New York University                              Kaufman Management Center
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-65                   44 West Fourth Street, 9-81
New York, NY 10012                               New York, NY 10012
and CEPR                                         rrichmon@stern.nyu.edu
and also NBER
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu                           Ernst-Ludwig von Thadden
                                                 Department of Economics
Zhengyang Jiang                                  University of Mannheim
Kellogg School of Management                     L 7,3-5
Northwestern University                          68 131 Mannheim
2211 Campus Drive                                vthadden@uni-mannheim.de
Evanston, IL 60610
zhengyang.jiang@kellogg.northwestern.edu
   The Covid-19 Pandemic has been truly international, spreading globally through health and
economic linkages between countries and regions. To understand the impact of pandemics on
the global economy and to analyze the role of coordination in international trade and health, we
generalize the Macroeconomic SIR literature to an international context by introducing trade.
Our model helps understand how the outbreak of a pandemic in one country is transmitted to
other countries by trade (which includes tourism and services), and how national containment
measures impact the spread of the pandemic in other countries. Given that the policy response
to the pandemic in 2020 has been mostly along national lines, the question of the role and the
value of international coordination in combatting the pandemic is of great importance.
   By way of motivation, consider the stylized facts for China and the United States presented
in Figure 1 for the period December 2019 to October 2020: the evolution of the pandemic (top
panel); the exchange rate measured as CNY/USD, i.e., Renminbi per US dollar (second panel);
the year on year (y-o-y) growth in industrial production in the two countries (third panel);
and, the trade balance for China and the US (bottom two panels, respectively). The pandemic
peaked in China in terms of new infections during mid-February to mid-March 2020, while the
US reached its second peak in August 2020, with infections remaining higher thereafter relative
to its first peak attained during April 2020. Unsurprisingly, the y-o-y change in industrial
production evolved in each country according to the pandemic, dipping as the pandemic took
grip and recovering (in case of China) as the pandemic subsided.
   Significant from an international trade perspective are the observations that (i) each country
imported more relative to exports (negative trade balance) during the period it witnessed the
pandemic; and, (ii) the terms of trade (expressed in terms of the exchange rate) deteriorate in
the country experiencing the pandemic, with USD depreciating sharply relative to CNY during
the second wave of the pandemic in the US. Can these outcomes be reconciled with uncoordi-
nated health and tariff policy decisions of national governments? Are these outcomes desirable
from a social efficiency standpoint? Put differently, what would the outcomes be if national
governments were to coordinate their health and tariff policies? Indeed, how do health and
tariff policies affect each other, and in turn, the attendant health and trade outcomes, during
a pandemic? By introducing a micro-founded SIR dynamic for international disease trans-
mission in an otherwise standard and simple model of trade, our paper provides a theoretical
framework for answering these important policy questions.
   It has been widely noted in the recent economic literature (Eichenbaum, Rebelo and Tra-
bandt, 2020; Brotherhood et al., 2020, and others) that if a pandemic hits an economy, local
consumption and production create health externalities among its individuals. Our model's
key insight is that international trade offers a risk-sharing alternative, as it can help sustain
consumption in pandemic-affected economies without excessively aggravating its health ex-
ternalities through production-related transmissions. However, international trade exposes the

                                               1
foreign economies to the pandemic, requiring an eventual reversal of the roles played by the
economies in risk-sharing through trade. In spite of the transmission of infection across bor-
ders, the socially efficient arrangement does in general involve trade-based risk-sharing that
reflects high contingency on the state of the pandemic in different economies; in particular,
tariffs are lowered to counteract the economic fallout on the foreign economy when its infec-
tion is peaking, and they can even be negative, i.e. be replaced by import subsidies.
   In contrast, uncoordinated, i.e., Nash equilibrium, trade policies adopted by national-
mandate governments robustly feature inefficiently high tariffs, which are only reduced during
the peak of the pandemic at home and peak when the pandemic in the foreign country peaks.
While uncoordinated tariffs are inefficiently high even in the absence of a pandemic (a well
known-result from trade theory), the inefficiencies are magnified in the presence of a pandemic,
manifesting in the form of lower levels of consumption and production, smaller health gains
via diversification of infection curves across economies, and weaker post-pandemic economic
recovery. In summary, health outcomes in Nash equilibrium are inferior in terms of a higher
incidence of deaths and in terms of less economic burden-sharing via trade compared to the
case of policy coordination.
   We show these results on the need for international coordination on health and trade in
a dynamic two-country model with complete SIR dynamics, a micro-founded international
transmission of the pandemic operating via both consumption and labor, policy instruments for
domestic containment and international tariffs, and an analysis of uncoordinated international
activity in the form of infinite-horizon Nash equilibrium play.
   We calibrate our model so that the pandemic starts in one country and spills over to the
other country such that the infection in the second country peaks when the infections in the
first country have subsided thanks to herd immunity. This is the simplest model to capture
the international transmission of the health externality; we do not consider more complicated
policy shifts that can give rise to several infection waves in one country. The pandemic in-
duces households to endogenously cut down their consumption and labor provision in order to
reduce the probability of getting infected. However, as has been widely noted, households do
not internalize health externalities on other agents. In fact, our model features what are proba-
bly the two most important such externalities (see, e.g., Garibaldi, Moen and Pissarides (2020)
for a careful discussion) and extends them to the international context. First, self-interested
infected individuals ignore the health impact of their activity on others. Second, even suscep-
tible individuals ignore the dynamic externality on other not yet infected individuals, as they
risk getting infected and thus posing a risk to others in the future. While these externalities
have been widely analyzed in the recent macro-SIR literature (see our discussion below), they
also constitute an international externality through international trade.
   Our model allows us to investigate the optimal domestic containment and tariff policies

                                                2
with and without international coordination. In both the coordinated and the uncoordinated
outcomes, the governments impose domestic containment policies (which we model as a pos-
sibly non-remunerative "tax" on domestic consumption) during the course of the domestic
infection. This policy contains the spread of the pandemic, as it discourages households from
consuming goods and internalizes the health externalities. Under our calibration, the domestic
containment policy can amount to the equivalent of a tax as high as 70% during the peak of
infection, which substantially decreases economic activity. Both uncoordinated governments
and the coordinated planner reduce the amount of infection during the pandemic, at the expense
of lower consumption and production in both countries. In fact, the levels of consumption and
production in each country largely track the evolution of infected cases in each country due to
both the government's containment policies and the households' endogenous responses.
    In addition to the domestic containment policies, our model considers tariffs as a second
instrument addressing the international dimension of the problem, and predicts novel import
tariff patterns. In the absence of a pandemic, our model features standard tariffs wars. When
countries take uncoordinated (Nash) policy decisions, they choose import tariffs that are too
high relative to the coordinated (social planner) case. Such tariffs lead to poor consumption
levels and poor choice between domestic and foreign goods, resulting in a significant loss
of welfare. The pandemic fundamentally alters the temporal structure of tariffs, inducing in
them a variation that is linked to the relative state of the pandemic in the two countries, with
important welfare consequences.
    Consider first the uncoordinated (Nash equilibrium) case. When the pandemic hits the first
country, it seeks to limit transmission of the disease domestically by imposing strong con-
tainment measures on domestic consumption; this puts a downward pressure on its domestic
price level, resulting in both a competitive disadvantage to foreign goods as well as an increase
in the risk of infection to the foreign country since it incentivizes imports from the infected
country. In response, the foreign country raises its import tariffs beyond the case without a
pandemic. This weakens the infected country's output even further and limits its consump-
tion possibilities. On the other hand, the infected country lowers import tariffs below the case
without a pandemic, in order to encourage its domestic households to consume more foreign
goods which are less conducive to infection. In other words, the pandemic modulates the
tariff structure in a manner that skews the terms of trade against the infected country's produc-
tion, aggravating economic risk-sharing possibilities in the midst of a pandemic. The loss of
risk-sharing manifests itself in the form of a high domestic bias in the infected country's con-
sumption basket; nevertheless, the home bias reduces as the pandemic peaks in the infected
country given its response of limiting import tariffs to support the economy. As the infected
country reaches herd immunity and the pandemic peaks in the foreign country, their roles are
reversed in this loss of risk-sharing.

                                               3
   Consider now the case where the two countries coordinate on a jointly optimal outcome.
The pandemic modulates the structure of tariffs in this case too, but in a manner that is exactly
the opposite of the uncoordinated case. As domestic containment measures required to reduce
domestic infections aggravate production and consumption in the infected country, the planner
lowers the import tariffs in the foreign country and raises the import tariffs in the infected one.
The structure of these tariffs is intriguing at first pass because they encourage both countries
to consume more goods produced by the more infected country and therefore raise the likeli-
hood of infection. On the other hand, terms of trade are now skewed in favor of the infected
country's goods to ameliorate its economic situation. As in the uncoordinated case, these roles
reverse once the infected country reaches herd immunity and the pandemic peaks in the foreign
country, so that each country ends up with more favorable terms of trade and higher income
during the peak of its domestic infection. The better economic risk-sharing manifests itself in
the form of efficient home bias in each country, in particular, a home bias far lower than in the
uncoordinated case.
   It is worth noting that risk sharing in this context refers to individual risk. As is common in
the basic SIR models, there is no aggregate risk in our model. Once national policies are deter-
mined, the disease runs its course deterministically, with aggregate transmissions determined
by the Law of Large Numbers. Government policies, however, influence the laws of motion
of the domestic transmissions and can shift aggregate infection rates internationally, since the
economies are linked through international trade and infections. This then results in changing
infection risks for the individuals in each country. A key result of our analysis is that this
intertemporal economic risk-sharing also leads to sharing of health risk: the foreign country
imports a part of the infections by facilitating trade with the infected country, which encour-
ages the infected country to shift consumption towards foreign goods and therefore prevents
its domestic infection rates from peaking too fast; this risk-sharing then benefits the foreign
country at the peak of its own infection.
   This implies, from a normative standpoint, that cooperation on trade in times of a pandemic
can result in both superior economic and health risk-sharing outcomes across countries. Hence,
there is no tradeoff between economic and health performance in the international context. In
fact, while Nash equilibrium behavior in tariffs leads to lower international disease transmis-
sion compared to laisser-faire policies, uncoordinated behavior still produces worse health
outcomes in each country than socially optimal, because it fails to generate the intertemporally
optimal modulation of the terms of trade.
   This is by no means obvious, as a simple variant of our model shows in which there are no
tariffs. If tariffs are exogenously fixed and constant (for example by international trade rules),
then both countries are still linked by international trade and infections, but set their domestic
containment policies independently. In this model, this leads to outcomes that are, of course,

                                                4
          overall inferior to the coordinated outcome, but that result in fewer infections and deaths. In
          fact, the lack of coordination in Nash equilibrium leads to excessive economic containment,
          exactly because an instrument to coordinate international economic activity at least implicitly
          is missing. In this sense, the tradeoff between economic and health performance is resolved
          differently by uncoordinated governments than in the coordinated outcome, who tolerate more
          infections in exchange for higher consumption.
              From a technical point of view, our analysis is, as far as we know, the first to study Nash
          Equilibrium in fully dynamic economic and health policies. This is computationally demand-
          ing, because strategies are high-dimensional vectors and each iteration of the best-response
          algorithm requires solving a full dynamic macroeconomic equilibrium model. In order to get
          sufficiently fast convergence we therefore model economic, health, and policy interactions as
          parsimoniously as possible.
              From a positive standpoint, our model can help to explain why in the real-world scenario
          of uncoordinated decision-making by countries, terms of trade and economic outcomes may
          end up being excessively dire for the infected countries. An important insight is that the purely
          epidemiological consideration of imposing "border controls" on trade and travel to limit the
          spread of infections should be weighed against its implications for loss of economic risk-
          sharing; indeed, our model suggests that even health outcomes tend to end up being superior
          with some coordination on trade.
              Our analysis is also informative about the dynamics of health and economic outcomes
          under uncoordinated policies. In fact, our simulations consistently generate the pattern that
          Nash equilibrium "does too much too late". This is most striking for the evolution of aggregate
          consumption, which in Nash equilibrium remains high in the non-affected country for more
          than half a year after the outbreak in the first country, and then drops dramatically in a short
          period when the infections hits. In contrast, international coordination reduces consumption
          even in the non-affected country right from the start of the pandemic, but the overall drop is
          much smaller. Similarly, in Nash equilibrium tariffs in the originally non-affected country stay
          high until well into the outbreak and are then reduced drastically, well below levels chosen
          under coordinated policy. In our benchmark case this results in durations of the pandemic that
          are around 5% longer in Nash equilibrium than in the coordinated outcome.


          Related Literature. Our paper is related to an emerging literature that studies the nexus
          between economics and disease1 . On a single country level, Eichenbaum, Rebelo and Trabandt
          (2020) embed SIR disease dynamics into a macroeconomic model and study the tradeoffs in-
          volved with suppression policies. In one of the few papers on the economic consequences
1
    This literature has grown impressively during the last six months, and we cannot do justice to it here. See Brodeur
    et al. (2020) and references therein for a broad overview.


                                                            5
of disease dynamics before 2020, Greenwood et al. (2019) analyzed the dynamics of HIV in
Africa and its economic consequences. Building on this work, Brotherhood et al. (2020) an-
alyze a rich set of behavioral patterns and show the importance of heterogeneous lockdown
policies for the Covid-19 environment. Alvarez, Argente and Lippi (2020) is an early paper
studying the optimal lockdown policy in a single country as a planning problem in a macre-
conomic disease model. Foundational work on the health externalities arising from Covid-19
is, among others, Garibaldi, Moen and Pissarides (2020) and Assenza et al. (2020). A number
of papers investigate different containment policies, such as Berger, Herkenhoff and Mongey
(2020) on the role of testing and case-dependent quarantine, Alon et al. (2020) on age-specific
lockdown policies among sets of developing and advanced economies, and Jones, Philippon
and Venkateswaran (2020) on work from home policies. There is a large body of work on na-
tional fiscal and macroeconomic stabilization policies in response to the pandemic, on which
we build in order to simplify the policy space as much as possible, but that is too large to
review here.
   Our paper extends these studies to multiple countries and international trade in multiple
goods, with associated domestic and trade policies to manage the pandemic. It thus relates to
other recent contributions studying hetereogeneity in macroeconomic SIR dynamics, such as
Acemoglu et al. (2020) who develop an SIR model with heterogeneous groups and lockdown
policies, and Kaplan, Moll and Violante (2020) who integrate the SIR disease dynamics in a
heterogeneous agent new Keynesian model and study the distributional consequences of differ-
ent containment strategies, with a focus similar to Glover et al. (2020). Fernandez-Villaverde
and Jones (2020) estimate and simulate an SIR model by using disaggregate data from various
locations and provide an impressive overview of the international evolution of the disease on
their website.
   A very rich recent paper written parallel to ours and with a similar focus on international
trade and health, is Antras, Redding and Rossi-Hansberg (2020). They develop a two-country
model of household interaction in equilibrium with spatial frictions that provides a micro-
foundation for the international spread of a disease similar to the one developped here and a
gravity model of international trade. Different from our work, they do not consider govern-
ments, strategic national policies, and international coordination. This latter theme is the focus
of Beck and Wagner (2020) who study cooperation across countries in containment policies
in a simple two-stage model that leaves aside the macroeconomic dynamics at the core of our
model. Leibovici and Santacreu (2020) studies the role of international trade in essential goods
during a pandemic with a multi-country, multi-sector model. Bonadio et al. (2020) examine
the role of global supply chains' impact on GDP growth across countries, while Meier and
Pinto (2020) study the specific disruption of China-US supply chains and its impact on US
production in March/April 2020 in detail. Early empirical work comparing pandemic policies

                                                6
internationally includes Ullah and Ajala (2020), who analyze effects of testing and lockdown
in 69 countries, and Noy et al. (2020) who estimate measures of exposure, vulnerability and
resilience to Covid-19 across countries.
    McKibbin and Roshen (2020) and Liu, Moon and Schorfheide (2020) estimate a DSGE
model and a Bayesian panel VAR, respectively., while We explicitly model the international
trade and health coordination by studying the dynamic interaction between the SIR dynamics,
international trade, and local and global containment policies.
    Our paper is also related to the large literature on international business cycles (Backus,
Kehoe and Kydland, 1992; Stockman and Tesar, 1990). While the business cycle dynamics in
these papers are driven by productivity, investments and savings, the dynamics in our paper are
driven by disease and health policies that give rise to interesting cross-country co-movements
(as analyzed in different contexts, e.g., by Imbs (2004); Rose and Spiegel (2009)). We identify
these co-movements and analyze how different tax and tariff policies affect them.



1     The Model
In thinking about the importance of coordinating health and trade outcomes during a pandemic,
a simple two-period consumption and trade model with two countries (sketched in Appendix
A.1) provides a useful starting point. Suppose that each country has an initial group of infected
individuals and a susceptible group that may become infected by coming in contact with the
domestic (foreign) infected group while consuming the domestic (foreign) goods. Two key
externalities arise, one in the context of health due to the cross-country spread of the pandemic,
and another -- more traditional one -- in the context of trade. Each government has two
instruments, one controlling domestic infections via domestic containment policies, and one
controlling imports via tariffs. The two externalities are evaluated differently depending on
whether decisions are made by a coordinated "planner" maximizing the sum of the objectives
of the two countries or by uncoordinated governments in Nash equilibrium.
    On the health front, the infected group in each country exposes the susceptible group in
the other country to the risk of infection. This "health externality" is not internalized by un-
coordinated governments while setting containment policies, i.e., when effectively choosing
consumption, for their respective infected groups. Hence, the coordinated planner imposes
stricter domestic containment policies on consumption in each country than the uncoordinated
planners. Second, a "trade externality" materializes as is standard in the literature (Brander
and Spencer, 1985; Ossa, 2014). Each country views its net imports as a cost to its welfare and
chooses a level of consumption of the foreign good for its citizens that is lower than that un-
der coordination, where imports and exports are simply cross-country transfers. Clearly, both



                                                7
instruments are at least partially conflicting, and the health and the trade externalities interact
with each other, depending on the state of the pandemic in the two countries
   To analyze this broader problem, we study a full dynamic two-country model with com-
plete SIR dynamics, production and costly deaths that builds on the insights from the simple
two-period model, but is micro-founded in its domestic and international transmission mech-
anism and derives richer implications on the need for international coordination on the health
and trade fronts.
   The model considers 2 countries, k = A, B . Time is discrete, t = 0, 1, 2, ... Each country
has households, identical competitive firms, and a government.
   For all variables we use the following notational convention. Variables describing con-
sumption, production, or government activity in country k  {A, B } have the superscript k .
When discussing a single country, the superscript -k denotes the other country. To simplify
the presentation, superscripts in equations referring to a single country are dropped whereever
possible without ambiguity.
   The households in each country are defined over a continuum of unit mass. Let St , It ,
Rt , and Dt denote the mass of susceptible, infected, recovered and dead people in any of the
two countries. The total population of the country at any date t then is Nt = St + It + Rt .
We do not distinguish between individuals and households. Households within each of the
                                        -k -k     -k        -k
three living categories are identical. St , It , Rt  , and Dt  are the masses of the respective
groups in the other country, if we discuss activity in one country k . h  {s, i, r} indicates the
three health types.


1.1     The Economy
There are two goods j  {A, B }, which are denoted by subscripts throughout the paper. Each
period, good j is produced in country j only, by using country j labor according to the linear
technology
                                    yt = z ( t (s) +  t (i) + t (r))                           (1)
                    j
where   t (h)   =   t (h)   is the amount of labor provided by employees of health status h, and
z = z j is country k = j 's productivity, which is assumed to be constant. Infected individuals
(h = i) have a lower productivity, as given by  < 1. Firms act competitively, maximizing
profits and taking prices as given.
   The prices of the goods in both countries are pj , j = A, B . When discussing a single
country k , p-k denotes the price of good j = k . There are no transport costs or other physical
trade frictions between countries.
   Households in each country provide labor and consume a basket of the two goods A and
B . Suppressing the time index for simplicity, denote the per household consumption of good

                                                   8
j by households in country k by ck    k
                                 j = cj (h). Households in country k consume the goods as
a basket composed by the standard CES aggregator
                                                                                 
                                                  -1                       -1    -1
                         q (ck    k        k
                             k , c-k ) = (ck )
                                                       + (1 - )(ck
                                                                 -k )
                                                                                             (2)

where ck                                            k
       k denotes consumption of the domestic good, c-k of the foreign good,   (0.5, 1) is
the home bias for domestic consumption goods, and  > 1 the substitution elasticity between
the domestic and the foreign good. These two parameters are identical in both countries in
order to focus on the pure effects of disease transmission in international trade.
    At each time t, the representative households in any of the two countries have the following
objective function, where we ignore the household's health status to simplify the presentation:

                                            
                                                             1
                                 Ut = Et          -t v (x ) -         2
                                                                                             (3)
                                             =t
                                                             2

where 0 <  < 1 is the discount rate, x = xk
                                           (h) is the composite consumption basket,
    =   k (h)   labor supplied, and
        


                                      xk          k        k
                                        (h) = q (ck, (h), c-k, (h))                          (4)

    We assume for computational simplicity that the utility of consumption is of the constant-
relative-risk-aversion type:
                                          v (x) = x- ,  > 0                                  (5)

    In each country k , we denote aggregate consumption of the home good by

                              Htk = St
                                     k k           k k
                                       ck,t (s) + It             k k
                                                     ck,t (i) + Rt ck,t (r)                  (6)

and by
                            Mtk = St
                                   k k            k k
                                     c-k,t (s) + It              k k
                                                    c-k,t (i) + Rt c-k,t (r)                 (7)

that of the foreign good ("imports"). Hence, the exports of country k are Mt-k .
    In each country, the government imposes measures to contain the spread of the pandemic.
Since we are interested in the international interaction of health and economic policies, which
is computationally intensive, we do not attempt to model these measures in their actual rich-
ness and complexity, as, e.g., Brotherhood et al. (2020) or Kaplan, Moll and Violante (2020).
Without going into any institutional detail, we follow the minimalist approach taken by Eichen-
baum, Rebelo and Trabandt (2020) and assume that these measures act like excise "contain-
ment taxes" µk = µk                                                                 k
                  t . This means that households in country k have to pay an extra µ pj
per unit of consumption of good j , j = A, B . These additional costs include the costs of

                                                       9
          safety measures, new regulatory product features, waiting times, product substitution, and all
          other additional costs induced by policies restricting contact and economic activity. Despite
          their formal similarity, the µk are not value-added taxes. They are material or immaterial and
          partially deadweight costs of consumption. Furthermore, the government may decide to im-
          plement additional measures for foreign goods, which may include border controls, the closure
          of harbours, the restriction of air travel, additional safety checks etc. These measures act like
          a further excise tax, which we call  k  0. Despite their formal similarity, the  k are not just
          import tariffs. They are material or immaterial and partially deadweight costs of consuming
          foreign goods, on top of those generated by µk .
              In any of the two countries k = A, B , households then have to pay (1 + µk )pk per unit of
          consumption of the domestic good and (1+ µk +  k )p-k per unit of consumption of the foreign
          good. For each country, we can thus simplify notation by defining the "consumer prices"

                                            pk = pk         k
                                                  k = (1 + µ )pk                                                 (8)
                                           p-k = pk          k  k
                                                  -k = (1 + µ +  )p-k                                            (9)

          for the domestic and foreign goods, respectively.
              As noted, the µk and  k are frictions that do not necessarily generate government revenue.
              k and  k be the fraction of these costs received by the government;  k and  k are ex-
          Let µ                                                                   µ      
                                    k , i = µ,  , is pure waste from a public finance perspective and
          ogenous. The fraction 1 - i
          represents pure frictions to reduce consumption activity or make it safer in health terms. To
          simplify the presentation, we assume that k = 1, i.e. that the friction on international trade

          comes in the form of pure tariffs. The domestic policy µk may raise money as it is related
          to consumption and business activity, but it is purely dissipative as long as it simply disrupts
          consumption to contain the pandemic. In our simulations, we consider the two extreme cases
          k = 0, 1.2  k is a measure of the cost of containment measures: the lower  k the more
          µ          µ                                                              µ
          damaging the measures are economically.
              The government's budget in either country therefore is

                                      Gk   k k       k    k k   k        k
                                       t = µ µ pk,t Ht + (µ µ +  )p-k,t Mt                                     (10)

              In order to simplify the dynamics, we again follow Eichenbaum, Rebelo and Trabandt
          (2020), Brotherhood et al. (2020) and others, by assuming that households do not save or
          borrow. Hence, the only intertemporal link of household decisions is given by health concerns,
2
    Like most of the literature, Kaplan, Moll and Violante (2020) recognize that, factually, containment measures mostly
    generate costs rather than revenue, but propose, in a normative sense, to replace pure frictions by equivalent Pigouvian
                         k
    taxes, i.e. to make µ   a policy instrument and set it as large as possible.



                                                             10
and the budget constraint of a household of type h in country k at time t is static and given by

                   pk,t ck,t (h) + p-k,t c-k,t (h) = wt (h) t (h) + gt (h) + vt .           (11)

where we have dropped the superscript k for notational convenience, and wt (h) is the domes-
tic wage, gt (h) the per household government transfer to type h households, and vt the per
household profit of the corporate sector in the country. In our baseline framework we exclude
redistributionary policy and let gt (h) = gt for all h. Using our other simplifying assumptions,
the government's budget constraint therefore is

                                       Gk         k k
                                        t = (1 - Dt )gt                                     (12)

           k is the size of the population at time t, determined by the disease dynamics to
where 1 - Dt
which we turn now.


1.2      The Disease
Like Eichenbaum, Rebelo and Trabandt (2020), Brotherhood et al. (2020) and other recent eco-
nomic contributions, we augment the classic SIR model by economic activity. Different from
these contributions we do not only include domestic economic interactions, but also interac-
tions due to international trade. In the basic SIR model following Kermack and McKendrick
(1932), an infectious individual in any given area can spread the virus at the rate St (so-called
"mass action incidence"), where St is the number of susceptibles in that area. Hence, the mass
of newly infected people in that area at time t is given by Tt = St It . Eichenbaum, Rebelo
and Trabandt (2020) generalize this to transmission through consumption and work activities
in a single country by splitting the individual transmission rate St into three components to
obtain
                         Tt = [1 ct (s)ct (i) + 2 t (s) t (i) + 3 ] St It                   (13)

where ct (h) and t (h) are consumption and labor, resp., by the representative consumers.
   We add an international economic channel to this transmission mechanism, taking into
account that the consumption of imports leads to cross-border contacts that are potentially
contagious. Typical examples of such imports of country k would be the delivery and instal-
lation of goods and equipment in k by producers from country j = k , tourists from country k
in j , or services provided by j -firms in k . In Section A.3 in the Appendix we provide a micro-
founded analysis of such an international transmission mechanism, which yields the following




                                                11
       generalization of (13):

                 Ttk =       1 ck       k          k        k            k     k          k k
                                k,t (s)ck,t (i) + c-k,t (s)c-k,t (i) + 2 t (s) t (i) + 3 It St

                                    -k                  -k        -k k
                       + 4 ck                  k
                            k,t (s)ck,t (i) + c-k,t (s)c-k,t (i) It St                                      (14)

           As in (13), the first three terms capture infections from domestic contacts arising during
       consumption, work, and all other local activity, respectively. The fourth term describes infec-
       tions arising from contacts with foreigners while importing or exporting.3 This is the interna-
       tional disease transmission mechanism at the heart of our analysis, of which the single country
       case (13) is a special case obtained by setting ck
                                                        -k = 0, for k = A, B .
           As in standard epidemiological models, the evolution of the transmission in any country is
       now given by

                                          St+1 = St - Tt                                                    (15)
                                          It+1 = It + Tt - (pr + pd )It                                     (16)
                                         Rt+1 = Rt + pr It                                                  (17)
                                         Dt+1 = Dt + pd It                                                  (18)

       where pr and pd are the fractions of infected individuals that recover or die, respectively, during
       the period. Here, the transition probabilities pr and pd are in principle functions of It , because
       the functioning of the national health system depends on its use.4 For computational simplicity
       we work with constant probabilities for now.
           Note that the system (15)­(18) is deterministic, and the overall population, Nt = St +
       It + Rt , decreases by pd It each period. We normalize the initial population in each country to
        k = 1. As is commonly assumed in much of the epidemiological literature at the moment,
       N1
       we assume that recovered individuals remain in that category for sure (i.e. acquire at least
       temporary immunity).5 Importantly, by (14), the epidemiological evolution in each country
       depends on that of the other.
           We denote the current state of the disease by

                                              A A       A    B B       B
                                         t = St , It , Rt , St , It , Rt                                    (19)
3
  In order to simplify the model and the calibration, we do not include an international spillover-term from labor, as in
  2 , which would be particularly relevant for the import and export of services. We have experimented with such a
  more general model, and our results would become stronger.
4
  The role of such "congestion externalities" has been emphasized and modelled in the work on optimal containment
  policies, e.g. by Brotherhood et al. (2020), Kaplan, Moll and Violante (2020), Favero (2020), and Assenza et al.
  (2020).
5
  At the time of this writing, there is some uncertainty about this claim, see (see e.g. Long et al., 2020).



                                                          12
       and consider a situation in which initially,

                                           A          A      A
                                          S1 = 1 - , I1 = , R1 =0                                           (20)
                                          B       B    B
                                         S1 = 1, I1 = R1 =0                                                 (21)

       where  > 0 is a small number. Hence, the pandemic begins with a small number of infections
       in country A and then spreads endogenously to country B .


       1.3     The role of government
       As noted above, in the current simple model there is no role for redistributive policies gt (h).
       Policy therefore consists in setting the domestic containment policy µk
                                                                             t that controls overall
                                            k that control imports. Once these are fixed, government
       consumption and the tariff frictions t
       spending gt is given by the government budget constraint (12) and (10). The tariff can be used
       to achieve the following, partially conflicting goals of trade and health policy. First, of course,
       tariffs raise money that can be distributed directly to households. Second, as usual, tariffs
       manipulate the terms of trade in favor of domestic goods and thus higher domestic labor in-
       come. Third, high tariffs (or related frictions) reduce infections through foreign contacts. And
       fourth, tariffs can be used to influence the infection dynamics by attempting to shift production
       internationally to where infection rates are lower.
           Since the international infection dynamic (14) is deterministic, the interaction between the
       two governments is an infinite-horizon, deterministic multi-stage game with observed actions
       (see Fudenberg and Tirole, 1991). In a single-agent framework, conditioning on the state of
       nature (here: the aggregate infection state) would therefore not be necessary, and every open-
       loop optimal path can be implemented by closed-loop strategies (i.e. strategies that depend on
       time t and the state) and vice versa. In a multi-agent framework, on the other hand, condition-
       ing on the state of nature (i.e. considering Markov Nash equilibria) usually increases the set
       of equilibria. Here, for computational reasons we restrict attention to open-loop strategies, i.e.
       strategies that only depend on time t and not on the state. Hence, governments set their policy
       path initially once and for all.6 To further simplify the computation, we assume that a vaccine
       or other cure is known to exist in a fixed, finite time T in the future. Hence, after date T there
       are no more infections and the economies operate without any SIR-dynamics.7
           As discussed, households maximize their expected discounted utility, given government
6
  Uniqueness of equilibrium is, of course, an issue. We have conducted extensive computational searches for other
  equilibria from different starting values, but always found the single Nash equilibrium reported in Section 4.1 below.
7
  In fact, for the parametrizations we have studied, the pandemic has run its course at T and both countries have reached
  herd immunity. So this restriction is not binding.




                                                          13
policy and the evolution of the disease. Let

                                                       1 k
                              uk             k
                               t (ht ) = v (xt (ht )) -  t (ht )
                                                                 2
                                                                                          (22)
                                                       2

denote the flow utility of households of health status ht in country k at the household's opti-
mum, and
                                                 
                                Vtk (ht ) = Et           -t uk
                                                              (h )                        (23)
                                                  =t

the corresponding value functions. By symmetry, we assume that the government of country k
maximizes the utilitarian welfare function

                           V k = S1
                                  k k         k k
                                    V1 (s) + I1           k k
                                                V1 (i) + R1 V1 (r)                        (24)


Uncoordinated Policy: Without coordination, we assume that the two governments play
a non-cooperative game, where each chooses open-loop policy paths as described, such as to

                                             max V k
                                          {µk  k
                                            t ,t }t



taking the other government's policy path {µ- k -k
                                            t , t }t as given. A Nash equilibrium consists
of two policy paths that are each optimal responses to each other.


Coordinated Policy: Alternatively, we consider the benchmark of a single social planner
who makes the containment and tariff decisions for both countries in order to maximize the
sum of the two countries' welfare:

                                        max            VA+VB                              (25)
                                  {µk  k -k -k
                                    t ,t ,µt ,t }t




2     Equilibrium Analysis
Given government policy µk   k        k
                         t , t , and gt in each country, firms maximize profits and house-
holds expected utility taking prices and the economic and epidemiological constraints as given.


2.1    Firm behavior
Because of the constant-returns-to-scale structure (1) firms make zero profits in equilibrium
and hire as much labor as is supplied by households. Hence, in equilibrium, aggregate output
in each country is
                            Yt = z (St t (s) + It t (i) + Rt t (r))                       (26)


                                                 14
          wages are

                                                              wt     for h = s, r
                                           wt (h) =                                                          (27)
                                                              wt for h = i
                                              wt = pt z                                                      (28)

          and firm profits are vt = 0.


          2.2      Household behavior
          Households of each country at each date maximize expected utility Ut given by (3) subject
          to the budget constraint (11). Dropping the country superscript k , they choose their levels
          of domestic consumption ck,t = ck,t (h), foreign consumption c-k,t = c-k,t (h), and labor
           t   =   t (h).   They know their own health status h,8 and the current state of the disease t ,
          given by (19).
               Using (23), in recursive terms, households thus choose current labor and consumption to
          maximize
                                                  1     2
                                         v (xt ) -      t   +  Et Vt+1 (ht+1 ; t+1 )                         (29)
                                                  2
          where the expectation operator refers to the distribution of personal health ht+1 next period.


          Susceptible Households. For a susceptible individual there are only two possible future
          health states - either she remains in s or she gets infected and transits to i. Given (14), there
          are four possibilities to get infected. First, she may get infected from local contacts while
          consuming (shopping, eating out, etc.). This probability is increasing with her own time spent
          on that activity and the total time infected domestic or foreign individuals do the same. This
          corresponds to the first part of the 1 -term and of the 4 -term in (14), respectively. Second, she
          may get infected at work with a similar logic, which corresponds to the 2 -term. Third, she
          may get infected in general encounters with infected people locally, not related to consumption
          or work, summarized by the 3 -term. Fourth, she may get infected during the consumption of
          goods and services abroad or coming from abroad, which is summarized by the second part
          of the 1 - and of the 4 -term. While the first three terms refer to infections from domestic
          households, the fourth explicitly highlights the consumption risk from imports and exports and
          the associated interaction with foreigners.
               As shown in Section A.3 in the Appendix, when choosing (ck       k
                                                                        k (s), c-k (s),
                                                                                                 k (s))    0, and
          thus the consumption basket      xk (s)   at time t, a susceptible will transit to the infectious state
8
    Hence, we ignore the problem of asymptomatic or presymptomatic infections. See, for example, von Thadden (2020)
    for a detailed discussion.



                                                               15
with a probability that is approximately equal to

                                                                            -k      -k
                          (ck       k
                            k (s), c-k (s),
                                                 k
                                                     (s); ck       k
                                                           k (i), c-k (i), ck (i), c-k (i),
                                                                                              k
                                                                                                  (i))
                   =       1 ck     k        k      k         k   k
                              k (s)ck (i) + c-k (s)c-k (i) + 2 (s) (i) + 3 I
                                                                             k
                                                                                                               (30)
                              -k              -k       -k
                   + 4 ck              k
                        k (s)ck (i) + c-k (s)c-k (i) I


                        -k      -k
where ck       k
       k (i), c-k (i), ck (i), c-k (i),
                                               k (i)   are the equilibrium decisions by domestic and for-
eign infected households. We assume that susceptible households take this probability into
account when making their decision, and use the linear approximation (30) in the remainder of
our analysis.
    Bringing back the time index, at time t the s-household therefore has the following prob-
lem:

                                                         1               2
 Vtk (s) =                max                v (xk
                                                 t (s)) - 
                                                                 k
                                                                 t (s)       +  tk (s)Vtk             k       k
                                                                                        +1 (i) + (1 - t (s))Vt+1 (s)
                 ck        k
                  k,t (s),c-k,t (s),
                                       k (s)
                                       t
                                                         2
subject          to
                 xk           k         k
                  t (s) = q (ck,t (s), c-k,t (s))                                                                     (31)
                 pk    k          k     k            k k        k
                  k,t ck,t (s) + p-k,t c-k,t (s) = w t t (s) + gt                                                     (32)

where tk (s) =  (ck         k
                  k,t (s), c-k,t (s),
                                               k (s)).
                                               t         Here, (31) describes the household's consumption
basket according to (2) and (32) is its budget constraint.
    If ks
       t is the Lagrange multiplier of the budget contraint (32), the first-order conditions for
the consumption of the domestic good, the consumption of the imported good, and labor are

           -    xkt (s)                       -k      -k
    xk
     t (s)       k
                         +  1 ck       k
                               k,t (i)It + 4 ck,t (i)It                      Vtk          k
                                                                               +1 (i) - Vt+1 (s)         = ks k
                                                                                                           t pk,t
                ck,t (s)
      -   xk t (s)                          -k       -k
xk
 t (s)                +  1 ck        k
                            -k,t (i)It + 4 c-k,t (i)It                       Vtk          k
                                                                               +1 (i) - Vt+1 (s)         = ks k
                                                                                                           t p-k,t
          ck
           -k,t ( s )
                                              k         k     k   k          k
                                              t (s) - 2 t (i)It Vt+1 (i) - Vt+1 (s)                      = ks k
                                                                                                           t wt


where the second terms in each equation reflect the fact that consuming foreign goods and
services increases the chances of getting infected through contacts with foreigners. Eliminating
ks
t and simplifying yields the following two first-order conditions for the optimal choices of




                                                            16
susceptible individuals:

                    1             1
                  - k                              -k      -k
       wk  k
        t xt (s)
                   ck,t (s)-  +  1 ck       k
                                    k,t (i)It + 4 ck,t (i)It                    Vtk          k
                                                                                  +1 (i) - Vt+1 (s)

  =      k         k     k   k          k
         t (s) - 2 t (i)It Vt+1 (i) - Vt+1 (s)                 pk
                                                                k,t                                          (33)
                           1                 1
                        - k                                -k       -k
       wk        k
        t (1 - )xt (s)
                         c-k,t (s)-  +  1 ck        k
                                           -k,t (i)It + 4 c-k,t (i)It                       Vtk          k
                                                                                              +1 (i) - Vt+1 (s)

  =      k         k     k   k          k
         t (s) - 2 t (i)It Vt+1 (i) - Vt+1 (s)                 pk
                                                                -k,t                                         (34)

    Together with the aggregation condition (31) and the budget constraint (32), (33)­(34) de-
termine the behavior of s-individuals as a function of current prices, the state of the pandemic,
                                                                  k and µk ,  k (which are
the current choices of infected agents and the policy parameters gt
inherent in the consumer prices pk      k
                                 k,t , p-k,t ).


Infected Households. The behavior of infected households is simpler. Their behavior has
no consequences for their future health, which is exogenously given by either recovery, with
probability pr , or death, with probability pd .
    A type i household at time t therefore chooses (ck         k
                                                     k,t (i), c-k,t (i),
                                                                                  k (i))
                                                                                  t         0 such as to
optimize the static decision problem

                            1                      2
  Vtk (i) = max v (xk
                    t (i)) - 
                                          k
                                          t (i)        +  (1 - pr - pd )Vtk             k              k
                                                                          +1 (i) + pr Vt+1 (r ) + pd Vt+1 (d)
                            2
subject     to
               xk           k         k
                t (i) = q (ck,t (i), c-k,t (i))                                                            (35)
               pk    k          k     k            k k        k
                k,t ck,t (i) + p-k,t c-k,t (i) = w t t (i) + gt                                            (36)

    Letting ki
            t denote the multiplier of the budget constraint, the problem yields the first-order
conditions

                                            -    xkt (i)
                                      xk
                                       t (i)      k
                                                             = ki k
                                                               t pk,t
                                                 ck,t (i)
                                         -   xk t (i)
                                  xk
                                   t (i)      k
                                                             = ki k
                                                               t p-k,t
                                             c-k,t (i)
                                                   k       ki  k
                                                   t (i) = t w t


    These conditions can be further simplified and even solved explicitly for  = 1, which
we do in Appendix Section A.2. Together with the aggregation condition (35) and the budget
constraint (36), they determine the behavior of i-individuals as a function of current prices and
                       k and µk ,  k .
the policy parameters gt



                                                        17
Recovered Households. Similarly, when recovered, a type r household at time t chooses
(ck          k
  k,t (r ), c-k,t (r ),
                           k (r ))
                           t          0 such as to optimize the static decision problem

                                                           1                    2
                     Vtk (r) =            max v (xk
                                                  t (r )) - 
                                                                       k
                                                                       t (r )       + Vtk
                                                                                        +1 (r )
                                                           2
                          subject         to
                                          xk            k          k
                                           t (r ) = q (ck,t (r ), c-k,t (r ))                              (37)
                                          pk    k           k     k             k k         k
                                           k,t ck,t (r ) + p-k,t c-k,t (r ) = w t t (r ) + gt (r )         (38)

    Letting kr
            t denote the multiplier of the budget constraint, the first-order conditions are


                                                  -   xkt (r )
                                           xk
                                            t (r )     k
                                                                   = kr k
                                                                     t pk,t
                                                      ck,t (r)
                                                 -   xk t (r )
                                         xk
                                          t (r )      k
                                                                   = kr k
                                                                     t p-k,t
                                                     c-k,t (r)
                                                         k        kr k
                                                         t (r ) = t w t


    As before, these conditions can be further simplified and even solved explicitly for  = 1,
which we do in Appendix Section A.2. Together with the aggregation condition (37) and the
budget constraint (38), they determine the behavior of r-individuals as a function of current
prices and the policy parameters.


2.3      The macroeconomic synthesis
Each period, the following endogenous economic variables are determined in equilibrium:

    · Households: 18 variables ck         k
                                k,t (h), c-k,t (h),
                                                                   k (h),
                                                                   t        for h = s, i, r and k = A, B

    · Markets: 4 variables pk,t , wk
                                   t for k = A, B , where prices, consumer prices, and govern-
       ment policy are linked by (8)­(9).
                                            k , k = A, B . In the absence of health dependent
    · Government expenditures: 2 variables gt
       transfers gt (h), fiscal policy therefore is reduced to the balanced-budget rule (12).

    As argued above, given the linear production technologies, the firm variables are trivial and
follow automatically from the household decisions.
    The governments or the common social planner set the epidemiological policy consisting
of the 4 variables µk   k
                    t , t , k = A, B , which are exogenous from the point of view of market
participants. These variables are implicit in the consumer prices pk      k
                                                                   k,t , p-k,t .
    Counting equations, we have

    · Labor markets: 2 equations in (28)

                                                             18
           · Households: in each country 9 equations

                  ­ for s: (32)­(34),
                  ­ for i: (50), (51), and (47), with w = wk
                                                           t , appropriately indexed.

                  ­ for r: (50), (51), and (47), with w = wk
                                                           t , appropriately indexed.

           · Goods markets: 2 equations
                                                    Ytk = Htk + Mt-k                                      (39)

              for k = A, B , where output Ytk is given by (26), domestic consumption Htk by (6) and
              imports Mt-k by (7).

           There are 6 value functions to be solved, Vtk (s), Vtk (i), Vtk (r), for k = A, B . As usual,
       we normalize the value function Vtk (d) = 0, assuming that the cost of death is the lost utility
       of life.
           To help interpret the results, we define the terms of trade as the relative price of the output
       of country A to that of country B , before taxes and tariffs:

                                                           pA
                                                      e=                                                  (40)
                                                           pB

           Finally, we define the aggregate consumption in each country as the population weighted
       sum of the consumption baskets of all health groups

                                         k    k k        k k        k k
                                        Xt = St x (s) + It x (i) + Rt x (r)                               (41)



       3      Parameterization
       Our parameterization builds on Eichenbaum, Rebelo and Trabandt (2020). Each period in the
       model is a week. To save on computational costs in our very complex environment, we assume
       log utility from consumption in the baseline model, i.e., we set  = 1, because this yields
       simple closed-form solutions to some expressions (see Appendix Section A.2).9 We set  =
       .96(1/52) such that the value of life in autarky is approximately $10 million.10 Furthermore,
       we let  = .8, such that the productivity loss for infected individuals is 20%, and we set
       productivity z = 39.835 and  = 0.001275 so that in the pre-pandemic steady state each
       person works 28 hours per week and earns 58, 000 per year, consistent with average data from
       the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis and the Bureau of Labor Statistics in 2018. Initial
       populations are normalized to 1. In the pre-pandemic steady state the countries are symmetric.
9
 Noting that  is also the inverse of the marginal rate of intertemporal substitution, Kaplan, Moll and Violante (2020)
 argue that also empirically  = 1 is a reasonable assumption.
10
   See, e.g., Hall, Jones and Klenow (2020) for a discussion.

                                                         19
               We follow Costinot and Rodríguez-Clare (2014) and set  = 6. The home bias parameter
           is chosen such that the pre-pandemic steady-state domestic consumption share is 66%.
               To fix ideas we assume that the infection originates in country A with an initial infected
          population of 0.001 (0.1%). It then spreads to country B via international trade, at a speed
          that is endogenous to each country's policy. To parameterize our disease transmission we
          choose 1 , 2 , and 3 such that in a closed economy 1/6 of transmission would occur through
          consumption, 1/6 of transmission through production, and the remaining 2/3 of transmission
          through other activities. We then choose 4 such that without government intervention the peak
          of the infection in country B occurs approximately 6 months after the peak of the infection in
          country A where the disease originates. Moreover, we calibrate the transition probability pr
          and pd so that the mortality rate is 0.5% for the infected and it takes on average 18 days to
          either recover or die from infection.11
               For our benchmark results we focus on a case where the pandemic ends definitively in 3
          years from its beginning. While stylized, this case illustrates many of the key tradeoffs we
          are interested in this paper. Since estimates of the likely arrival time of the vaccine and the
          time to its global delivery, both measured from onset of the pandemic, were in the range of
          18 months to 48 months, we take the "end" of the pandemic in our computation to be 3 years
          as a reasonable mid-point. If in our simulations we take 2 years instead of 3, the results are
          qualitatively unchanged.
               We provide further details about the computation algorithm in Appendix Section A.4.



          4      Results

          4.1      Health and Economic Outcomes with No Government Policy
          As a benchmark, Figure 2 illustrates the SIR dynamics and economic outcomes when there
          are no containment policies or tariffs. Starting with an initial infection rate of I0 = 0.001
          in country A, the pandemic quickly takes off in country A and slowly spreads to country B ,
          where it begins to take off after around week 25. The share of infected households in country
          A peaks at 5.2% in week 34 and declines thereafter. Around week 50, infections in country
          B overtake those in A and peak at 5.2% in week 60. After week 91 the disease has run its
          course in country A, and after week 115 in country B , when both countries have reached
          herd immunity. Eventually, 53% of the population in both countries becomes infected, and a
          mortality rate of 0.5% implies that around 0.27% of the population in both countries dies.
11
     Our calibration of the case fatality rate is at the lower end of the early estimates that we are aware of (see, for example,
     Fernandez-Villaverde and Jones (2020) or Verity et al. (2020)). These early estimates reflect high uncertainty, but
     also lack of experience with the treatment of severe cases.


                                                                20
    The economic outcomes track local infection rates closely. When the first wave of infection
hits country A, its consumption and labor decline quickly by almost 10 percent, while the
values for country B .stay constant or even increase slightly. Similarly for country B , when the
pandemic hits there. The decline in consumption is greater in magnitude than the additional
leisure from lower labor, which leads to declines in the country-level utility during the peak
of domestic infection. Here, aggregate utility of country k is the weighted sum of the flow
utilities (22). Interestingly, during both peaks, i.e. when the domestic infection rates are
either much higher or much lower than the foreign ones, domestic households increase foreign
consumption. This is to reduce the exposure to domestic infection or to profit form foreigners
not wanting to consume their home production. These shifts in consumption shares only have
a small impact on the terms of trade expressed by the relative prices of both goods (which
change by at most 1 percent).


4.2        Government Policy by a Coordinated Planner, the case µ = 1
Next, we consider the optimal policy by a coordinated planner who maximizes the sum of
the welfare of both countries' households where the welfare of each country is calculated
as the weighted average of utilities of its health groups. At time 0, this planner determines
both countries' domestic containment policies and tariffs from week 1 to 156 until the vaccine
arrives.
                                                              k = 1, i.e. the case in which
    Figure 3 reports the equilibrium outcomes for the case of µ
containment policies are not very costly economically as they raise tax revenue. As in Figure 2,
the pandemic quickly takes off in country A and slowly spreads to country B , where it begins
to take off after around week 25. The share of infected households in country A peaks at 3.2%
in week 35, almost the same time as in the unfettered outbreak, and declines thereafter. This
peak is about 1/3 lower than in the case of an unfettered outbreak, shown in the benchmark in
Figure 2. After around week 50, infections in country B overtake those in A and peak at 3.2%
in week 63. Hence, the coordinated planner slows the spread of the disease from A to B , but
not significantly. After week 122 the disease has run its course in country A, and after week
149 in country B . Eventually, 43% of the population in both countries become infected, which
is significantly lower than that in the laissez-faire case in Figure 2 and leads to a lower death
rate.
    The economic outcomes react both to the infection rates and the domestic containment
and tariff policies. When the first wave of infection hits country A, its consumption and labor
decline much more than under laisser-faire. Differently from the laisser-faire case, also the
consumption basket in country B decreases, while labor and production in B stay moreless
constant. Only when the second wave of infection hits country B , its consumption and labor


                                               21
decline significantly. The decline in both consumption and labor is much more drastic than the
laissez-faire case in Figure 2, which reflects the planner's tradeoff between economic welfare
and health outcomes. The early reduction of aggregate consumption Xt in country B when
the pandemic begins in country A is a remarkable sign of foresight intended to limit infections
from imports.
   The coordinated planner achieves these health and economic outcomes with a combination
of domestic containment measures and tariffs. The severity of containment measures in each
country roughly tracks the level of infection rates in the country, and its peaks at a tax rate of
67%. On the other hand, tariffs have a different pattern across time that is symmetric between
the two countries. When the infection peaks in country A around week 34, the coordinated
planner responds by raising a positive tariff of 8% in country A, while imposing a negative
tariff of -11% in country B .
   These tariffs are intriguing at a first pass because they encourage both countries to consume
more of country A's goods, which transmits the pandemic via consumption- and labor-induced
interactions in country A and via imports to country B . However, these health costs are dom-
inated by the economic benefits -- as the tariffs raise the terms of trade for country A during
the peak of the infection, its households have higher income and enjoy a higher level of con-
sumption. The tariffs act as an international transfer mechanism to smooth out the economic
outcomes during the pandemic. Similarly, when the second wave of infection hits country B ,
the coordinated planner reverses the tariffs in both countries, leading to a more favorable terms
of trade for country B and raising its households' consumption. Note that the terms of trade
rise by more than 13 percent for country A during the peak of its pandemic, i.e. more than ten
times the change under laisser-faire. This drastic swing of the terms of trade brought about by
boosting tariffs allows risk-sharing between the two countries due to the asynchronous feature
of the pandemic.


4.3    Government Policy in Nash Equilibrium, the case µ = 1
We next consider the case where each country's government determines its own domestic con-
tainment and tariff policies in order to maximize the welfare of their domestic households,
defined as the weighted average of their lifetime utilities. More precisely, at time 0, the gov-
ernments determine the domestic containment policy and tariff from week 1 to 156 until the
vaccine arrives, in a non-cooperative game where the equilibrium policies are best responses
to each other.
                                                                         k = 1, i.e. the case
   Figure 4 reports the outcomes of the Nash equilibrium for the case of µ
in which containment policies raise tax revenue. The share of infected households in country
A peaks at around 3.5% in week 33, whereas the share of infected households in country B


                                               22
peaks at 3.5% in week 62. Hence, infections peak more strongly and earlier under Nash than
under coordinated planning. The disease is over after week 118 in country A, and after week
151 in country B .
   The governments fight the disease by raising the containment tax on consumption, and
its levels again track the levels of infection closely. The tax level peaks around 74% during
the peak of infection in each country. In this aspect, the coordinated planner and the Nash
governments engage in similar domestic containment measures, but the Nash players choose
significantly stricter measures than the planner.
   In contrast, the governments' tariff policies are very different between the uncoordinated
and the coordinated cases. In the Nash game, both governments impose tariffs of up to 30%,
as is typical in models of trade wars. In fact, in the current calibration, tariffs of around 23
percent would be set in the equilibrium of a stationary trade game without a pandemic. As
in standard trade wars, both governments attempt to manipulate the terms of trade and tilt the
consumption share towards domestic goods - actions that offset each other. But in the case
of the pandemic, as country A approaches the peak of infection, the government in country
A lowers its import tariff to 2%, in order to encourage its domestic households to consume
more foreign goods that expose them less to infection. Compared to the social planner, who
raises tariffs up to 8 percent, government A does too much too late. On the other hand, the
government in country B raises its import tariff to 30% during A's peak infection, in order to
minimize the international transmission of the pandemic through the imports from country A.
When the disease hits country B , the same happens with reversed roles, but, interestingly with
an additional delay. 7 weeks after country B hits the peak of infection, in week 68, tariffs in
country A reach their maximum, but at a level below the maximum of country B previously,
because the marginal benefit is smaller since a large share of the population in country A has
already gone through an infection and recovered.


4.4    Comparing the Policies, the case µ = 1
Figure 5 compares the equilibrium government policies and pandemic dynamics in the three
                                       k = 1. Both the Nash case and the Planner case feature
cases discussed above, for the case of µ
similar paths of domestic containment policies, with higher peaks in the Nash case. In contrast,
the Nash case has large swings in tariffs that drop with domestic infections and rise with
foreign infections, just the opposite of what the planner would impose optimally. As discussed
above, the Nash tariffs try to adjust the trade war logic that inefficiently attempts to benefit
the domestic households at the expense of the foreign households, whereas the coordinated
planner's tariffs act as international risk-sharing mechanisms.
   In both cases, coordinated planning and Nash behavior, the combination of private demand


                                               23
reactions to the pandemic and government containment policies and tariffs induces severe eco-
nomic recessions in both countries. In both cases, aggregate labor and production decline by
more than 26 percent until the peak of the pandemic in each country. But in addition, in the
Nash case, as the domestic government lowers tariffs during the peak of domestic infection
while the foreign government raises tariffs, the demand for the domestic goods in the infected
country collapses and magnifies the variation in the terms of trade that is induced by the pre-
cautionary motive of households discussed in Section 4.1. As Figure 6 shows, this leads to a
highly unbalanced consumption basket in terms of domestic goods and imports, such that the
domestic consumption basket Xt at the peak of the infection under Nash decreases more than
under coordinated planning, and the weekly flow utility, which measures the consumption-
leisure tradeoff, drops much more than in the coordinated solution.
   Interestingly, the Nash players do not do much worse than the Planner compared to the
                                           k = 1 (the coordinated planner reduces the
benchmark in terms of health outcomes when µ
ultimate death toll by 18.8%, while the Nash governments reduce it by 15.8% compared to
laisser-faire). The reason is that domestic containment is less costly in economic terms and
can thus be used to make up for the deficiencies in tariff policies, so that the Nash competitors
"get it approximately right for the wrong reasons", as their aggressive trade policies limit the
international spread of the infection. As discussed above, the real difference is the unbalanced
shift in imports and thus the consumption baskets, which reduces economic welfare. The
coordinated planner achieves a slightly better health outcome by using the policy instruments
very differently, but much of her efficiency gain is reflected in the better economic outcomes.
   These results highlight the contrast between health and economic externalities. Health
externalities arise from the possibility that a country does too little to shut down its production
and consumption activities, thus spreading the pandemic. Economic externalities arise from
the possibility that a country will reduce its consumption of foreign goods in order to promote
the interests of its own workers and firms. The coordinated planner fully internalizes this
economic externality and uses tariffs to control the pandemic and smooth out its impact on
both countries' economies. In this way, international trade can lead to better risk-sharing and
facilitates global health diversification. Importantly, the two externalities interact. When the
disease hits one country the demand for its good collapses for health reasons, leading to a
collapse of its price. This, however, triggers a demand effect in the less affected country,
where the risk of infection is overall lower, and thus provides a countervailing stimulus that is
absent in the affected country. The government in that country reacts by increasing tariffs to
contain that stimulus and at the same time benefit from domestic financial gain of tariffs. This
leads to the apparently paradoxical situation, exhibited in the second row of Figure 6, that in
Nash equilibrium imports in one country can peak when tariffs are highest.
   The above comparison is made explicit in the decomposition of the overall policy effect

                                                24
                                                                                k = 1.
in Table 1, which considers the case of revenue-generating containment measures µ
Table (a) reports the welfare of the full benchmark case with pandemic and government policy.
We decompose the households' utility loss in each country relative to the pre-pandemic level
into two components: the welfare loss due to economic recession, and the welfare loss due
to death. The former is the present value of the utility change in the consumption and labor
of living households, from period 1 to the infinite future; the latter is the present value of the
foregone utility due to death. Their sum is the total utility loss relative to the alternative world
with no pandemic and no government tax and tariff.
   Trivially, the coordinated outcome is better than that of no policy. More precisely, the
planner lowers the utility loss due to death by partially shutting down the economy and causing
a welfare loss due to economic recession relative to the no policy regime. In both countries, the
economic loss is greater than under laisser faire, the loss of lives is smaller, and the sum of both
losses is smaller. Clearly, the social planner implements a different consumption-work-health
tradeoff than that resulting from laisser-faire, with more emphasis on health.
   In contrast, the Nash equilibrium outcome is worse than laisser-faire, due to the damaging
effect of high tariffs. To put this in perspective, Table 1(b) reports the welfare calculation in
a world with no pandemic, where the welfare loss from tariffs is 25.23 units. In the world
with the pandemic, the welfare loss due to economic recession is even greater due to the gov-
ernments' containment policies and households' precaution. As noted earlier, the welfare loss
due to death in Nash equilibrium is also greater than that in the coordinated case: Since the
households have lower life-time utility due to high tariffs, a domestic government that weighs
current losses against future gains also has less incentive to save lives. As we discuss below,
this tradeoff depends on the relative economic costs and benefits of tariffs and is not present in
a world with no tariffs (  0).


4.5    Domestic Containment Policies with no Monetary Benefit: The
     k
Case µ =0
In this section we consider the case, in which domestic containment measures do not generate
         k = 0. The government budget (10) therefore only consists of tariff receipts, and
revenue, µ
domestic containment measures µk are pure frictions reducing economic activity, such as stay-
at-home orders, social distancing rules, special hygiene prescriptions, etc. that discourage
consumption but do not generate revenue.
   Figures 7 and 8 report the coordinated and the Nash equilibrium outcomes. They differ
              k = 1 in one striking dimension. Because domestic containment measures
from the case µ
now are highly inefficient in economic terms, both governments do not use them under either
scenario. This is remarkable as these measures would be saving lives. But the economic cost

                                                25
of using them is too high. As a consequence, infections peak much higher, and the ultimate
death toll in the coordinated outcome is 2.7 deaths per 1000, 24% higher than in the case
where domestic containment measures generate revenenues for the government. This outcome
is a result of our simplifying assumption in (18) that death rates are independent of the health
situation. If instead we assume that the probability of dying from an infection, pd , increases
in the number of infected It , i.e. if there are health congestions, then this picture changes, and
domestic containment measures become more important.
   A notable consequence of this reduced relative value of domestic containment measures is
                 k = 0 the Nash outcome is clearly inferior to the coordinated one in terms of
that in the case µ
health. In fact, Figure 7 shows that the Nash outcome now has more than 6 percent more deaths
than under coordinated planning. Hence, the superiority of coordination over non-coordination
                                                                                k = 0 than
in both, the economic and the health, dimensions is more pronounced in the case µ
   k = 1.
if µ
   Furthermore, tariff policies in both cases are very similar to those in our benchmark spec-
ification in Figure 5: tariffs in the coordinated case facilitate international resource transfer
by managing the terms of trade, while tariffs in the uncoordinated case are high on average,
                                                                k = 1 discussed above.
exhibiting exactly the same destructive dynamics as in the case µ
   This setting also exhibits another feature of the interaction between health and economic
externalities made above more clearly. In the uncoordinated case, governments attempt to
improve their domestic welfares at the expense of the foreign welfares by raising import tariffs
and enhancing their terms of trade. As shown in Figure 8, these tariffs lead to high consumption
shares of domestic goods: While the consumption home bias cA   A
                                                           A /cB under coordination is
approximately 2:1, it is fluctuating between 7:1 and 4:1 in Nash equilibrium, where the third
row of Figure 8 shows a double dip reflecting the attempts of domestic governments to react
to the infection peaks in each country, as discussed above.
   In fact, the high consumption home bias aggravates the health outcomes. When the in-
fection rate peaks in country A around week 30, even though country A lowers the tariff to
encourage its domestic households to consume foreign goods, the consumption home bias is
still 4:1. Domestic households are thus stuck at consuming the domestic goods, which fasten
the spread of the pandemic. As a result, the uncoordinated case has a higher cumulative in-
fection rate and a higher death rate compared with the coordinated case. Again, the lack of
international trade coordination leads to worse infection dynamics during a global pandemic.


4.6    Containment Without Tariffs: The Case   0
An interest variant of our model obtains if we rule out tariffs, i.e. set   0. This case certainly
is realistic, as tariffs and other trade barriers are internationally regulated by trade agreements


                                                26
and cannot be changed flexibly in crises. Furthermore, in many parts of the world, most notably
the European Union, tariffs have been abolished altogether.
                                                                k = 1 in Figures 9 and 10,
    We report the health and economic dynamics in this case for µ
and again compare laisser-faire, Nash equilibrium, and coordination. In this case, and different
from the case  > 0, the domestic containment policies adopted by the coordinated planner
and the Nash governments are qualitatively very similar, and so are the outcomes. In partic-
ular, governments in Nash equilibrium now cannot use tariffs to counteract the risk-shifting
policies that are optimal under coordination. Therefore, key variables such as terms of trade or
imports now move very much alike under coordination and non-coordination. Thus, in terms
of the observed dynamics, "Nash equilibrium broadly gets it right". However, this obervation
masks important differences between the coordinated and the uncoordinated outcome. Most
importantly, on the health front, total deaths are lower in Nash equilibrium than under optimal
policy coordination. Table 2(a) reports the welfare comparison in this case and disaggregates it
into its economic and health component as described above. The coordination failure in Nash
equilibrium now lets each government adopt too stringent domestic containment measures, and
since there are no international transfers via tariffs possible to offset this (partially and ineffi-
ciently), Nash is inefficiently aggressive on the health front and does not use the international
risk-sharing through trade as well as a social planner would do during a pandemic.



5     Conclusion
In this paper, we have developed a model of epidemiology and international trade to study how
international coordination and the lack thereof influences the impact of government policies on
health and economic outcomes. By studying Nash equilibria over high-dimensional strategies
that determine dynamic macroeconomic equilibria, the model introduces a relatively complex
tool to study this complex and important question. This benefit comes at the price of simplify-
ing each of the modelling components as much as possible. This relates to the notion of Nash
equilibrium, where we restrict attention to open-loop equilibria, to the modelling of health
policy, where we restrict attention to simple two-dimensional pairs of "containment taxes" and
tariffs, to the role of aggregate risk, which, in line with much of the literature, we currently
assume away, and to the macroeconomic dynamics, where we ignore important intertemporal
linkages such as private savings or government debt. In ongoing work, we are undertaking a
thorough sensitivity analysis to different model features and model parameterizations to enrich
our understanding of the gains from coordination that we find in this paper. This includes an-
alyzing the role of the finite horizon due to the arrival of a vaccine, the relative importance of
transmission via consumption and labor, and the impact of the magnitude of household risk-



                                                 27
aversion. In future work we plan to generalize the model to address the broader questions along
the dimensions sketched above. We hope that our analysis will ultimately be able to shed light
on the important general question of the costs and benefits of coordination of local health and
economic policies, be it between different sovereign governments, between states in a federal
country, or within the European Union.




                                              28
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Victor Chernozhukov, Iván Werning, and Michael D Whinston. 2020.
  "Optimal Targeted Lockdowns in a Multi-Group SIR Model." National Bureau of Economic
  Research Working Paper 27102.

Alon, Titan, Minki Kim, David Lagakos, and Mitchell VanVuren. 2020. "How should
  policy responses to the Covid-19 pandemic differ in the developing world?" CEPR.

Alvarez, Fernando E, David Argente, and Francesco Lippi. 2020. "A Simple Planning
  Problem for COVID-19 Lockdown." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
  26981.

Antras, Pol, Stephen J Redding, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2020. "Globalization and
  Pandemics." Harvard University Working Paper.

Assenza, Tiziana, Fabrice Collard, Martial Dupaigne, Patrick Fieve, Christian Hellwig,
  Sumudu Kankanamge, and Nicolas Wequin. 2020. "The Hammer and the Dance: Equi-
  librium and Optimal Policy during a Pandemic Crisis." University of Chicago Working Pa-
  per.

Backus, David K, Patrick J Kehoe, and Finn E Kydland. 1992. "International real business
  cycles." Journal of political Economy, 100(4): 745­775.

Beck, Thorsten, and Wolf Wagner. 2020. "National containment policies and international
  cooperation." Covid Economics, 8: 134­148.

Berger, David W, Kyle F Herkenhoff, and Simon Mongey. 2020. "An SEIR Infectious Dis-
  ease Model with Testing and Conditional Quarantine." National Bureau of Economic Re-
  search Working Paper 26901.

Bonadio, Barthélémy, Zhen Huo, Andrei A Levchenko, and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar. 2020.
  "Global Supply Chains in the Pandemic." National Bureau of Economic Research Working
  Paper 27224.

Brander, James A, and Barbara J Spencer. 1985. "Export subsidies and international market
  share rivalry." Journal of international Economics, 18(1-2): 83­100.

Brauer, Fred. 2008. "Compartmental models in epidemiology." In Mathematical epidemiol-
  ogy. 19­79. Springer.

Brodeur, Abel, David Gray, Anik Islam, and Suraiya Jabeen Bhuiyan. 2020. "A Literature
  Review of the Economics of COVID-19." IZA Institute of Labor Economics.

                                            29
Brotherhood, Luis, Philipp Kircher, Cezar Snatos, and Michele Tertilt. 2020. "An eco-
  nomic model of the Covid-19 epidemic: The importance of testing and age-specific poli-
  cies." Working Paper.

Costinot, Arnaud, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. 2014. "Trade theory with numbers: Quan-
  tifying the consequences of globalization." In Handbook of international economics. Vol. 4,
  197­261. Elsevier.

Eichenbaum, Martin S, Sergio Rebelo, and Mathias Trabandt. 2020. "The Macroeco-
  nomics of Epidemics." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 26882.

Favero, Carlo. 2020. "Why is Mortality in Lombardy so High?" Covid Economics, 4: 47­61.

Fernandez-Villaverde, Jesus, and Charles I Jones. 2020. "Estimating and Simulating a
  SIRD Model of COVID-19 for Many Countries, States, and Cities." Working Paper.

Fudenberg, Drew, and Jean Tirole. 1991. Game theory. MIT press.

Garibaldi, Pietro, Espen R. Moen, and Christopher A. Pissarides. 2020. "Modelling con-
  tacts and transitions in the SIR epidemics model." CEPR.

Glover, Andrew, Dirk Krueger, Jonathan Heathcote, and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull. 2020.
  "Health versus Wealth: On the Distributional Effects of Controlling a Pandemic." Federal
  Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Working Paper Staff Report 600.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Philipp Kircher, Cezar Santos, and Michele Tertilt. 2019. "An equi-
  librium model of the African HIV/AIDS epidemic." Econometrica, 87(4): 1081­1113.

Hall, Robert E, Charles I Jones, and Peter J Klenow. 2020. "Trading Off Consumption and
  COVID-19 Deaths." Stanford University Working Paper.

Imbs, Jean. 2004. "Trade, finance, specialization, and synchronization." Review of Economics
  and Statistics, 86(3): 723­734.

Jones, Callum J, Thomas Philippon, and Venky Venkateswaran. 2020. "Optimal Mitiga-
  tion Policies in a Pandemic: Social Distancing and Working from Home." National Bureau
  of Economic Research Working Paper 26984.

Kaplan, Greg, Ben Moll, and Gianluca Violante. 2020. "Pandemics According to HANK."
  University of Chicago.




                                            30
Kermack, William Ogilvy, and Anderson G McKendrick. 1932. "Contributions to the math-
  ematical theory of epidemics. II.--The problem of endemicity." Proceedings of the Royal
  Society of London. Series A, containing papers of a mathematical and physical character,
  138(834): 55­83.

Leibovici, Fernando, and Ana Maria Santacreu. 2020. "International trade of essential
  goods during a pandemic." CEPR.

Liu, Laura, Hyungsik Roger Moon, and Frank Schorfheide. 2020. "Panel Forecasts of
  Country-Level Covid-19 Infections." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Pa-
  per 27248.

Long, Quan-Xin, Bai-Zhong Liu, Hai-Jun Deng, Gui-Cheng Wu, Kun Deng, Yao-Kai
  Chen, Pu Liao, Jing-Fu Qiu, Yong Lin, Xue-Fei Cai, et al. 2020. "Antibody responses to
  SARS-CoV-2 in patients with COVID-19." Nature medicine, 1­4.

McGrattan, Ellen R, Richard Rogerson, et al. 2004. "Changes in hours worked, 1950-2000."
  Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 28(1): 14­33.

McKibbin, Warren, and Fernando Roshen. 2020. "The global macroeconomic impacts of
  covid-19: seven scenarios." Brookings Institute Working Paper 2021.

Meier, Matthias, and Eugenio Pinto. 2020. "Covid-19 Supply Chain Disruptions."

Noy, Ilan, Nguyen Doan, Benno Ferrarini, and Donghyun Park. 2020. "Measuring the
  economic risk of Covid-19." CEPR.

Ossa, Ralph. 2014. "Trade wars and trade talks with data." American Economic Review,
  104(12): 4104­46.

Rose, Andrew K, and Mark M Spiegel. 2009. "International financial remoteness and
  macroeconomic volatility." Journal of Development Economics, 89(2): 250­257.

Stockman, Alan C, and Linda L Tesar. 1990. "Tastes and technology in a two-country model
  of the business cycle: Explaining international comovements." National Bureau of Eco-
  nomic Research.

Ullah, Akbar, and Olubunmi Agift Ajala. 2020. "Do lockdown and testing help in curbing
  Covid-19 transmission?" CEPR.

Verity, Robert, Lucy C Okell, Ilaria Dorigatti, Peter Winskill, Charles Whittaker, Nat-
  suko Imai, Gina Cuomo-Dannenburg, Hayley Thompson, Patrick GT Walker, Han Fu,


                                           31
  et al. 2020. "Estimates of the severity of coronavirus disease 2019: a model-based analysis."
  The Lancet infectious diseases.

von Thadden, Ernst-Ludwig. 2020. "A simple, non-recursive model of the spread of Covid-
  19 with applications to policy." Covid Economics, 10: 24­43.




                                             32
                           Figure 1: Pandemic and Economic Outcomes in China and the U.S.

                                               CHN (cases are per 10k)   USA (cases per 1mm)


                           200
  New Cases




                           150
                           100
                            50
                             0
                                     Jan                  Apr                    Jul                    Oct



                           7.1
  CNY/USD




                           7.0
                           6.9
                           6.8
                           6.7
                                     Jan                  Apr                    Jul                    Oct
                                                                  date
  IP YoY




                           0.0


                          -0.1


                                     Jan                  Apr                    Jul                    Oct
  China Trade Balance




                           600
                           400
                           200
                             0
                         -200

                                     Jan                  Apr                    Jul                    Oct
  US Trade Balance




                        -60000

                        -70000

                        -80000

                                     Jan                  Apr                    Jul                    Oct


Note: Health and economic outcomes in China and the United States during the 2020 pandemic. Daily new
cases for China are per 10,000 people and per 1,000,000 for the United States. Industrial production is measured
year-over-year. Trade balance is total exports minus total imports.




                                                             33
                               Figure 2: Benchmark SIR Dynamics



                                                                                            10 -3
      1                        0.06                          0.6                      3


     0.8                       0.04                          0.4                      2


     0.6                       0.02                          0.2                      1


     0.4                         0                             0                      0
        0   50    100    150      0    50   100     150         0   50   100   150     0            50   100   150


      1                          1                                                   30
                                                             560
                                0.5
                                                             540
     0.5                         0                                                   25

                                                             520
                               -0.5

      0                          -1                          500                     20
       0    50    100    150       0   50   100     150         0   50   100   150     0            50   100   150


    800                        800
                                                               2                      2
    700                        700
                                                             1.9                     1.9
    600                        600
                                                             1.8                     1.8
    500                        500
                   Home                       Home           1.7                     1.7
                   Foreign                    Foreign
    400                        400
                                                             1.6                     1.6
       0    50    100    150      0    50   100     150         0   50   100   150      0           50   100   150
              Weeks                     Weeks                        Weeks                           Weeks

    1.01                       5.84

   1.005                       5.83

      1                        5.82
                                            Country A
   0.995                       5.81         Country B
                                            Average
    0.99                        5.8
        0   50    100    150       0   50   100     150
              Weeks                     Weeks




Note: Benchmark model with international transmission of pandemic. No government domestic containment
policies or tariffs.




                                                        34
             Figure 3: Coordinated Planning Equilibrium Outcomes, µ = 1



                                                                                              10 -3
       1
                                 0.03                           0.4                      2
      0.9
                                                                0.3                     1.5
                                 0.02
      0.8
                                                                0.2                      1
      0.7                        0.01
                                                                0.1                     0.5
      0.6
                                    0                             0                      0
        0     50    100    150       0    50   100     150         0   50   100   150     0           50   100   150


       1                          0.1                           550                     30

                                 0.05
                                                                500
      0.5                           0                                                   25

                                 -0.05                          450

                                  -0.1
       0                                                        400                     20
        0     50    100    150        0   50   100     150         0   50   100   150     0           50   100   150


     800                          800                             2
     700                          700                                                    2
                                                                1.8
     600                          600                                                   1.8
                                                                1.6
     500                          500                                                   1.6
                     Home                        Home
     400             Foreign      400            Foreign        1.4                     1.4

        0     50    100    150       0    50   100     150        0    50   100   150     0           50   100   150
                Weeks                      Weeks                        Weeks                          Weeks

                                 5.84
      1.1
                                 5.82
     1.05
                                  5.8
       1
                                               Country A
     0.95                        5.78          Country B
                                               Average
      0.9                        5.76
         0    50    100    150       0    50   100     150
                Weeks                      Weeks




Note: Benchmark model with international transmission of pandemic. Equilbirium domestic containment
policies and tariffs are determined by a global social planner that maximizes the sum of both countries' welfare.




                                                           35
                       Figure 4: Nash Equilibrium Outcomes, µ = 1



                                                                                           10 -3
      1                        0.04
                                                             0.4                      2
     0.9                       0.03
                                                             0.3                     1.5
     0.8
                               0.02
                                                             0.2                      1
     0.7
                               0.01                          0.1                     0.5
     0.6
                                  0                            0                      0
       0    50   100     150       0   50   100     150         0   50   100   150     0           50   100   150


      1                         0.3                          550                     30

                                                             500
                                0.2
     0.5                                                     450                     25
                                0.1
                                                             400

      0                           0                          350                     20
       0    50   100     150       0   50   100     150         0   50   100   150     0           50   100   150


   1000                        1000                            8                      8

                                                               7                      7

                                                               6                      6
    500                         500
                                                               5                      5
                   Home                       Home
                   Foreign                    Foreign          4                      4
      0                           0
       0    50   100     150       0   50   100     150        0    50   100   150     0           50   100   150
              Weeks                     Weeks                        Weeks                          Weeks

     1.1                       5.85

    1.05
                                5.8
      1

                               5.75         Country A
    0.95                                    Country B
                                            Average
     0.9                        5.7
        0   50   100     150       0   50   100     150
              Weeks                     Weeks




Note: Benchmark model with international transmission of pandemic. Equilbirium domestic containment
policies and tariffs are the outcome of a Nash game between the two countries.




                                                        36
                    Figure 5: Equilibrium Policy and SIR Dynamics, µ = 1



       1                                                        1                         0.4
                      No Policy     0.2
                      Nash
                      Planner       0.1                                                   0.2
     0.5                                                       0.5
                                     0
                                                                                            0
                                   -0.1

       0                           -0.2                         0                         -0.2
           0   50     100    150          0   50   100   150         0   50   100   150          0          50   100   150

                                                                                                     10-3
       1                           0.06                        0.6                          3


     0.8                           0.04                        0.4                          2


     0.6                           0.02                        0.2                          1


     0.4                             0                          0                           0
           0   50     100    150          0   50   100   150         0   50   100   150          0          50   100   150

                                                                                                     10-3
       1                           0.06                        0.6                          3


     0.8                           0.04                        0.4                          2


     0.6                           0.02                        0.2                          1


     0.4                             0                          0                           0
           0   50     100    150          0   50   100   150         0   50   100   150          0          50   100   150
                Weeks                          Weeks                      Weeks                              Weeks




Note: Comparison of domestic containment policies and SIR dynamics in three cases: benchmark, Nash, and
Planner. In the no policy case there are no domestic containment policies. In the Nash case, equilbirium
domestic containment policies and tariffs are the outcome of a Nash game between the two countries. In the
planner case, equilbirium domestic containment policies and tariffs are determined by a global social planner
that maximizes the sum of both countries welfare.




                                                          37
            Figure 6: Equilibrium Policy and Economic Outcomes, µ = 1



       1                              1                         1
            Planner - Nash                                                             0.5
            Planner - No Policy
                                    0.5
     0.5                                                      0.5
                                                                                        0
                                      0


       0                            -0.5                        0                     -0.5
        0     50     100      150       0   50   100   150       0   50   100   150       0   50   100   150


    1000                            400                      1000                     400
                     No Policy
                     Nash
     800             Planner        300                       800                     300


     600                            200                       600                     200


     400                            100                       400                     100
        0     50     100      150      0    50   100   150       0   50   100   150      0    50   100   150


       8                              8                      5.85                     5.85

       6                              6
                                                              5.8                      5.8
       4                              4
                                                             5.75                     5.75
       2                              2

       0                              0                       5.7                      5.7
        0     50     100      150      0    50   100   150       0   50   100   150       0   50   100   150


                                    1.4
     1.1                                                      1.2
                                    1.2
    1.05                                                      1.1

       1                              1                         1

    0.95                            0.8                       0.9

                                                              0.8
     0.9                            0.6
        0     50     100      150      0    50   100   150      0    50   100   150
               Weeks                         Weeks                    Weeks




Note: Comparison of equilibrium outcomes and SIR dynamics for three cases: benchmark, Nash, and Planner.
In the no policy case there are no domestic containment policies. In the Nash case, equilbirium domestic con-
tainment policies and tariffs are the outcome of a Nash game between the two countries. In the planner case,
equilbirium domestic containment policies and tariffs are determined by a global social planner that maximizes
the sum of both countries welfare.


                                                        38
                   Figure 7: Equilibrium Policy and SIR Dynamics, µ = 0



     1                             0.4                         1                         0.4
                     No Policy
                     Nash
                     Planner       0.2                                                   0.2
    0.5                                                       0.5
                                    0                                                      0


     0                            -0.2                         0                         -0.2
          0   50     100    150          0   50   100   150         0   50   100   150          0          50   100   150

                                                                                                    10-3
     1                            0.06                        0.6                          3


    0.8                           0.04                        0.4                          2


    0.6                           0.02                        0.2                          1


    0.4                             0                          0                           0
          0   50     100    150          0   50   100   150         0   50   100   150          0          50   100   150

                                                                                                    10-3
     1                            0.06                        0.6                          3


    0.8                           0.04                        0.4                          2


    0.6                           0.02                        0.2                          1


    0.4                             0                          0                           0
          0   50     100    150          0   50   100   150         0   50   100   150          0          50   100   150
               Weeks                          Weeks                      Weeks                              Weeks




Note: Equilibrium outcomes in a model in which containment policy collects no revenue for the government.




                                                         39
           Figure 8: Equilibrium Policy and Economic Outcomes, µ = 0



      1                            0.2                         1                      0.2
           Planner - Nash
           Planner - No Policy       0                                                 0

    0.5                            -0.2                      0.5                     -0.2

                                   -0.4                                              -0.4

      0                            -0.6                        0                     -0.6
       0    50      100      150       0   50   100   150       0   50   100   150       0   50   100   150


   1000                                                     1000                     400
                                   400
                    No Policy
    900             Nash
                    Planner
                                                             900                     300
                                   300
    800
                                                             800
                                   200                                               200
    700
                                                             700
    600                            100                                               100
       0    50      100      150      0    50   100   150      0    50   100   150      0    50   100   150


      8                              8
                                                            5.85                     5.85

      6                              6

                                                             5.8                      5.8
      4                              4


      2                              2
                                                            5.75                     5.75
       0    50      100      150      0    50   100   150       0   50   100   150       0   50   100   150


    1.2                            1.2                       1.2

    1.1                            1.1                       1.1

      1                              1                         1

    0.9                            0.9                       0.9

    0.8                            0.8                       0.8
       0    50      100      150      0    50   100   150       0   50   100   150
              Weeks                         Weeks                    Weeks




Note: Equilibrium outcomes in a model in which containment policy collects no revenue for the government.




                                                       40
                 Figure 9: Equilibrium Policy and SIR Dynamics,   0



 1                               1                          1                           1
                  No Policy
                  Nash          0.5                                                   0.5
                  Planner

0.5                              0                         0.5                          0

                               -0.5                                                   -0.5

 0                               -1                         0                          -1
      0     50    100    150          0   50   100   150         0   50   100   150          0          50   100   150

                                                                                                 10-3
 1                             0.06                        0.6                          3


0.8                            0.04                        0.4                          2


0.6                            0.02                        0.2                          1


0.4                              0                          0                           0
      0     50    100    150          0   50   100   150         0   50   100   150          0          50   100   150

                                                                                                 10-3
 1                             0.06                        0.6                          3


0.8                            0.04                        0.4                          2


0.6                            0.02                        0.2                          1


0.4                              0                          0                           0
      0     50    100    150          0   50   100   150         0   50   100   150          0          50   100   150
              Weeks                        Weeks                      Weeks                              Weeks




          Note: Equilibrium outcomes in a model with domestic containment policy but no tariff.




                                                      41
        Figure 10: Equilibrium Policy and Economic Outcomes,   0



  1                                                        1
                                 0.6                                               0.6
         Planner - Nash
         Planner - No Policy
                                 0.4                                               0.4
 0.5                                                      0.5
                                 0.2                                               0.2

                                   0                                                0
  0                                                        0
   0      50      100      150     0    50   100   150      0    50   100   150      0    50   100   150


800                              400                     800                      380
                  No Policy
                  Nash                                                            360
700               Planner                                700
                                 350                                              340
600                                                      600
                                                                                  320

500                              300                     500                      300
   0      50      100      150      0   50   100   150      0    50   100   150      0    50   100   150


 2.5                             2.5                     5.85                     5.85




  2                                2                      5.8                      5.8




                                                         5.75                     5.75
 1.5                             1.5
    0     50      100      150      0   50   100   150       0   50   100   150       0   50   100   150


1.04
                                 1.2                      1.2

1.02                             1.1                      1.1

                                   1                       1
  1
                                 0.9                      0.9

0.98                             0.8                      0.8
    0     50      100      150      0   50   100   150      0    50   100   150
            Weeks                        Weeks                    Weeks




        Note: Equilibrium outcomes in a model with domestic containment policy but no tariff.




                                                    42
                            Table 1: Welfare Decomposition
We report the welfare loss relative to the steady-state level without pandemic and
policy. We decompose the welfare loss in each country into two components. The
economy loss is the present value of the utility loss of living households due to
changes in consumption and labor during the pandemic episode, and the death
loss is the present value of the foregone utility due to death.

               Panel (a): With Pandemic and Domestic Containment Policy/Tariff
                                       Country A                        Country B
                             Total      Economy     Death      Total    Economy     Death
           No Policy         -19.85       -0.48     -19.37     -19.41     -0.47     -18.93
           Nash              -43.29      -27.18     -16.11     -42.74    -27.03     -15.71
           Planner           -17.96       -2.34     -15.62     -17.50     -2.36     -15.14
           Planner - Nash    25.33       24.83       0.50      25.24      24.67      0.57
                                     Panel (b): With No Pandemic
                                       Country A                        Country B
                             Total      Economy     Death      Total    Economy     Death
           No Policy          0.00        0.00          0.00    0.00       0.00     0.00
           Nash              -25.18      -25.18         0.00   -25.18    -25.18     0.00
           Planner            0.00        0.00          0.00    0.00       0.00     0.00
           Planner - Nash    25.18       25.18          0.00   25.18      25.18     0.00




                                                   43
          Table 2: Welfare Decomposition: Different Specifications
We report the welfare loss relative to the steady-state level without pandemic
and policy. We consider two additional cases. In Panel (a), we report the case
in which governments cannot impose tariff. In Panel (b), we report the case in
which governments can impose domestic containment policy but cannot remit the
revenue on consumption of domestic goods back to the households.

                                          Panel (a): No Tariff
                                Country A                             Country B
                       Total    Economy       Death     Total    Economy          Death
      No Policy        -19.85     -0.48       -19.37   -19.41     -0.47           -18.93
      Nash             -18.16     -2.90       -15.26   -17.70     -2.88           -14.82
      Planner          -18.04     -2.26       -15.77   -17.63     -2.32           -15.31
      Planner - Nash    0.12      0.64         -0.52    0.07       0.57            -0.49
      Panel (b): Dissipative Domestic Containment Policy on Consumption of Domestic Goods
                                Country A                             Country B
                       Total    Economy       Death     Total    Economy          Death
      No Policy        -19.85     -0.48       -19.37   -19.41      -0.47          -18.93
      Nash             -45.51    -25.31       -20.21   -44.69     -24.95          -19.73
      Planner          -19.99     -0.69       -19.30   -19.21      -0.36          -18.85
      Planner - Nash   25.53     24.62         0.91     25.48      24.60           0.88




                                                  44
A       Model Appendix

A.1       Insights from a Two-Period Model
First, we illustrate our key ideas in a simple model with two periods t  {0, 1}. There are two
countries k = A, B . Variables describing consumption, production, or government activity in
country k  {A, B } have the superscript k . When discussing a single country, the superscript
-k denotes the other country. Each country has a unit mass of agents, with health status s for
susceptible and i for infected. Let S k denote the share of susceptible agents.
    Each country has a distinct which we index with subscripts j = A, B . Let ck
                                                                               j (h) denote the
consumption of the good produced in country j by the agent in country k with health status h.
We use  k to denote the transmission likelihood of country k 's susceptible agents. We assume

                                                                 -k              -k            -k
 k ({c}) = 1 [ck     k        k      k            k        k              k
               k (s)ck (i) + c-k (s)c-k (i)](1 - S ) + 4 [ck (s)ck (i) + c-k (s)c-k (i)](1 - S    );

this transmission equation implies that the disease is transmitted both domestically and inter-
nationally, in proportion to the product between the susceptible agents' consumption and the
infected agents' consumption, as well as to the share of infected agents 1 - S k .
    We use U k to denote the utility of country k 's agent at time 0. At time 1, susceptible agents
                   k                                         k
have utility U s and infected agents have utility U i .


Government Consider first the centralized problem solved by the government of country
k . The objective function is

                                                                    k          k                                   k
     max                     S k [U k (ck       k               k       k              k   k k        k
                                        k (s), c-k (s)) +  (1 -  )U s +  U i ] + (1 - S )[U (ck (i), c-k (i)) + U i ]
{ck      k
  k (h),c-k (h)}

                       + pk (S -k c- k
                                   k (s) + (1 - S
                                                  -k -k
                                                    )ck (i)) - p-k (S k ck              k k
                                                                         -k (s) + (1 - S )c-k (i))


where the good price pk and p-k are taken as given.
    We model the international trade in a simplified setting. From the perspective of a planner
in country k , the production cost of domestic goods is 0, but it costs p-k to purchase a unit of
the foreign good. Therefore, the optimization problem is equivalent to

                                                                                k
                   max               S k [U k (ck       k               k          k
                                                k (s), c-k (s)) +  (1 -  )U - p-k c-k (s)]
             {ck      k
               k (h),c-k (h)}

                                     +(1 - S k )[U k (ck       k              k
                                                       k (i), c-k (i)) - p-k c-k (i)]

             k           k       k
where U = U s - U i > 0. Now we assume U (c1 , c2 ) =  log c1 + (1 - ) log c2 . The




                                                        45
first-order conditions imply

                                                                 
               ck
                k (s) =                                                             k
                                (1 ck
                                    k (i)(1    -   Sk)   + 4 c- k
                                                              k (i)(1 - S
                                                                          -k ))U

                                                            (1 - )
             ck
              -k (s) =                                                                  k
                                                        -k
                                (1 ck           k
                                    -k (i)(1 - S ) + 4 c-k (i)(1 - S
                                                                     -k ))U + p
                                                                               -k
                                       
               ck
                k (i) =                              k
                                (1 ck      k
                                    k (s)S )U
                                         (1 - )
             ck
              -k (i) =                                   k
                                (1 ck      k
                                    -k (s)S )U + p-k


Social Planner Next, we consider the first best from the perspective of a global planner.
Let c
    ^ denote the equilibrium allocation:

                                                                                    A               A
                  max                                cA
                                           S A [U A (^       ^A
                                                      A (s), c
                                                                             A       A
                                                              B (s)) +  (1 -  )U s +  U i ]
       ^A
      {c      ^A
        A (h),c       ^B
                B (h),c       ^B
                        B (h),cA (h)}
                                                                                A
                                           +(1 - S A )[U A (^
                                                            cA      ^A
                                                             A (i), cB (i)) + U i ]
                                                                                        B               B
                                           +S B [U B (^
                                                      cB      ^B
                                                       B (s), c
                                                                              B       B
                                                               A (s)) +  (1 -  )U s +  U i ]
                                                                                B
                                           +(1 - S B )[U B (^
                                                            cB      ^B
                                                             B (i), cA (i)) + U i ]


    The first-order conditions imply

                                                                     
                    ^k
                    ck (s) =                                                                k
                                        ^k
                                     (1 c           k
                                         k (i)(1 - S ) + 4 c^- k
                                                             k (i)(1 - S
                                                                         -k ))U

                                                        (1 - )
                  ^k
                  c-k (s) =                                                                     k
                                        ^k
                                     (1 c            k      ^-
                                         -k (i)(1 - S ) + 4 c
                                                               k
                                                             -k (i)(1 - S
                                                                          -k ))U

                                                         
                    ^k
                    ck (i) =                                 k                        -k
                                        ^k
                                     (1 c      k         ^-
                                         k (s)S )U +  (4 c
                                                            k
                                                          k (s)S
                                                                 -k )U

                                                   (1 - )
                  ^k
                  c-k (i) =                                      k                      -k
                                        ^k
                                     (1 c       k         ^-
                                         -k (s)S )U +  (4 c
                                                             k
                                                           -k (s)S
                                                                   -k )U


    The difference between the global planner and the local government planner's solutions
illustrates two key insights. First, the global planner addresses the externality of international
transmission of the pandemic. As a result, the infected agents' consumption has an additional
                                 -k
         ^-
term  (4 c  k
          k (s)S
                 -k )U                  in its denominator. This term lowers the infected agents' con-
sumption, in order to account for its effect to the susceptible agents in country k >
    Second, the global planner recognizes that the export price p-k is just a cross-country
transfer. This unnecessarily depresses the consumption of foreign goods, and will therefore be
set to 0 using differential tariffs at the optimal global allocation.



                                                         46
A.2     The Static Model
Without pandemics, the model boils down to an essentially static two-country macro model.
This is because, in order to focus on the epidemiological dynamics, in (11) we have ruled out
economic dynamics. As a benchmark we now provide the basic properties of this simple static
model. This analysis is also useful because it directly applies to the choice problems of the
infected and the recovered households in the full model, who structurally solve the same static
decision problems. The only truly dynamic decisions are made by susceptible households,
whose choices influence their future health status.
   To simplify notation, we drop country superscripts and time subscripts for the static anal-
ysis of households of country k . Denote the wage by w.
   The representative consumer of country k (who is not concerned with health) chooses per-
period consumption and labor (ck , c-k , )  0 in order to

                                                        1     2
                                          max v (x) - 
                                                        2
                           subject to     x = q (ck , c-k )                                  (42)
                                          pk ck + p-k c-k = w + g                            (43)

where pj are consumer prices and g is the public transfer. Let  denote the Lagrange multiplier
of the budget constraint. Importantly,  measures the pre-epidemic willingness to pay for util-
ity, i.e. the "exchange rate between utils and dollars", which is needed to calibrate the model.
As noted in Section 2, the solution is characterized by the following first-order constraints:

                                        x
                                        x-       = pk                                        (44)
                                        ck
                                        x
                                     x-          = p-k                                       (45)
                                        c-k
                                                 = w                                         (46)

   Dividing (44) by (45) yields
                                                              
                                          1-             pk
                                c-k =                             ck                         (47)
                                                        p-k

   Hence, unsurprisingly, ck and c-k are linear functions of each other.
   Inserting (47) into (42) yields

                                             
                                     x =  -1 (p-k )- ck                                      (48)




                                                47
where
                                       -1          -1
                                  =  p-k + (1 - ) pk

   Inserting (48) into (44), using (46), yields

                                   -1
                             w - -1 (p-k ) c- 
                                            k = pk p-k                                      (49)

   By straightworward calculations, the three equations (43), (47), and (49) yield the follow-
ing solutions for the three unknowns (ck , c-k , ). Labor is given by

                                               w 1-
                               (w + g ) =        -1 (pk p-k )-1                             (50)
                                               

home consumption ck by

                                                          w2 -  -1
              (pk p-k )2 ck
                           +1
                              - pk p-k (p-k ) gck =          -1 (p-k )(+1)                  (51)
                                                          

and foreign consumption by (47). It is easy to see that (50) and (51) each have a unique positive
root. Hence, the household problem has a unique solution.
   For the case  = 1, which we use in the numerical calibration, things are particular simple,
as both equations are quadratic. In particular, we have

                                         g   1                4w2
                                   =-      +           g2 +                                 (52)
                                        2w 2w                  
                                                                           
which yields the multiplier , the "price of utility", by (46), as  =       w   .
   Optimal domestic consumption is

                                 g (p-k )   (p-k )                   4w2
                          ck =            +                   g2 +                          (53)
                                 2 pk p-k   2 pk p-k                  

and foreign consumption correspondingly.
   The above analysis describes the demand side of each of the two economies in the absence
of health concerns.


A.2.1    No-Pandemic Equilibria

We re-introduce country superscripts to describe market clearing in economies with no health
concerns, be it pre-pandemic or after the arrival of a vaccine. The conditions are

                                        wk = pk z k                                         (54)
                                                       -k
                                      zk   k
                                               = ck
                                                  k + ck                                    (55)


                                                  48
k = A, B , for labor market and product market clearing, respectively.


Social Planner Under a benevolent social planner, government policy in each country will
be (µk ,  k ) = (0, 0): levying taxes on domestic or foreign goods is welfare reducing. Hence,
the government collects no taxes, and by the budget constraint (12) transfers are g = 0. Con-
sumer prices are undistorted,
                                      pk         k
                                       k = pk , p-k = p-k

and the 4 equations (54) and (55) to are sufficient to determine the 4 prices wk , pk , k = A, B ,
by using the solutions of (50), (51), and (47) obtained above. Of course, prices are determined
only up to one degree of freedom, and by Walras' Law one of the above equilibrium relations
is redundant.


Nash In Nash Equilibrium, µk = 0 in each country. Yet, tariffs can be positive, for the
standard economic reasons of trade wars discussed more broadly in the main text. Hence,
consumer prices are

                                      pk
                                       k = pk

                                     pk          k
                                      -k = (1 + v )p-k


   Public transfers are therefore endogenous even in the static setting,

                                        g k =  k p-k ck
                                                      -k                                     (56)

   Now, for given government policies ( A ,  B ), we have the 6 equations (54), (55), and (56)
to determine the 6 endogenous variables wk , pk , g k , k = A, B .


A.2.2    Demand by Infected or Recovered Households

As noted above, the demand of infected and of recovered households in the full model in Sec-
tion 2 derives from an essentially static optimization problem. Hence, by letting w = wk
                                                                                       t for
the infected households of country k at date t, the household optimization conditions of the
full model yield the conditions (50), (51), and (47), appropriately indexed for the i households.
Similarly, by letting w = wk
                           t for the recovered households, the household optimization condi-
tions of the full model lead to (50), (51), and (47), appropriately indexed for the r households.




                                               49
       A.3      Disease Transmission
       This subsection provides a microfoundation for the disease transmission dynamics (14) in
       Section 1.2.
           In the basic SIR model (without economic choices) transmission occurs according to

                                                      Tt = St It                                            (57)

           This has the following logic. Let N be size of a given population. Let N = S + I + R
       , where I is the number of infectious, and S that of susceptibles. Let N be the rate of
       contacts of a single individual during which the disease can potentially be transmitted.12 The
       assumption is that individuals spend a fixed proportion of their time outside the home, where
       they can transmit or contract the virus. Letting  denote the probability that a contact leads
       to an infection,13 equation (57) can now be derived as follows.14 One susceptible individual
       outside his home, per unit of time, on average has N contacts. This leads to N (I/N ) = I
       contacts with infectious individuals. The probability of getting infected in these k = I
       contacts is
                                                             k-1
                                                                     k
                                    = 1 - (1 - )k =                     (-)m                                (58)
                                                                    m+1
                                                            m=0

       for k > 0, and the expected total number of transmissions per unit of time is  S .  as a
       function of  is a polynomial of degree k and strictly concave for k > 1. Hence, for small
        (which seems to be the case for Covid-19 under social distancing)  is smaller than, but
       approximately equal to k. In this case, letting  = , the average rate of transmission is
       approximately equal to
                                                kS = IS = IS

       as stated in (57). If N is large or the population fragmented (so mass incidence in the form
       described above is not reasonable), the argument holds by adding up local populations.


       A.3.1     The Macro-SIR Model

       Eichenbaum et al. (2020) have proposed a particularly simple framework to incorporate eco-
       nomic activity into the above model, by distinguishing transmissions while consuming, at
12
   This is the so-called "mass incidence" model which is relevant for Covid-19 (differently from, say, HIV, as ana-
   lyzed in Greenwood et al. (2019)): one infectious individual can infect a whole (sub-)group, no need for bilateral
   interaction.
13
    clearly depends on the country and its policies. At least in richer countries,  has decreased dramatically since
   February 2020.
14
   This is the perspective of susceptibles, which is most relevant for economic incentives. Usually, the derivation takes
   the perspective of infectious. See standard textbooks such as Brauer (2008).



                                                          50
       work, and during other activities outside the home. This model does not distinguish between
       foreign and domestic consumption goods.
           To make that precise, dropping the time index for convenience, suppose that individuals
       spend a fixed fraction f < 1 of their time outside neither at work nor consuming. All durations
       are in terms of the unit of time chosen (which is scaled by ).15 To simplify, and different
       from Brotherhood et al. (2020), we do not distinguish between utility from different types
       of leisure. Hence, individuals do not derive specific utility from leisure outside the home,
       and we therefore assume this fraction to be constant.16 Suppose that individuals of health
       status h spend a fraction (h) < 1 of their time at work, and a fraction c(h) < 1 consuming
       (shopping, dining, ...), the assumption being that the time spent on consumption is proportional
       to the quantity bought. We assume that f + (h) + c(h) < 1, the remaining time being leisure
       alone at home.17 Then, using the linear approximation of the infection probability  , we have
       the following infection probabilities for susceptibles and aggregate average transmission rates:

          1. During non-work-non-consumption time outside the home,

                 · individual proba of becoming infected: f I
                 · expected total number of transmissions: f IS

          2. During work,

                 · average rate of susceptible contacts with infected: L( (i)I/L)
                 · individual proba of becoming infected when working: (s) (i)I
                 · expected total number of transmissions at work: (s) (i)IS

          3. During consumption,

                 · average rate of contacts with infected: C (c(i)I/C )
                 · individual proba of becoming infected when consuming c(s): c(s) 2 c(i)I
                 · expected total number of transmissions from consumption:  2 c(s)c(i)IS

           Here,
                                         Ct = St ct (s) + It ct (i) + Rt ct (r)

       is total consumption, and

                                         Lt = St t (s) + It t (i) + Rt t (r)
15
   If this unit is a week and a day has 16 useful hours (e.g. McGrattan, Rogerson et al., 2004), then the individual has
   112f hours of non-shopping leisure per week outside the home.
16
   See Garibaldi et al. (2020) for work that endogenizes f in a model of occupational choice, abstracting from the
   work-consumption choice considered here.
17
   We calibrate the parameter values such that the individual time constraints are satisfied in our simulations. Hence,
   we can ignore the time constraint in the household's optimization problem of (29).

                                                          51
          total labor (hours worked) in the economy.
               Hence, an s individual faces the following transition probability to the infected state, if she
          chooses individual consumption c(s) and labor supply (s):

                                 (c(s), (s)) = f I + (s) (i)I + c(s) 2 c(i)I                             (59)
                                                =   2 c(s)c(i) + (s) (i) + f I                           (60)

               This yields the expected total number of transmissions from all activities, now with time
          indices:

                                   Tt =   2 ct (s)ct (i) + t (s) t (i) + f It St                         (61)
                                        = [1 ct (s)ct (i) + 2 t (s) t (i) + 3 ] It St                    (62)

          where
                                             1 =  2 , 2 = , 3 = f


          A.3.2      International transmission

          Again dropping the time index for convenience, we denote individual consumption of good
          j = A, B in country k = A, B by ck    k
                                           j = cj (h). Aggregate consumption of good j in country k
          is
                                           k
                                          Cj = Sck         k         k
                                                 j (s) + Icj (i) + Rcj (r )                              (63)

                                                                                  k = H k and C k = M k .
               In terms of the notation of (6) and (7) in the main text, we have Ck            -k
          As before, suppose individuals of country k and health status h spend a fraction           k (h)   of
          their time at work, a fraction ck
                                          k (h) of their time consuming the domestic good, a fraction
          ck
           -k (h) consuming the foreign good, and a fraction f out of their home for other reasons.
          When "shopping", an individual is directly exposed to home residents and foreigners. Since
          the contact intensity for foreign and domestic consumption is likely to differ we assume that
          the consumer has a contact rate d  (Ck
                                               k + C k ) with domestic residents and a contact rate
                                                    -k
               -k    -k
          f  (Ck  + C- k ) with foreigners. In fact, when consuming the domestic good, an individual
          in country k meets foreign consumers who consume her domestic good, which leads to a
                                                    -k
          number of contacts per unit of time of f Ck  . And when consuming the foreign good, she
          meets foreign consumers who consume this good, i.e. their domestic good, which leads to a
                                                    -k
          number of contacts per unit of time of f C- k . Since the consumption of foreign goods is
          often intermediated by specialized import/export agents and thus likely to involve fewer direct
          contacts, we expect f < d .18
18
     An important exception to this logic is tourism. Remember that consumption includes tourism, which is a large


                                                           52
          We assume for simplicity that there are no international encounters in non-work-non-
     consumption situations, and we also ignore those at the workplace. Hence, the transmission
     dynamics is unchanged from the previous subsection as regards these two types of encounters,
     and only changes with respect to the transmission related to consumption. For a susceptible
     consuming the bundle (ck       k
                            k (s), c-k (s)), we have:

                                          k + f C -k ) +  (d C k + f C -k )
         · average rate of contacts:  (d Ck      k            -k      -k

         · average rate of contacts with infected: d (ck       k       k  f -k       -k       -k
                                                       k (i)+ c-k (i))I +  (ck (i)+ c-k (i))I

         · individual proba of becoming infected:
             ck     2 d ck (i)I k + f c-k (i)I -k + ck (s) 2 d ck (i)I k + f c-k (i)I -k
              k (s)      k             k             -k         -k            -k

          Adding the infection probabilities shows that a susceptible in country k who chooses             k (s),

     ck           k
      k (s), and c-k (s) transits to the infectious state with probability


                         (ck       k
                           k (s), c-k (s),
                                             k
                                                 (s))
                   =      2 d ck     k        k      k
                               k (s)ck (i) + c-k (s)c-k (i) + 
                                                              d k
                                                                  (s) k (i) + d f I k                       (64)
                                          -k              -k       -k
                             + 2 f ck              k
                                    k (s)ck (i) + c-k (s)c-k (i) I


          This yields the expected total number of transmissions from all activities in country k , now
     with time indices, as used in Section 1.2:

                 Ttk =       1 (ck      k         k       k            k     k          k k
                                 kt (s)ckt (i) + c-kt (s)c-kt (i)) + 2 t (s) t (i) + 3 It St                (65)
                                       -k                -k       -k k
                            +4 ck                k
                                kt (s)ckt (i) + c-kt (s)c-kt (i) It St                                      (66)

     where

                                                    1 =  2 d                                                (67)
                                                    2 = d                                                   (68)
                                                    3 = d f                                                 (69)
                                                    4 =  2 f                                                (70)

          The transmission dynamics (65)-(66) generalize those of the single good case (61) - (62).
     The new terms reflect the transmissions through consumption interactions in exports (c- k
                                                                                           kt (i))

component of international trade in several countries (see, e.g., Culiuc, 2014). As in standard foreign trade statistics,
holidays abroad therefore count as the domestic purchase of a foreign consumption good. It is likely that this type
of import is very contact intensive. Also tourism is not subject to the usual logic of import tariffs. A more general
model (not presented here) therefore distinguishes between tourism and other imports/exports.



                                                         53
                                                                               -k
and imports (ck
              -kt (i)) and therefore also involve foreign consumption abroad (c-kt (i) in the
4 -term).


A.4     Computation Details
The numerical algorithm for solving our model proceeds in a number of steps. We first detail
the solution to the model for fixed containment policies and then detail the solution for the
optimal coordinated and uncoordinated policies.


Solution for fixed policies. To solve the model for a fixed set of containment taxes, we
begin with guesses for the susceptible households' labor and consumption choices in each
country and period as well as the relative price of country B 's good in each period. Note that
we normalize country A prices to 1. Given these guesses, we calculate the implied government
tax as well as the labor and consumption of all other household types. We then iterate forward
on the SIR equations until the final period of the model, at which point consumption and labor
return to their steady state values due to the vaccine's arrival. Next, we iterate backward to
derive the present value of lifetime utility for each agent. We then use gradient-based methods
to adjust our initial guesses until the susceptible agents' first-order conditions, market clearing
conditions, and government budget constraints hold. In this way, we confirm all equilibrium
conditions are satisfied.


Social planner solution. To solve for optimal containment policies from the perspective of
a social planner, we nest the solution for fixed policies within another gradient-based optimizer.
In this outer loop, we solve for containment policies and tariffs which maximize the present
value of total time-0 utility, equally weighted across both countries.


Nash equilibrium solution. To solve for the Nash Equilibrium containment policies we
begin with a guess for containment policies and tariffs across both countries. Given a fixed
policy for a given country, we use a gradient-based optimizer to find the optimal policy re-
sponse of the other country that maximizes the welfare of its own households. We then take
this policy as fixed and find the optimal policy response of the other country. We iterate on this
procedure until both countries' policies are the best responses to each other. We experiment
with many different starting values but do not find any differences in the final result, which
makes us believe that the identified Nash equilibrium is unique.




                                                54
