                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    SPECIAL DEALS FROM SPECIAL INVESTORS:
            THE RISE OF STATE-CONNECTED PRIVATE OWNERS IN CHINA

                                        Chong-En Bai
                                       Chang-Tai Hsieh
                                      Zheng Michael Song
                                          Xin Wang

                                      Working Paper 28170
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28170


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020




We are grateful to Yasheng Huang, Yingyi Qian, Aleh Tsyvinski and Wei Xiong for helpful
discussions. Jin Han and Yanzun Yang provided excellent research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Chong-En Bai, Chang-Tai Hsieh, Zheng Michael Song, and Xin Wang. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Special Deals from Special Investors: The Rise of State-Connected Private Owners in China
Chong-En Bai, Chang-Tai Hsieh, Zheng Michael Song, and Xin Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 28170
December 2020
JEL No. E0,F0,O0,P0

                                          ABSTRACT

We use administrative registration records with information on the owners of all Chinese firms to
document the importance of "connected" investors, defined as state-owned firms or private
owners with equity ties with state-owned firms, in the businesses of private owners. We
document a hierarchy of private owners: the largest private owners have direct investments from
state-owned firms, the next largest private owners have equity investments from private owners
that themselves have equity ties with state owners, and the smallest private owners do not have
any ties with state owners. The network of connected private owners has expanded over the last
two decades. The share of registered capital of connected private owners increased by almost 20
percentage points between 2000 and 2019, driven by two trends. First, state owned firms have
increased their investments in joint ventures with private owners. Second, private owners with
equity ties to state owners also increasingly invest in joint ventures with other (smaller) private
owners. The expansion in the "span" of connected owners from these investments with private
owners may have increased aggregate output of the private sector by 4.2% a year between 2000
and 2019.

Chong-En Bai                                     Zheng Michael Song
Tsinghua University                              Department of Economics
Beijing 100084, China                            Chinese University of Hong Kong
baichn@sem.tsinghua.edu.cn                       Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong
                                                 zheng.michael.song@gmail.com
Chang-Tai Hsieh
Booth School of Business                         Xin Wang
University of Chicago                            Chinese University of Hong Kong
5807 S Woodlawn Ave                              wangx2.04@gmail.com
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
chsieh@chicagoBooth.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28170
2                                          BAI, HSIEH, SONG, WANG



1.         Introduction

In the late 1990s, a young Chinese auto manufacturer called Chery found itself up against
what seemed like an unsurmountable obstacle.1 Chery was successfully producing low-
priced knockoffs of the Volkswagen Jetta, but it did not have a license to make cars. It
had appealed to Chinese central planners multiple times for the necessary license, but
the authorities were adamant that companies such as Chery were not part of their plan
for China's automobile industry. The goal of the Chinese authorities at the time was
to consolidate production around a small number of state-led giants such as Shanghai
Automobile and First Auto Works. Small companies such as Chery that would compete
with the industrial giants were forbidden.
         In desperation Chery turned to Shanghai Automobile. It struck a deal where the
state-owned giant took a 20% equity stake in Chery. Legally, this made Chery a "sub-
sidiary" of Shanghai Automobile, which enabled Chery to get a car license from the
Chinese authorities. Shanghai Automobile eventually sold its 20% equity stake back to
Chery, which has gone on since then to become the largest exporter of cars and the 10th
largest car producer in China today.
         The role played by Shanghai Automobile in Chery's growth is an example of the
critical role of what the Chinese call a "politically-connected investor" or a "protective
umbrella" in enabling firms to grow. In this paper we use administrative registration
data on the universe of Chinese firms from 2000 to 2019 to document the importance
of "connected" investors such as Shanghai Automobile in the growth of Chinese private
owners over the last two decades. A key feature of the registration data is that it provides
information on the owner of every Chinese firm, which we use to identify firms with
"connected" investors defined as state-owned firms or private owners with equity ties
to state-owned firms.
         This ownership information reveals two key facts. First, there is a clear hierarchy
of private owners in terms of the closeness of their equity links with state owners. In
2019 state owners have equity stakes in the firms of about one hundred thousand pri-
vate owners. These private owners are the largest in China and also hold equity in the
companies of other, typically smaller, private owners. In turn, these private owners

     1
         This account of Chery is from Dunne (2011).
                               CONNECTED PRIVATE OWNERS                                 3


also invest in other, even smaller, private owners and so on. At the very bottom of the
hierarchy are owners that are up to forty steps away from the state owners at the top of
the hierarchy and that do not invest in other owners. The very smallest private owners
thus do not have any equity ties, direct or indirect, with state owners.
   Our second finding is that the hierarchy of private owners with connected investors
is relatively recent phenomena. In 2000 private owners with connected investors only
accounted for at most 16% of registered capital. By 2019, private owners with connected
investors owned about 35% of all registered capital in China. The 19.5 percentage point
increase in the share of connected private owners from 2000 to 2019 contributes a
significant part of the increase in the share of all private owners over this period.
   The growth of this hierarchy of connected owners is driven, in a proximate sense,
by two related trends. First, in 2000 only 12% of state owners had joint ventures with
private owners. By 2019, about a quarter of all state owners had such joint ventures.
In addition, conditional on investing in private owners, state owners on average had
investments with 6 distinct private owners in 2000. By 2019, the average state owner
had projects with 15 distinct private owners. The result is that the number of private
owners with joint ventures with state owners increased from about 20 thousand in 2000
to more than one hundred thousand by 2019.
   Second, private owners associated with the state also now undertake more invest-
ments with other private owners. For example, the 20 thousand private owners with
joint ventures with state owners in 2000 themselves had joint ventures with less than
1.5 other private owners in that year. In 2019, the hundred thousand private owners
directly connected with state owners were themselves the "connected investor" for 3.5
other private owners on average. The result is that number of private owners invested
by the directly connected private owners (i.e., two steps away from the state) increased
from 23 thousand in 2000 to more than three hundred thousand by 2019. This effect is
particularly dramatic for connected owners distant from the state. In 2000 for example,
there were just around 5 thousand owners six or more steps away from the state. By
2019, there were more than 1.5 million such owners.
   By 2019 the net effect of the increase in the number of connected private owners,
and the growth of such owners after they became connected with a "connected in-
vestor," was that the assets of connected private owners accounted for 35% of total
4                                 BAI, HSIEH, SONG, WANG



assets in China, or about 45% of total assets of all private owners. At the same time,
the share of connected state owners, the owners at the "top of the food chain" of the
connected sector, is merely 21%, 60% less than the share of connected private owners.
This is because politically connected investors are rarely the controlling shareholders.
In the case of Chery, Shanghai Auto's stake was 20%. For the average private owner with
joint ventures with state owners, the share of state owners was also around 20% in 2019.
    We then filter these facts through the lenses of a simple model where connected in-
vestors reduce "frictions" faced by private owners. In the model, an increase in the ben-
efits provided by connected investors increases the number of connections per worker,
total number of connected owners, the share of connected owners in the economy, and
an increase in aggregate output. We calibrate the increase in the benefits provided by
connected owners from data on the number of connections made by each connected
investor. We then filter this number through the model to estimate the contribution
of the expansion of connected private owners to aggregate output. We find that this
mechanism can explain a 4.2% annual growth in aggregate output of private sector
between 2000 and 2019.
    The closest predecessors of this paper are Bai et al. (2019) and Huang (2008). Bai
et al. (2019) highlights the importance of informal institutions in the form of "special
deals" by local governments and Huang (2008) argues that state connected agents in
China frequently get special deals. This paper focuses on a specific informal institution,
namely connected investors, including private individuals that are connected to state
owners, taking equity stakes in private owners. Our findings challenge the views that
informal institutions are often locally effective and hard to substitute for formal institu-
tions. The effects from a special deal can be transmitted through the hierarchy in which
private owners closer to the state undertaking investment with those further from the
state, extending the coverage of the informal institution to a significant proportion of
private owners.
    More generally, Chandler (1977) shows that the managerial revolution in American
industrial firms in the early 20th century enabled them to scale new productive tech-
niques in larger establishments. Hsieh and Rossi-Hansberg (2019) argue that over the
last four decades, new technologies enabled top firms in the U.S. to scale the delivery of
local services over a large number of geographic locations. In this paper, we highlight
                                       CONNECTED PRIVATE OWNERS                             5


the ownership network that emerged in China as an important institutional change that
has enabled connected investors to scale their "connections" over a large number of
owners, even over owners that they do not have equity stakes in.
         Four recent papers use the same registration data we use to explore the growth of
China's private sector. Dai et al. (2019) identify community origins of entrepreneurs and
investigate how the origin-based connections affect firm entry. Shi et al. (2020) finds
a causal relationship between transfer of local government leaders and inter-regional
investment flows. Brandt et al. (2019) show that a growing fraction of firms are started
by serial entrepreneurs. Allen et al. (2019) construct a firm-to-firm equity investment
network and estimate the effects of the firm's network. Although all the papers, in-
cluding ours, shed light on the rapid growth of China's private sector from different
perspectives, our focus is on the connection between state and private owners. We
document a hierarchy of owners that transmits the benefit of special deals from state
owners at the top to millions of private owners. We also document a rapid expansion of
the hierarchy and argue that it may be a crucial force behind the growth of the private
sector in China.
         The paper proceeds as follows. The next section describes the firm registration data.
We then use the case of the East Hope Group and Shanghai Automobile to illustrate the
importance of connected owners. The following section presents six key facts about
connected owners. We then present a model of connected investors and use the model
to calibrate the effect of a change in the value of becoming connected. The last section
concludes.



2.         Data

We use the firm registration records of the State Administration for Market Regula-
tion. All Chinese firms are legally obligated to register with this body.2 The data are
the registration records for all firms, including those that have been closed, with the
following information for each firm: registration year, exit year (if the firm has been
closed), location, industry, total registered capital, and the firm's immediate owners and
the registered capital share of each owner.
     2
         We exclude the self-employed from our analyses.
6                                    BAI, HSIEH, SONG, WANG



        The registration records identify the immediate owners of each firm. The immediate
owners can be an individual person (with encrypted personal ID in the data), another
firm (a "legal person" owner), or the publicly held shares of a publicly listed company
(a "collective" owner). An important feature of the registration data is all Chinese legal
person owners also have to be registered and thus also appear in the data. Therefore,
we can also identify the immediate owners of all Chinese legal person owners. However,
the registration data has no information on the owners of foreign legal persons or the
identity of owners of the publicly traded shares of a listed company.
        The majority of the legal person owners are other firms, but we know from several
case studies that some of them are holding shells. Take, for example, the East Hope
Group, a large conglomerate with multiple companies in the heavy metals and animal
food processing industries. The two dark circles at the bottom of Figure 1 represent two
companies in the Group. East Hope Aluminum is one of the largest alumina producers
in China. Dachang Mining is a bauxite prospecting company and a business services
provider. The circles directly linked to the two firms represent their immediate owners.
We distinguish different types of owners by color ­ light gray for suspected holding
shells, dark gray for "real" private companies, red for state-owned firms, and blue for
individual owners.
        East Hope Aluminum is wholly owned by the family of the founder of the East Hope
Group. This family, which we call "East Hope's family," owns East Hope Aluminum
through five holding shells.3 The immediate owners of East Hope Aluminum are three
companies, two of which are registered outside of China and one in China. We do
not know for sure, but we have circumstantial evidence that the two "foreign" holding
companies are fully owned by East Hope's family.4 As for the domestic holding shell
East Hope Group Ltd., its immediate owners are two other holding shells, East Hope
Investment Holding Ltd. and East Hope Enterprise Management Ltd. In the registration
data, these two holding shells are fully owned by East Hope's family, which we represent
by the blue circle at the top of Figure 1.


    3
   We define "East Hope's family" as the founder of East Hope, his wife, and his son.
    4
   The two "foreign" holding companies are Shidebang Metal Ltd. and Shidebang Trade Ltd. We identify
them by an announcement made by Mingsheng Bank (http://stock.finance.sina.com.cn/hkstock/
go/CompanyNoticeDetail/code/01988/aid/488702.html). More generally, we may fail to identify some
companies of a domestic owner because of their ownership through firms registered outside China.
                                   CONNECTED PRIVATE OWNERS                                               7



             Figure 1: Owners of East Hope Aluminum and Dachang Mining




  Note: The circles represent the owners of East Hope Aluminum and Dachang Mining, shown as dark
  gray circles at the bottom of the figure. Dark gray circles represent "real" private companies, light
  grey (suspected) holding shells, red for state owned firms, and blue for individual owners.




   Dachang Mining is a joint venture between East Hope's family and six other com-
panies. The immediate owners of Dachang Mining are five state owned firms (denoted
by the red circle) and two private companies. One of the private companies is Mianchi
Yizhengcheng Mining which is fully owned by East Hope's family through a sequence of
holding shells. The other private company is Sanmenxia Jinjiang Mining which is fully
owned by a large private conglomerate called the Hangzhou Jinjiang Group.
   In this paper we focus on the ownership links between the ultimate owners. That
is, we work through the ownership chain to identify each firm's ultimate owners, which
can be state owned firms, private individuals, foreign legal persons, or collective own-
ers. The ultimate owner of East Hope Aluminum is East Hope's family. The ultimate
owners of Dachang Mining are East Hope's family and the ultimate owners of the five
state owned firms and the Hangzhou Jinjiang Group.
8                                        BAI, HSIEH, SONG, WANG



        The only economic information in the data is the firm's registered capital. Chinese
Company Law stipulates that the owners of a firm need to subscribe a fixed amount of
funds known as registration capital when the firm is established. These funds represent
the maximum liability of the owners and is viewed as a signal of the company's financial
resources. For example, a firm's potential creditors pay close attention to registration
capital because it represents the maximum they can collect in the event of a default.
Chinese law stipulates the minimum amount of registered capital for firms in certain
sectors, but generally registered capital is determined by the amount of real business
the firm needs to undertake. Therefore, registered capital of holding shells is minimal
and a poor measure of the value of its assets, but it is a reasonable proxy of the value-
added of a "real" firm.5
        We have access to the registration records in 2013 and 2019. We use the 2019 records
to identify the ultimate owners (and their share of registered capital) of the active firms
in that year. We also want to identify the ultimate owners and their ownership stake
in previous years, e.g. 2000 and 2010. We use the 2013 registration records to do this.
Specifically, for a given year prior to 2013, we assume a firm is active if it was established
prior to that year and also had not exited by that year. We then infer the ultimate
owners and their ownership share of each active firm from the information in 2013. The
assumption is that the immediate owner of a firm is constant over time. In Appendix B,
we check the error due to this assumption by comparing the ownership in 2013 inferred
from the 2019 data with the ownership measured directly from the 2013 data.
        Table 1 shows the number of active firms and ultimate owners from 2000 to 2019
inferred using this procedure. The first column shows that the number of active firms
increased 8 fold between 2000 and 2019. The number of ultimate owners increased
by more than 10 times (column 2). The third column shows that all of this growth
is due to the growth in private individual owners. The last three columns show the
number of state-owned ultimate owners, defined as firms wholly and directly owned
by all the levels of the Chinese government (central, provincial, city- and county-level

    5
    In Appendix A we use the data from the Chinese Annual Industrial Survey with high quality
information on sales and total assets of industrial firms to check the data on registered capital from the
registration data. We match the firms in the Industrial Survey to the firms in the registration data. For
example, in this sample of firms matched in the two data-sets, a regression of the firm's log registered
capital (from the registration data) on the log value of its total assets (from the firm survey) in 2013 yields
a coefficient of 0.93 (s.e = 0.000) with a R2 of 0.48.
                                     CONNECTED PRIVATE OWNERS                                               9



                   Table 1: Number of Firms and Ultimate Owners, 2000-2019

                                                           Ultimate Owners
                 Active Firms
                                     All          Individuals       State      Foreign       Collective
         2000     4,405,139       5,332,032        5,255,522       35,029       41,235          246
         2010    10,122,468      20,055,478       19,932,816       32,296       90,085          281
         2019    37,546,275      62,865,027       62,689,037       40,672      134,864          454

  Note: Table shows number of active firms and ultimate owners in each year in the firm registration
  data. It also shows number of individual owners, state owners, legal person owners registered outside
  of China and the collective owners of public traded companies.




governments), foreign firms, and collective owners.6 In 2019, these last three groups of
owners account for less than 0.3% of all ultimate owners in China.
         Table 2 shows the share of registration capital owned by each group of owner. We
impute the total registered capital of each ultimate owner as the weighted sum of the
registered capital of all the firms she has a stake in, where the weights are the owner's
share of the firm's registered capital.7 Table 2 delivers two messages. First, the 40
thousand state owners in China are large and own about 21% of total registered cap-
ital in China. Second, the share of private individual owners in registered capital has
increased from about 50% in 2000 to almost 70% by 2019.



3.        Owners of East Hope and Shanghai Automobile

Earlier in the paper, we use SAIC's investment in Chery to illustrate the role played by
connected investors in Chery's growth. Empirically this shows up in the registration
data as an ownership link between SAIC and the other owners of Chery. In this section,
we illustrate the prevalence of such links by examining SAIC and the East Hope Group
     6
    See Appendix C for details on how we identify state owners.
     7
    This measure of an owner's total registered capital includes the registered capital of the holding shell
companies. Ideally we should exclude holding shell companies from the firms owned by each owner, but
we can not identify all the holding shells in the data. However, the registration capital of holding shells is
minimal. We can check this by measuring the total registration capital of industrial firms in the Annual
Industrial Survey that belong to a given owner and comparing this number to the total registered capital
in the registration data including the registration capital of all the intermediate owners. A regression of
log registered capital of firms in the industrial data that belong to the same owner on the log registered
capital of all firms that belong to the same owner, including all the intermediate firms in the registration
data, yields a coefficient of 0.83 and an R2 of 0.80.
10                                    BAI, HSIEH, SONG, WANG



               Table 2: Registered Capital Share of Ultimate Owners, 2000-2019

                        Individuals            State            Foreign            Collective
        2000              52.1%               35.8%              8.5%                 3.5%
        2010              59.5%               29.4%              9.1%                 2.0%
        2019              68.9%               21.4%              6.7%                 3.1%

  Note: Table shows registered capital share of individual owners, state owners, legal person owners
  registered outside of China and the collective owners of public traded companies.




in more detail.
     East Hope Aluminum, the company we described earlier, was created in 2003 as
a joint venture between East Hope's family and Huanghe Aluminum and Electricity, a
state owned firm owned by the city of Sanmenxia (Henan Province). Huanghe initially
owned 24% of East Hope Aluminum but sold its share to East Hope in 2006. East Hope
Aluminum is currently one of the largest alumina producer in China.
     After it established East Hope Aluminum, the East Hope Group has created new
companies as joint ventures with the Sanmenxia local government. Dachang Mining
was created in 2009 as a joint venture between East Hope and several state owned firms
in Sanmenxia. More generally, East Hope has used joint ventures with local govern-
ments to enter into new markets. The East Hope Group started in the animal feed
business in Sichuan and expanded its animal feed business to other provinces through
joint ventures with local state-owned enterprises. Two examples are a joint venture with
a county-level grain bureau in Henan province and another joint venture with a local
state-owned animal feed producer in Anhui province. East Hope has also used joint
ventures to enter into new industries. In addition to East Hope Aluminum, the East
Hope Group also created two companies in Chongqing and Inner Mongolia as joint
ventures with local state owned firms to enter into the coal mining industry. These
state owned firms are the "connected" investors that made it possible for the East Hope
Group to expand beyond its original business of selling animal feed in Sichuan.
     Table 3 uses the registration records to identify all the ultimate owners involved in
joint ventures with the East Hope Group in 2019. We define the East Hope Group as
the collection of companies where East Hope's family owns, directly or indirectly, at
                                     CONNECTED PRIVATE OWNERS                                             11



                             Table 3: Owners of the East Hope Group

                                      East Hope's Family       State Owners              Other
                                                                                    Private Owners
     # of Owners                               1                     15                    11
     Firms per Owner                          236                   599                   305
     East Hope's Joint Ventures               27                     15                    12
     Capital per Owner                       26.5                   226                   5.1

  Note: East Hope Group is defined as companies where East Hope's family owns at least a 10% equity
  share. East Hope's family consists of the founder of East Hope, his wife, and his son. State owners and
  other private owners own at least one company in the East Hope Group. Capital is registered capital
  owned by each ultimate owner in billion yuan.




least a 10% equity share.8 The first column in Table 3 shows that the East Hope Group
consists of 236 firms of which 209 are wholly owned by East Hope's family and 27 are
joint ventures with other owners.
    The second and third columns in Table 3 focuses on the 15 state owners and 11 pri-
vate owners with joint ventures with East Hope's family. The 15 state owners operate on
average 600 companies with total registered capital of 226 billion yuan. The registered
capital of state owners linked with East Hope's family is almost nine times larger than
that of the East Hope's family itself. These state firms are the connected owners in the
East Hope Group and are significantly larger than East Hope itself.
    This is not the case for the private owners that operate joint ventures with East
Hope's family. For these owners, East Hope's family is itself the "connected" investor.
These private owners are significantly smaller than the businesses owned by East Hope's
family, with a total registered capital averaging 5 billion yuan which is about 20% of the
registered capital of the businesses owned by East Hope's family.
    Table 4 provides the same information for the SAIC Group, where the Group is de-
fined as the collection of firms where SAIC owns at least a 10% equity share. Different
from East Hope's family, SAIC is a state owner. The first column in Table 4 shows that
there are 586 companies in the SAIC Group and SAIC's registered capital in these com-
panies totals 169 billion Yuan. Among these 586 companies, 226 companies are wholly

   8
     We define East Hope's family as the founder of East Hope, his wife, his son and several overseas holding
shells, which to the best of our knowledge, are owned by the three individuals.
12                                          BAI, HSIEH, SONG, WANG



owned by SAIC and 360 are joint ventures with other 60 state owners and 155 private
owners. The state owners directly connected to SAIC are of comparable size to SAIC
as measured by the number of firms and total registered capital. Among the private
owners, ten of them are linked with SAIC via 57 joint ventures with Anbang Insurance,
Shanghai-VW, and Shanghai-GM.9 These ten owners are significantly larger than the
remaining 145 private owners. On average the registered capital of these 145 private
owners is 1.4 billion yuan, which is about 1% of SAIC's registered capital.


                                   Table 4: Owners of Shanghai Automobile

                                     SAIC    State Owners        Anbang,                   Other
                                                                VW, and GM            Private Owners
             # of Owners               1          60                 10                    145
             Firms per Owner          586         423               19.4                   24.1
             SAIC Joint Ventures      360         173                57                    157
             Capital per Owner        169         193               10.9                   1.4

  Note: Shanghai Automobile is defined as collection of companies where SAIC owns at least a 10%
  equity share. State owners, Anbang, VW, GM, and other private owners own at least one company
  in Shanghai Automobile. Anbang, GM, and VW refer to the ultimate private owners (10 in total) of
  Anbang, Shanghai-GM and Shanghai-VW. Capital is registered capital owned by each ultimate owner
  in billion yuan.




         Remember that East Hope's family has joint ventures with a number of private own-
ers that are themselves even smaller than the East Hope Group. The same is true for the
private owners directly connected to SAIC. In this case, the registration data indicates
the 145 private owners directly connected to SAIC (excluding the owners of Anbang,
VW, and GM) also operate joint ventures with 817 private owners. These owners are
significantly smaller, with an average of 8.6 firms and total registered capital of 0.24
billion yuan. Because these owners are connected to SAIC through their joint ventures
with the 145 private owners with direct ties with SAIC, we will say that these 817 private
owners are "indirectly connected" with a state owner (SAIC).10
         An example of an owner indirectly connected to SAIC is an entrepreneur (whom we
call Mr. X) who established a car dealership in Yantai (Shangdong Province) in 2010.

     9
         Two of these owners are obviously GM and VW.
 10
         The 817 private owners do not have joint ventures with other state owners.
                                      CONNECTED PRIVATE OWNERS                            13


This company was a joint venture with two private owners with joint ventures with
SAIC. Before 2010 Mr. X's only company was a car dealership in Hunan Province but
after creating his Yantai company, Mr. X created 23 new car dealerships in Guizhou,
Hebei, Jiangsu, Shanghai and Heilongjiang.11 By 2019, Mr. X owned 26 companies with
a registered capital of 134 million Yuan. This evidence is only suggestive but at least
the timing suggests that the indirect ties Mr. X formed with in 2010 when he set up
the car dealership in Yantai may have been an important factor behind the expansion
of his business. In this sense, the private owners directly connected to SAIC were Mr.
X's connected investors that enabled him to grow beyond his original car dealership in
Hunan, in the same way that SAIC was the connected investor for Chery that made it
possible for the company to get the critical license.
      We take three messages from these cases. The first message is the prevalence of
equity links with multiple owners in SAIC and the East Hope Group. SAIC has joint
ventures with 60 state owners and 155 private owners; the East Hope Group has joint
ventures with 15 state owners and 11 private owners.
      Second, there is a clear hierarchy of owners in terms of the size of the owners and
the number of connections with other owners. At the very top are state owners that are
the key connected investor for many private owners. These state owners are large and
undertake investments with a large number of private owners such as East Hope's fam-
ily. These private owners form the next tier of owners and are themselves the connected
investors for other private owners such as Mr. X in the case of SAIC. Compared to their
state-owned investors, these private owners are smaller and are connected to smaller
number of private owners. The next tier after that are owners such as Mr. X that are
even smaller.
      Third, connected investors have equity ties in only a subset of the businesses of their
partners. State owners in the East Hope Group are involved in 15 of the 236 companies
in East Hope. SAIC has equity stakes in 57 of the 194 companies in Anbang, VW, and
GM. Among the other private owners directly tied to SAIC, the state giant has equity in
157 of the almost 3,500 companies of these owners. Of course the companies connected
investors have invested in could be the larger ones. In the next section, we will show this
evidence for all connected owners in China.
 11
      Mr. X also started a car parts manufacturer after 2010.
14                                 BAI, HSIEH, SONG, WANG



4.     Connected State and Private Owners

In this section we show that the ownership links between state and private owners
documented in the case studies of the East Hope Group and SAIC hold more generally
across all ultimate owners in the Chinese economy. We will use the following defini-
tions:

     · Owners: Ultimate owners of a firm. Owners can be state or private, where private
       are either individuals, foreign legal persons, or collective owners.

     · Owner's Capital: Sum of registered capital of all the firms the owner has an equity
       stake in weighted by the owner's equity share in each firm.

     · "Directly Connected" Private Owners: Private owners with joint ventures with
       state owners such as East Hope's family in the case of the East Hope Group.

     · "Indirectly Connected" Private Owners: Private owners whose only connection
       with a state owner is through a joint venture with another private owner. Mr. X in
       the case of SAIC is an indirectly connected private owner.

     · "Distance" to the State: The minimum number of other private owners between
       the private owner and the state. The distance of owner i is di = minj O(i) dj + 1
       where O(i) represents the set of owners directly connected to owner i. Distance
       = 1 for directly connected private owners such as East Hope's family. Mr. X's
       distance from the state is 2 because his tie with SAIC is only through the two
       private owners (with distance = 1) with joint ventures with SAIC.

     · "Downward" Connections and Connected Investor: Consider two connected own-
       ers A and B that have a joint venture together. If owner B is more distant from the
       state than owner A, then owner A has a "downward" connection with owner B.
       Owner A is also owner B's connected investor.

We summarize the ownership links between state and private owners as six key facts.


Fact 1: Large Owners are "Connected"
                                     CONNECTED PRIVATE OWNERS                                             15



                    Table 5: Connected Owners Among Top Owners, 2019

                                      Top 100         Top 1,000         Top 10,000         Top 100,000
   # State Owners                        63              458              2,438               6,826
      # Connected                         63              452               2,305              5,243
   # Private Owners                      37              542              7,562              93,174
      # Directly Connected                31              358               3,466              17,236
      # Indirectly Connected               3               73               1,953              37,360

  Note: Table shows number of top state and private owners among each group of top owners, where
  the size of an owner is measured by the sum of its registered capital in all the firms it owns. Connected
  state owners have joint ventures with a private owner. Directly connected private owners have joint
  ventures with a state owner. Indirectly connected private owner have a joint venture with another
  private owner that has a connection with a state owner.




            Figure 2: State Owners with JVs with Private Owners by Size, 2019




                            Registered Capital of State Owner (Percentile)

  Note: Figure shows share of state owners in 2019 that have joint ventures with private owners by
  percentiles of total registered capital of the state owner.




   Table 5 shows the number of connected owners among the top 100 owners ranked
by total registered capital in 2019. Every single one of 63 state owners among the top 100
16                                BAI, HSIEH, SONG, WANG



owners have joint ventures with private owners. Among the 37 private owners among
the top 100, 31 are directly connected to state owners and 3 are indirectly connected.
This fact suggests that the distinction between state and private sectors in China is
blurry for the very largest owners. Large private owners are deeply connected to the
state and large state owners have deep ties with private owners.
     Table 5 also shows that the prevalence of these ties falls among smaller owners.
Among the 93 thousand largest private owners in 2019, 17 thousand are directly con-
nected and 37 thousand are indirectly connected to state owners. Figure 2 focuses
on state owners and shows the share of state owners with joint ventures with private
owners as a function of the registered capital (in percentiles) of the state owner in 2019.
Less than 20% of the bottom half of state owners have joint ventures with private owners
but more than 60% of state owners among the top 10% of state owners are connected
with private owners.

Fact 2: A Private Owner's Position in the Hierarchy of Connected Owners Depends on
Distance to the State

     Figure 3 shows the importance of distance to the state for private owners in terms
of the size of the private owner and the number of downward connections it has with
other owners. The left panel shows total registered capital of connected private owners
(relative to unconnected private owners) as a function of the owner's distance to the
state. Private owners directly connected to state owners (distance = 1) are around 200
times larger than unconnected private owners. The gap in registered capital falls as
the distance of the owner from the state gets larger. The right panel shows that private
owners closer to the state also have more downward connections with other private
owners. Private owners directly connected with the state have on average joint ventures
with more than 3 other private owners, while owners five steps away from state owners
have on average only one downward link.
     Figure 4 shows the average capital productivity of firms owned by a private owner is
also related to her distance to the state. By merging the 2013 firm registration records
with the 2013 Chinese Annual Industrial Survey, we can calculate the average capital
productivity of a private owner if at least one firm in the survey is owned by her. The
results shows that capital productivity of firms owned by the directly connected pri-
                                  CONNECTED PRIVATE OWNERS                                       17



         Figure 3: Capital and Downward Connections of Private Owners, 2019

      Registered Capital per Owner                              Downward Connections per Owner




                                        Distance to State Owners

  Note: Left panel shows the ratio of the average registered capital of connected private owners
  to the average registered capital of unconnected private owners by distance to the state (dashed
  lines represent 95% confidence intervals). Right panel shows the average number of downward
  connections of connected private owners by distance to the state.



vate owners are on average 40% lower than those firms owned by unconnected private
owners. The gap falls as the distance of the private owner from the state gets larger.

Fact 3: Connected Investors Are Not Controlling Shareholders

   We now show the share of the investment by an owner's connected investors in the
total registered capital of the owner. Figure 5 shows the investment of the connected
investors as a share of its partner's investment in the joint venture only (left panel). The
connected investor typically owns 50% of the joint venture. The right panel shows the
investment of the connected investor as a share of the total registered capital of its part-
ner, taking into account all the businesses of the partner. For private owners directly
tied to the state (distance = 1), this share is only about 20%. For private owners more
distant from the state, the share of the upward owner rarely exceeds 40%. So a private
owner that takes on connected investors is typically still the controlling shareholder of
her businesses.
18                                   BAI, HSIEH, SONG, WANG



                   Figure 4: Capital Productivity of Private Owners, 2013




                                     Distance to State Owners

  Note: Figure shows the average Y/K ratio (in log term) of firms owned by a connected private owner
  compared with firms owned by unconnected private owners by distance to the state (dashed lines
  represent 95% confidence intervals).




Fact 4: More Private Owners Have Become Connected


     The number of private owners directly connected to state owners is the product of
the number of state owners that undertake investments with private owners and the
number of private owners each state owner invests in. The former is shown in the left
panel in Figure 6 and the latter in the right panel. The left panel shows that the fraction
of state owners that invest in joint ventures with private owners increased from 12% in
2000 to 25% in 2019. The right panel shows that, conditional on investing with a private
owner, the average state owner is connected with 6 private owners in 2000. This number
increases to more than 15 in 2019.
     The product of the number of state owners connected to private owners (left panel
in Figure 6) and the average number of downward connections per state owner (right
panel in Figure 6) is the number of private owners directly connected with state owners.
The right panel in figure 7 shows that the number of private owners that have joint
                                  CONNECTED PRIVATE OWNERS                                        19



        Figure 5: Share of Connected Investors in Private Owner's Capital, 2019

            Joint Ventures Only                                                All Businesses




                                        Distance to State Owners

  Note: Left panel shows the equity share of the connected investor in the joint venture with its
  downward owner. Right panel shows the ratio of the registered capital of the joint ventures owned
  by the connected investor to total registration capital of the downward owner. For two connected
  owners, the connected investor is closer to the state compared to the downward owner.



ventures with state owners (distance = 1) increases a five -fold from 2000 to 2019 from
20 thousand to more than one hundred thousand. The right panel also shows that the
number of private owners indirectly connected to the state also increased dramatically.
This effect is particularly dramatic for owners very distant from the state. The number
of owners with distance  6 increased from around 5 thousand in 2000 to more than
1.5 million by 2019.
   The huge increase in the number of indirectly connected owners is driven, in a
proximate sense, by the significant increase in the number of private owners directly
connected to the state and by the increase in the number of downward connections
per private owner. The latter is shown in the left panel in Figure 7.

Fact 5: Private Owners Grow Faster After They Become Connected

   Here we show the estimates of "event" studies to measure the effect of becoming
connected on a private owner. Specifically, we estimate the following empirical model
20                                     BAI, HSIEH, SONG, WANG



            Figure 6: Expansion of State Investment in Private Owners, 2000-2019

     % State Owners with JV with Private Owners                      # Downward Connections per State Owner




  Note: Left panel shows the share of state owners with joint ventures with private owners. Right panel
  shows the average number of private owners a state owner has joint ventures with, conditional on
  investing with a private owner.




for the panel of owners between 2004 and 2019:

                                      =15                      =15
             yi,t =  + µi + t +              Directi,t- +             Indirecti,t- +      i,t ,       (1)
                                     =-14                     =-14

where yi,t is a measure of owner i's businesses; µi and t denote owner and year fixed
effects; Directi,t is an indicator variable for an owner that creates a joint venture with
a state owner at t and; Indirecti,t is an indicator variable for an owner that becomes
indirectly connected (distance = 2) to the state at t. The excluded group are private
owners who are never connected to the state during 2004-2019. The coefficients of
interest are  and  , which summarize the values of y in the year  before and after
the "event" (becoming connected). Here, we use 2019 data to infer historical 2004-2018
data and estimate equation (1).
      Figure 8 shows the results for the number of firms owned by an owner (row 1),
number of provinces the owner operates in (row 2), and number of 2-digit industries
the owner operates in (row 3). The first column shows the effect for owners that become
                                  CONNECTED PRIVATE OWNERS                                        21



              Figure 7: Expansion of Connected Private Owners, 2000-2019

  Downward Connections per Owner                                     # Connected Private Owners




                                       Distance to State Owners

  Note: Left panel shows the average number of downward connections per private owner by distance
  to the state from 2000 to 2019. Right panel shows the total number of connected private owners by
  distance to the state from 2000 to 2019.



directly connected to state owners; the second column shows the effect for owners
that become connected to a private owner that is directly connected to the state. The
coefficient estimates and the standard errors are shown in red; the black dashed line
fits and extrapolates the pre-trend.
   Figure 8 delivers three messages. First, there is clearly a pre-trend in all the outcome
variables for owners that become connected. We interpret this as saying that owners
that were growing quickly are more likely to become connected. Second, there is a
clear change in the trend for all three outcomes once the owner becomes connected.
Third, the magnitude of the change in the trend is larger for owners that become directly
connected compared to owners that become indirectly connected.


Fact 6: State-Connected Private Owners Account For A Large Part of Total Private
Owner Growth


   A central fact about China's growth is the decline in the size of the state sector and
the expansion of the private sector. Table 6 (column 1) shows that, in the registration
22                                    BAI, HSIEH, SONG, WANG



              Figure 8: Effect of Becoming "Connected" for Private Owners

          Directly Connected                                            Indirectly Connected
                                                  # of Firms




                                                # of Provinces




                                           # of 2-Digit Industries




 Note: Figure plots the average # of firms (row 1), provinces (row 2), and 2-digit industries (row 2) of
 owners that become connected to state owners (column 1) or to private owners that are themselves
 connected to state owners (column 2) before and after the owner became connected. x-axis is
 number of years relative to the year the owner became connected (year 0).
                                       CONNECTED PRIVATE OWNERS                                           23


data, the share of private owners in total registered capital increased by 14.4 percentage
points between 2000 and 2019.12 Here we document that the growth of private owners
is mostly due to the expansion of state-connected private owners. The share of private
owners directly connected to state owners increased from 10.3% in 2000 to 16.7% by
2019. Meanwhile, the share of private owners indirectly connected to state owners rose
from 5.6% in 2000 to 18.7% by 2019. The share of all connected private owners, in-
cluding directly and indirectly connected owners, increased by 19.5 percentage points
between 2000 and 2019. Note that the share of all private owners shown in the first
column increased by only 14.4 percentage points during this period. In other words,
the share of unconnected private owners dropped by 5.1%.
       At the same time, the share of state owners has declined, even among the state
owners that have invested in private owners. The last column in Table 6 shows that
the registered capital share of connected state owners fell by 12.2 percentage points
between 2000 and 2019. Of course this does not say that connected state owners have
shrunk in absolute terms. It is just that the growth of the private owners that state
owners have enabled is much larger than the growth of the state owners that facilitated
this process in the first place.


             Table 6: Share of Connected Owners in Registered Capital, 2000-2019

                                          Private Owners                              Connected State
                   All Private    Directly Connected     Indirectly Connected            Owners
         2000        64.2%               10.3%                     5.6%                    33.0%
         2010        70.6%               13.6%                     11.3%                   28.0%
         2019        78.6%               16.7%                     18.7%                   20.8%

  Note: Private Owners are defined as individuals, collective owners, and foreign legal persons. Directly
  connected private owners have joint ventures with state owners. Indirectly connected private
  owners are linked to the state through another private owner. All private includes unconnected and
  connected private owners. Connected state owners have joint ventures with private owners.




       There are two limitations of the numbers shown in Table 6. First, we infer the his-
torical (2000 and 2010) registered capital share of private owners using the most recent
registration data (2013). This is inaccurate if ownership links and registered capital of a

  12
       Private owners are defined as private individuals, foreign legal persons, and collective owners.
24                               BAI, HSIEH, SONG, WANG



given owner changes over time. For example, Chery and East Hope Aluminum bought
back the equity stakes of state investors. We can gauge the bias due to this by measuring
the share of connected owners in the 2013 registration data and comparing this to
the share inferred using the 2019 registration data (see Table A.III in the appendix).
The share of connected private owners in 2013 is 28.2% (13.3% for directly connected
and 14.9% for indirectly connected) in the 2013 registration data and 25.2% (14.1% for
directly connected and 11.1% for indirectly connected) inferred from the 2019 regis-
tration data. Using inferred historical registration data might understates the share
of connected owners in the past so it is likely that the change the share of connected
owners in Table 6 overstates the growth in the importance of connected private owners.
Nevertheless, our main findings remain robust. Using the actual registration data in
2013, we still find a 7-percentage-point increase in the asset share of connected private
owners between 2013 and 2019.
     Second, registration capital may not be a good measure of the economic importance
of connected owners. We can gauge this by measuring the share of connected owners
in the Industrial Firm Survey in 2004 and 2013. In this data, the sales share of the
industrial firms owned by connected private owners increased from 21.9% in 2004 to
33.5% in 2013. The corresponding change in the registration capital share of the same
industrial firms is from 22.6% in 2004 to 36.9% in 2013. The percentage point increase
in sales share of industrial firms of connected private owners is just slightly less than
the increase in the share of the same firms in registered capital (11.7 percentage point
increase in the sales share vs. a 14.2 percentage point increase in the registered capital
share).




5.    A Model of Connected Investors

In this section, we build a simple model to highlight the mechanisms that are behind
the stylized facts we documented in the previous section. There are two key features of
the model. The first is the idea that connected investor allows a private owner to grow.
The second is that a private owner that becomes connected also has the ability to pro-
vide assistance to other private owners and thus undertakes joint ventures with other
                                   CONNECTED PRIVATE OWNERS                                           25


smaller owners. This second feature of the model is key in "explaining" the hierarchy of
connected owners see in the data.



5.1.     Model Economy

Consider an economy with private owners indexed by i. Revenues Yi of a firm owned
by owner i is:


                                        Yi = (1 -  + i )Ai .

Here Ai represents owner i's productivity,  denotes the frictions faced by all private
owners, and i is a reduced form representation of the benefits owner i gets from her
connections to the state. For example,  captures the benefit to Chery provided by
Shanghai Automobile in Chery's early years. We further assume an owner can own mul-
                                                                
                                                        -1                  
tiple firms and the cost of owning m firms is                m -1 , where   -1   > 1. Total revenues
of owner i is therefore:


                                  Y i = mi Yi = (1 -  + i )  Ai .                                    (2)

Total revenues depends on the owner's TFP Ai and the benefits she gets from being
connected i .13
       We make four key assumptions. First, we assume i > 0 for private owners that
become connected to state owners (and zero otherwise). We further assume that the
magnitude of this benefit is only a function of the owner's distance from the state d and
decreases with the owner's distance from the state. That is, i = d where the subscript
d denotes owner i's distance from the state and d is decreasing in distance from the
state d.
       Second, an owner chooses the distance at which they are connected to the state
depending on the benefit and costs of becoming connected. This choice of distance
then determines the benefits they get from being connected. It is easy to see from
equation (2) that higher TFP owners derive more benefits from being closer to the state.

  13
   We can generalize the model by introducing capital and labor and the associated resource
                                                           -
misallocation. For example, consider Yi = (1 -  + i )Ai L1
                                                         i   with a labor wedge iL . Our main results are
robust to such extension.
26                                BAI, HSIEH, SONG, WANG



Therefore, if all owners face the same cost of becoming connected at a given distance,
higher TFP owners will sort into closer connections to the state.
     Third, the cost of a connection is determined endogenously by the number of own-
ers that choose to become connected and the number of connected investors providing
these connections. Specifically, the marginal cost of a connection at distance d is given
by

                                                      - 1
                                                Nd
                                M Cd =                      ,                         (3)
                                               Nd-1
                     Nd
where  > 1 and      Nd-1   is the ratio of the number of owners that choose to become
connected at distance d to the number of owners at distance d - 1 providing these con-
nections. We assume that connected investors charge a price on each downward con-
nection and there is perfect competition among connected investors at each distance d.
Therefore, the price for downward connection is equal to the marginal cost in Equation
(3). Moreover, all owners at the same distance from the state provide connections to
the same number of downstream owners, as assumed in Equation (3). The marginal
cost of a connection is increasing in the number of owners that choose to become
connected and decreasing in the number of owners that provide these connections,
with an elasticity  - 1 > 0.
     The last two assumptions generate endogenous sorting of owners by their TFP. High
TFP owners benefit more from closer connections with the state. The cost of such con-
nections rise as more owners sort into these connections. In equilibrium, connections
that provide more value will have more owners choosing to have these connections,
and the cost of these connections will be correspondingly higher.
     Fourth, once a private owners becomes connected, she can also provide benefits to
other owners. The gain to an owner from being connected at distance d is thus the sum
of her revenues plus the net payment she receives from her downward owners minus
the cost she pays to her connected investor:
                               CONNECTED PRIVATE OWNERS                                   27




                              U (d|Ai ) = (1 -  + d ) Ai
                                                                
                                                     Nd+1
                                       + ( - 1)                                           (4)
                                                      Nd
                                                      -1
                                               Nd
                                       -                    .
                                              Nd-1

The first term is owner i's revenues from connecting at distance d; the second term is
the net gain to owner i from being the connected investor itself to other private owners;
the third term is the price owner i pays to her strategic investor (at distance d - 1).




5.2.    Equilibrium

We assume private owners choose d to maximize U (d|Ai ) defined by equation (4) taking
as given the number of owners at each distance Nd , where the latter is determined in
equilibrium by the number of owners that sort into each distance d. The maximum
                                    
distance d and the cutoff TFP Ad at this distance are defined by:

                                                     - 1
                                              Nd                            
              (1 -  + d ) Ad           -                   = (1 -  ) Ad        ,
                                             Nd -1
                                                                                   
where no owner is connected at distance > d and owners with TFP Ai < Ad choose
                                                     
to be unconnected. For owners with TFP Ai  Ad , the cutoff TFP for a connection at
distance d < d is defined by U (d|Ad ) = U (d + 1|Ad ) where all owners with TFP Ai  Ad
sort into connections closer to the state (distance  d) and owners with TFP Ai < Ad
          
(and  Ad ) choose to be connected at distances more distant from the state (distance
> d).
   To illustrate the intuition behind the equilibrium, consider a simplified version of
the model where only owners directly connected to the state receive benefits. That is
1 > 0 and d = 0  d > 1. In this case, connected private owners do not provide
benefits to other private owners so Nd = 0 for d > 1. If we further assume that Ai
follows a Pareto distribution (say with scale parameter 1 and shape parameter k ) the
number of private owners that are connected to the state N1 is given by:
28                                 BAI, HSIEH, SONG, WANG




                                                Np
                                        N1 =
                                               (A1 )k

where Np is the total number of private owners and A1 is the cutoff productivity such
that firms with Ai  A1 choose to become connected. Since the net gain from a con-
nection is zero for the owner with the cutoff productivity A1 , this cutoff is given by:

                                                                      1
                                                             -1    +k(-1)
                      1                                 Np
                    A =                                                     .
                           (1 -  + 1 ) - (1 -  )        N0

     We highlight two features of this equilibrium. First, an increase in the value of being
connected 1 increases the number of connected owners. The intuition here is that
more owners choose to become connected when the benefits of being connected is
higher. As more owners choose to become connected, this raises the marginal cost of
a connection. In equilibrium, the increase in the marginal benefit of a connection of
the owner with the cutoff productivity is exactly equal to the (higher) marginal cost of a
connection.
     Second, an increase in the number of agents providing the connection N0 (in this
case state owners) also raises the number of connected private owners. In this case,
more agents providing connections lowers the marginal cost of a connection, prompt-
ing more owners to choose to become connected with the state. Here again, the marginal
cost of a connection increases as more downstream owners choose to become con-
nected. The new equilibrium then is when there is enough entry into the "connected"
sector such that the marginal benefit of a connection of the owners with the cutoff
productivity is equal to the marginal cost.
     Of course, an important aspect of the connections we see in China is that private
owners also provide connections to other private owners. There is no closed form
expression for the equilibrium when this is the case, but the intuition is similar to the
simple model. The number of connections a given private owner has depends on the
benefits she provides to her partners. More agents providing connections lowers the
marginal cost of providing a connection to downstream owners, which also increases
the number of downstream owners that become connected. The expansion in the num-
ber of connected owners (Fact 4) then comes from the increase in  and the propagation
                                    CONNECTED PRIVATE OWNERS                                            29


of its effect by increasing the number of connected owners that become the connected
investor for other owners.
       More generally, higher  increases the benefit from becoming connected, leading to
more entry into the connected sector. In turn, more entry increases the marginal cost
of a connection. In the data, the average number of downward connections falls with
distance (Fact 2). This fact indicates that a close connection with the state provides
more benefits than a connection further away from the state. The data also indicates
that the average number of downward connections has increased over time (Fact 4). In
the model, this fact tells us that the value of a connection with the state has increased
over time. In the next section, we will try to measure empirically how much  must
differ across d and over time to "explain" the two facts we observe in the data.
       We summarize the equilibrium in four propositions.14
                                                                       
Proposition 1. There is a unique distance d and TFP Ad such that there are owners
connected with each distance d  [1, d ], no owner is connected with distance d > d and
                                                                                  
all owners with Ai  Ad are connected and all owners with Ai < Ad are not connected.

High TFP owners are connected while low TFP owners are not. This is consistent with
our empirical finding under Fact 1 that connected owners are larger compared to un-
connected owners.


Proposition 2. Among the set of private owners that are connected, owners with Ai 
                                                                 
[Ad , Ad-1 ) choose to connect at distance d where {Ad }d
                                                        d=0 is a strictly decreasing sequence
in d.

Among the set of connected owners, higher TFP owners sort into connections that are
closer to the state. The positive sorting comes from the assumption that connections
closer to the state delivers greater benefits and that this gain is increasing in Ai . This is
consistent with our empirical finding that owners closer to the state are larger (Fact 2).

                                                                                        Nd+1
Proposition 3. The average number of downward connections per owner                      Nd    is decreas-
ing in distance from the state for d  [0, d - 1].
  14
   Full proofs are in Appendix D. In the data only a subset of private owners are connected with the state.
We therefore focus on an equilibrium where this condition holds. Appendix D also states the conditions
under which this is the case.
30                               BAI, HSIEH, SONG, WANG



The result comes from the assumption that the benefit from connecting with the state
is decreasing in the distance to the state and the cost of providing a connection is
convex in the number of connections. Owners more distant from the state provide
less benefits to its downstream partners and thus choose to provide fewer connections.
This is consistent with the fact that the average number of connections is decreasing in
distance from state (Fact 2).



Proposition 4. A non-decreasing change in d increases: (i) the number of connected
owners; (ii) the maximum distance from the state d ; (iii) the average number of down-
ward connections per owner for some d; and (iv) aggregate output.

This result is consistent with the observed increase in the average number of connec-
tions per owner, maximum distance of a connected owner from a state, and total num-
ber of connected owners (Fact 4). It is also consistent with the increase in the share of
connected owners in the economy as a whole (Fact 6). The intuition is straightforward.
Increasing the benefits from connecting makes it profitable for some owners to increase
the number of downward connections. More owners thus choose to become connected
and the share of the connected owners in the economy increases both because there are
more connected owners and because connected owners grow.




5.3.    Model Calibration

The model is summarized by three forcing variables and four parameters. The forcing
variables are the benefits provided by the connected investor d and the number and
TFP distribution of private owners. The four parameters are the level and convexity of
the cost of providing connections,  and , the span of control parameter of the owners
, and the friction faced by the private owners  . In this section we back out the values
of these variables and parameters.
     We proceed as follows. First, we infer  from the difference in the average size of
firms owned by directly connected private owners and firms owned by unconnected
private owners. Second, we take the number of private owners from the data and back
out the distribution of TFP of firms owned by private owners from the empirical dis-
                                     CONNECTED PRIVATE OWNERS                                             31


tribution of measured firm TFP in the data.15 Third, the remaining parameters and
the distribution of TFP of private owners collectively determine the number of owners
at each distance from the state and the average firm size and total size of the private
owner.

                                     Table 7: Model Parameters

                    Parameter     Description                           Value     S.D.

                                  Frictions Faced by Private Owners     0.9       ­
                                  Owner Span of Control                 2.32      0.15
                                  Level of Connection Cost              0.0158    0.0051
                                  Convexity of Connection Cost          2.50      0.06




       We use the 2000, 2010 and 2019 data on the number of connected owners, average
registered capital of firm and average registered capital of owner at each distance from
the state to back out the benefits from taking on a connected owner d in 2000, 2010
and 2019, respectively, and the parameters ,  and .16 The resulting estimates of
the parameters are shown in Table 7. The estimate of  is 2.32 which implies that the
elasticity of an owner's size with respect to TFP is about 2.3. The convexity of the cost of
establishing downward connection  is 2.5, which implies that the cost of establishing
connections rises rapidly with the number of connections.  = 2.5 implies that average
cost of downward connections increases 11-fold if the owner increases her downward
connections from 1 to 5. Without the hierarchy, special deals would only benefit a very
small group of directly connected private owners.
       In the estimation, we calibrate d to match exactly Nd in the data. Figure 9 shows
d for each distance d in 2000, 2010 and 2019 inferred from this procedure. In all years,
 falls with distance from the state, which says that private owners that are closer to
the state get larger benefits. This is what our procedure infers to match the fact that
  15
      Following Hsieh and Klenow (2009), we measure firm TFP as the residual of firm value-added after
controlling for the average product of labor and capital of the firm. We can only do this for firms in the
industrial survey (remember we only observe registered capital in the registration records) so we estimate
firm TFP from the 2013 industrial survey. To simplify the calibration, we calculate the average of firm TFP
of owners for each distance d and fit a Pareto distribution to average firm TFP by distance from the state d.
This yields a Pareto shape parameter of 272. See Appendix E for more details.
   16
      See Appendix E for the fit of the model in each year.
32                                   BAI, HSIEH, SONG, WANG



                   Figure 9: Calibrated Benefit from Connected Owners




  Note: Figure plots benefit from a connected owner d in 2019, 2010, and 2000.




connected owners closer to the state have more downward connections. The figure
also shows that the distribution of  shifts to the right over time. This is what we in-
fer to match the increase in the the number of connected owners and the number of
downward connections per owner from 2000 to 2019.



5.4.   Effect of Connected Investors

Aggregate output from private owners in the model is given by:


                                                  d
                       Aggregate Output =              (1 -  + d )        Ai
                                                 d=1                 id


                                             +                  (1 -  ) Ai.
                                                 i  not connected


The first term is aggregate output of connected private owners; the second term is
aggregate output from unconnected private owners.
                                    CONNECTED PRIVATE OWNERS                                         33


       There are therefore two sources of growth in the model. The first is the growth in
the number of private owners and the shift in the distribution of TFP of these owners,
holding the distribution of  fixed. The second is the rightward shift in the distribution
of  shown in Figure 9, which shows up as an increase in the number of connected
owners Nd . We now measure how much the rightward shift in  explains economic
growth. To do this, we change  while holding fixed the number of private owners and
the TFP distribution of these owners.17

          Table 8: Aggregate Output Growth From Connected Investors, 2000-2019


                                                    2000-2019      2000-2010     2010-2019
            Output Growth in Data (% per year)        10.2%          11.6%          8.6%

            Output Growth in Model (% per year):
              d , d  1                                 4.2%          3.4%           5.1%
              d , d = 1 only                           2.4%          2.4%           2.3%
              d , d  2 only                            1.9%          1.1%           2.8%

            Output Growth in Model (% per year):
              Directly Connected Owners                2.5%          2.4%           2.5%
              Indirectly Connected Owners              2.4%          1.5%           3.4%

  Note: Output growth in data is annual GDP growth from private owners calculated from the share
  of private owners in Table 2 and real GDP growth from 2000-2010 and 2010-2019 from the China
  Statistical Yearbook (2019) and China's Statistical Communique on the 2019 National Economic and
  Social Development. Output growth from "connected" private owners is average annual GDP growth
  in the model due to the change in  we infer between 2000 and 2019.




       The results are shown in Table 8. The first row shows the growth rate of private sector
GDP in the data. The second row shows the effect of the change in  and the resulting
expansion in the size of the connected sector on aggregate output growth in the model.
From 2000-2019, the expansion of the connected sector increased the aggregate growth
rate by an average of 4.2% per year, so almost half of the growth of the private sector
  17
     We follow the standard approach of chaining. For example, we compute growth between 2000 and
2010 allowing  to change from 2000 to 2010 values but holding the other forcing variables at their 2000
values. Then we compute growth between 2000 and 2010 by holding the other forcing variables at their
2010 values and allowing  to change from 2010 to 2000 values. We take the average of these two estimates
of growth from changing  . We do the same for 2010-2019 and cumulate the growth to arrive at an estimate
from 2000-2019.
34                                BAI, HSIEH, SONG, WANG



in the data. The expansion of the connected sector in the first decade of the period
contributed less to growth, namely 3.4% per year. The expansion of the connected
sector in the most recent decade had a larger effect on aggregate growth, raising output
growth by an average 5.1% per year.
     The message then is that, when filtered through the lens of our model, the observed
expansion of the connected sector in China over the last two decades had a substantial
effect on growth, explaining almost half of the growth in the data. In addition, the effect
of the expansion of the connected sector is larger in the most recent decade compared
to 2000-2010.
     The next two rows in Table 8 decomposes the effect to the increase in benefits from
state owners to private owners directly connected to the state vs. the increase in ben-
efits that private owners bestow on their partners. Here, we first calculate the effect
of only changing  for d = 1 and holding  for all other distances d unchanged. That
is, we only change the benefit that private owners directly connected to the state get.
The third row shows that the effect of this exercise. The change in 1 between 2000 and
2010 contributes 2/3 of the growth effect while the change in 1 between 2010 and 2019
contribute almost half of the growth effect.
     This result may seem surprising given that the change in the benefit from a direct
connection with a state owner 1 is smaller than the change of  for other distances (see
Figure 9). To understand why, it is useful to introduce the idea of the multiplier effect of
an additional connected owner. Specifically, we define the "multiplier" as the effect of
one additional owner at distance d on the total number of connected owners, holding
fixed the average number of downward connections per owner:
                                                                 
                                               d       i-1 N     
                                                            j +1
                          Multiplierd = 1 +                       .
                                                            Nj 
                                              i=d+1    j =d

Figure 10 shows the multiplier effect of an additional owner implied by the average
number of downward connections in the data shown in Figure 7. It says that if one
private owner establishes a joint venture with a state owner in 2019 (distance = 1), the
multiplier effect of this new connection is that 50 additional private owners become
"connected." The reason the multiplier is this large is because of the hierarchy of own-
ers we document. The newly connected private owner establishes joint ventures with
                                  CONNECTED PRIVATE OWNERS                                        35


only 3 to 4 additional private owners. The multiplier comes from the fact that these
private owners in turn will also have joint ventures themselves with additional private
owners, and so on.


                     Figure 10: Multiplier by Distance to State Owners




                                      Distance to State Owners

  Note: This figure shows how many more owners would become connected by adding one more
  owner at distance d, taking as given the number of downward connections per owner shown in Figure
  7.




   Figure 10 shows that the multiplier at distance 1 is much larger than those for other
distances, which explains why the change in 1 has relatively larger growth effect. The
figure also shows that the multiplier at distance 1 through 5 is larger in 2019 compared
to previous years. The reason is because, as seen in Figure 7, the average number of
downward connections of connected private owners is higher in 2019 compared to
previous years so the "multiplier" effect of an additional connection in 2019 is larger
than in 2010 or 2000.
   In the model, the increase in the average downward connections of private owners
comes from the change in  for connected private owners. The fourth row of Table
8 therefore holds 1 constant and changes  for all the other distances d  2. That
36                               BAI, HSIEH, SONG, WANG



is, we change the "benefits" that connected private owners provide to other private
owners, while holding constant the benefits that state owners provide to private owners
directly connected to the state. We see that a large part of the higher growth from
the expansion of the connected sector in 2010-2019 compared to 2000-2010 is coming
from the increase in the benefits that private owners provide to other private owners.
Remember however that this counterfactual holds 1 constant, and an important effect
comes from the fact that the same increase in 1 has a larger effect when the benefits
provided by private owners also increase.
     The last two rows in Table 8 show the effect of the contribution of the expansion
of private owners directly connected to the state vs. the expansion of private owners
that are only indirectly connected to the state. Obviously both groups of private owners
expand in respond to the rightward shift in  so this decomposition should be thought
as a an examination of the channels via which the change in  affects aggregate output.
The message here is that around 50% of the contribution of connected owners to growth
comes from directly connected owners over this period, although the role of indirectly
connected owners is larger in the last nine years.




6.    Conclusion

In this paper, we use detailed administrative data from the Chinese registration records
to document the importance of "connected" investors. We report two key findings.
First, in recent years there is a hierarchy of private owners with state-owned firms at
the very top of the chain. These state owners hold equity in companies owned by
a large number of private owners. In 2019 there were a hundred thousand private
owners. These owners are the largest private owners and also hold equity in companies
owned by other, smaller, private owners. In turn, these owners are even smaller and
also hold equity in other companies with other owners themselves, and so on. In 2019
this hierarchical chain extends to owners that are more than ten steps away from the
state owners.
     Our second fact is that the magnitude of this hierarchy of connected private own-
ers is a recent phenomena. In 2019 connected private owners account for 35% of all
                               CONNECTED PRIVATE OWNERS                                 37


registered capital in China. In 2000, connected private owners only accounted for at
most 16% of registered capital. The increase in the share of connected private owners
over this time period contributes a significant part of the entire increase in the share
of all private owners in China over the same period. The rise of the connected private
sector is driven by two related facts. First, state owned firms increasingly invest in more
private owners. Second, a typical connected private owners themselves also invest in
more private owners.
   We leave several important questions for future research. First, our estimate of the
change in the share of connected owners over time assumes that a given firm does not
undergo ownership changes. This assumption is obviously not true, and our estimates
using the contemporary registration data in 2013 suggest some bias in the inferred his-
torical data. It may be possible to unearth contemporaneous registration data in earlier
years. When such data is available, we can update our estimates correspondingly.
   Second, we assume that connected owners are those that are tied to state owned
firms and that private owners become "connected" only when they become linked to
state owned firms, directly or indirectly, through equity ties. Of course some of the
private individuals themselves could be the connected investors, and perhaps even
more connected that the state owned firm that they are linked with. We think this is
likely to be true in many cases. It also raises the question why connected individuals
would choose to "share" their equity with official state owners when the latter are less
politically connected. One explanation is that the equity ties with state owned firms
could give the connected owners cover to provide favors to these firms. We do not
currently have a way of identifying such individuals but this is also something that
future research can address.
   Finally, we use a very simple model to show that the expansion in the "span" of
connected investors may have increased growth by 4.2% a year between 2000 and 2019.
This number is obviously tentative, and an important agenda for future research is to
examine the effect of these networks on aggregate productivity with richer models.
38                                 BAI, HSIEH, SONG, WANG



References
Allen, Franklin, Junhui Cai, Xian Gu, Jun "QJ" Qian, Linda H. Zhao, and Wu Zhu, "Ownership
  Network and Firm Growth: What Do Five Million Companies Tell About Chinese Economy,"
  2019.

Bai, Chong-En, Chang-Tai Hsieh, and Zheng Michael Song, "Special Deals with Chinese
  Characteristics," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 2019.

Brandt, Loren, Ruochen Dai, Gueorgui Kambourov, Kjetil Storesletten, and Xiaobo Zhang,
  "Serial Entrepreneurship in China," 2019.

Chandler, Alfred, The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American Business, Harvard
  University Press, 1977.

Dai, Ruochen, Dilip Mookherjee, Kaivan Munshi, and Xiaobo Zhang, "The Community Origins
  of Private Enterprise in China," 2019.

Dunne, Michael, American Wheels, Chinese Roads: The Story of General Motors in China, John P.
  Wiley, 2011.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, "The Industrial Revolution in Services," 2019.

     and Peter J Klenow, "Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India," Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2009, 124 (4), 1403­1448.

Huang, Yasheng, Capitalism with Chinese Characteristics, Cambridge University Press, 2008.

Shi, Xiangyu, Tianyang Xi, Xiaobo Zhang, and Yifan Zhang, ""Moving Umbrella": Identifying
  Collusion Through Bureaucratic Transfers And Investment Flows," 2020.
