                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         TFPR: DISPERSION AND CYCLICALITY

                                       Russell Cooper
                                       Özgen Öztürk

                                     Working Paper 28174
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28174


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2020




There are no financial disclosures to be made. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Russell Cooper and Özgen Öztürk. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
TFPR: Dispersion and Cyclicality
Russell Cooper and Özgen Öztürk
NBER Working Paper No. 28174
December 2020
JEL No. E31,E32,L11

                                        ABSTRACT

This paper studies the determinants of TFPR, a revenue based measure of total factor
productivity. Recent business cycle models are built upon the countercyclical dispersion of
TFPR. But, the distribution of TFPR is endogenous, dependent upon other exogenous shocks and
the endogenous determination of prices. This paper studies the determination the distribution of
TFPR is an overlapping generations model with monopolistic competition and state dependent
pricing. Changes in the mean and the dispersion of a quantity based measure of total factor
productivity, TFPQ, and monetary shocks are analyzed as exogenous variations that influence the
distribution of TFPR. None of these shocks alone can generate countercyclical dispersion in
TFPR and match observed countercyclical dispersion in price changes and countercyclical
movements in the frequency of price changes. Large enough shocks to the dispersion in TFPQ
along with an appropriately responsive monetary policy can match these facts. But the required
monetary feedback does not reproduce the positive correlation between money innovations and
the dispersion in TFPR seen in the data. In this framework, uncertainty per se plays a very
limited role.


Russell Cooper
Department of Economics
European University Institute
Villa La Fonte
Via delle Fontanelle 18
I-50014 San Domenico di Fiesole (FI)
ITALY
and NBER
russellcoop@gmail.com

Özgen Öztürk
European University Institute
Department of Economics
Villa La Fonte
Via delle Fontanelle, 18
San Domenico di Fiesole
Italy
ozgen.ozturk@eui.eu
                               TFPR: Dispersion and Cyclicality
                                                         ¨
                                      Russell Cooper and Ozgen ¨ urk
                                                               Ozt¨

                                                  December 2, 2020


                                                         Abstract
           This paper studies the determinants of TFPR, a revenue based measure of total factor productivity.
       Recent business cycle models are built upon the countercyclical dispersion of TFPR. But, the distribu-
       tion of TFPR is endogenous, dependent upon other exogenous shocks and the endogenous determination
       of prices. This paper studies the determination the distribution of TFPR in an overlapping genera-
       tions model with monopolistic competition and state dependent pricing. Changes in the mean and the
       dispersion of a quantity based measure of total factor productivity, TFPQ, and monetary shocks are
       analyzed as exogenous variations that influence the distribution of TFPR. None of these shocks alone
       can generate countercyclical dispersion in TFPR and match observed countercyclical dispersion in price
       changes and countercyclical movements in the frequency of price changes. Large enough shocks to the
       dispersion in TFPQ along with an appropriately responsive monetary policy can match these facts. But
       the required monetary feedback does not reproduce the positive correlation between money innovations
       and the dispersion in TFPR seen in the data. In this framework, uncertainty per se plays a very limited
       role.



1      Motivation
The dispersion of productivity has been shown to be countercyclical.1 This finding plays a major role in recent
quantitative analyzes of aggregate fluctuations. A prominent example is Bloom (2009) which studies the
effects of uncertainty over the dispersion of productivity on investment activity. Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich,
Eksten, and Terry (2018) go further to document the business cycle implications of countercyclical dispersion
in, inter alia, firm level productivity.2 Bachmann and Bayer (2014) provide complementary evidence from
German data.3 As another leading example, Vavra (2014) provides evidence that price changes are more
dispersed in recessions and the frequency of price adjustment is higher. He argues that these patterns can be
reproduced in a model with variations in the volatility of firm level productivity as these fluctuations induce
some sellers to adjust prices upwards and others to adjust downwards.4
     Discussions  with Edouard Challe, John Haltiwanger, Immo Schott and Jonathan Willis were greatly appreciated.
     Department   of Economics, European University Institute, NBER Research Associate, russellcoop@gmail.com
    Department of Economics, European University Institute, Ozgen.Ozturk@eui.eu
   1 See the evidence and discussion in, for example, Kehrig (2011), Bachmann and Bayer (2014), and Bloom, Floetotto,

Jaimovich, Eksten, and Terry (2018). The evidence is presented as changes in the distribution of total factor productivity
and/or the correlation in the dispersion of total factor productivity with a measure of economic activity.
   2 Here there is an important but distinction between uncertainty and dispersion. Uncertainty refers to an ex ante situation

of not knowing, say, some moment of the distribution of a random variable, such as not knowing the future variance. Bloom,
Floetotto, Jaimovich, Eksten, and Terry (2018) contains both uncertainty and dispersion effects.
   3 They also add to the set of observations the procylicality in the dispersion of investment rates.
   4 His calibration relies upon the same measures of dispersion as Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich, Eksten, and Terry (2018). The

connection between firm specific shocks and the distribution of price changes is highlighted in Golosov and Lucas (2007) as
well.


                                                              1
                                                                                                          1   MOTIVATION


    But, there is a fundamental inconsistency in the above description of evidence and models. It has to do
with the term "productivity". The measured productivity that underlies the evidence is revenue based total
factor productivity, hereafter TFPR. But, the models are built upon dispersion (and uncertainty) effects
from changes in the distribution of a quantity based measure of total factor productivity, hereafter TFPQ.
    The problem is that these are different measures of productivity, both in the data and in theory. The
distinction between these measures of productivity is central to the empirical analysis in Foster, Haltiwanger,
and Syverson (2008).5 The facts presented in Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2008) make clear that:
(i) the distributions of TFPQ and TFPR differ and (ii) the distribution of TFPR is not degenerate. The
first point implies that any model attempting to study both of these distributions needs to rationalize the
difference between TFPR and TFPQ. Further, that model, following the discussion in Hsieh and Klenow
(2009), must explain why the distribution of TFPR is not degenerate.
    The key difference between the distribution of TFPR and the distribution of TFPQ is the distribution of
prices. Thus, understanding the cyclicality of TFPR dispersion requires a model of price determination. With
that in mind, the central question of this paper is: what factors, both in the process of price determination
and shocks, generate the observed countercyclical dispersion in TFPR?
    This question is addressed through a model of state dependent pricing, with heterogenous firms, to
obtain a mapping from the distribution of TFPQ to the distribution of TFPR. In contrast to the flexible
price case, state dependent pricing due to menu costs introduces both extensive and intensive margins of
pricing decisions and thus allows for a variety of factors, both monetary and real, to influence the distribution
of TFPR.
    In our environment, following Hsieh and Klenow (2009), in the absence of frictions, the distribution of
TFPR would be degenerate. Interestingly, price stickiness is sufficient to create a non-degenerate distribution
of TFPR, other types of frictions or wedges are not needed.6 Thus state dependent pricing is a key input
into the economic mechanism determining the distribution of TFPR.
    This paper does not contest the cyclicality of TFPR dispersion. Rather, it studies the determinants of
this cyclicality through the effects of three types of exogenous shocks: (i) variations in the distribution of
TFPQ, (ii) aggregate money shocks and (iii) (both aggregate and idiosyncratic) productivity shocks.7
    The first source of fluctuations seems natural: the dispersion in TFPR is driven by the dispersion in
TFPQ. The second and third types of shocks can also generate changes in the dispersion in TFPR since, in
our framework, the distribution of prices is endogenous.
    The framework for the analysis is an overlapping generations model with monopolistic competition and
sticky prices specified in section 2. Young agents have market power, set prices ex ante and can, at a cost,
change them ex post, once the various shocks specified above along with the menu cost are realized. Old
agents take money earnings from youth as well as monetary policy induced transfers and spend them on a
variety of goods. The analysis is conducted through a stationary rational expectations equilibrium for this
environment.
    One benefit of this model framework is the transparency of the equilibrium characterization as the ex
   5 As in Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2008), suppose the technology at the plant-level is y = Af (l), where y is output,
A is a technology shock, and l is the labor input into a technology f (·). TFPQ is given by A = f y (l)
                                                                                                        while TFPR is pA = f pY
                                                                                                                              (l)
where p is the relative output price.
   6 We are grateful to John Haltiwanger for emphasizing this point to us.
   7 These are leading sources of fluctuations but there are other candidates worth considering. Kehrig (2011) stresses the

distributional implications of entry and exit as well as the distinction between durable and nondurable goods producers. Cooper
and Schott (2013) emphasize the importance of variations in the cost of reallocation as generating aggregate fluctuations as
well as variance in the dispersion of productivity.




                                                               2
                                                                                                        1   MOTIVATION


post pricing decisions of sellers have no dynamic component. That is, the pricing problem is associated with
young agents who set a price ex ante and have an option to pay a cost to adjust their price ex post. In old
age, they are buyers not sellers.8
    A second benefit is that money demand and monetary shocks are an integral part of the environment.
The response of prices and quantities at both the individual and aggregate levels are fully determined
in a stationary rational expectations equilibrium. There is no need to restrict the analysis to one-time
unanticipated shocks.
    Some of the results are quantitative and rely on a particular form of preferences and adjustment costs.9
These are calibrated from the existing literature. Section 3 presents the quantitative model.
    It is natural to think that variations in the dispersion of TFPR, hereafter denoted dispR , is driven by
changes in the dispersion of TFPQ, hereafter denoted dispQ . This is indeed the case, despite the endogenous
component of TFPR due to price setting. That is, variations in the distribution of TFPQ impacts TFPR
dispersion directly and also indirectly through the frequency and magnitude of price adjustment. This
includes the responsive of prices on both the extensive and intensive margins.
    But this does not generate countercyclical dispR . In the model, output is itself positively correlated
with dispQ . In a flexible price model, the increased dispersion of productivity allows for the reallocation
of inputs towards more productive uses and output increases.10 That effect exists also when prices are
sticky. Thus one main finding is that a model economy driven by dispersion shocks to TFPQ fails to capture
the countercyclicality in dispR . To clear, this result is not immediate because of the endogeneity of price
determination.
    As suggested by Vavra (2014), shocks to the dispersion of TFPQ do succeed in matching two prominent
features of pricing: (i) countercyclical dispersion in price changes and (ii) the countercyclical frequency of
price adjustment. This qualitatively matches the data patterns Vavra (2014) uncovers but the model delivers
the counterfactual prediction of procyclical dispR .11
    Note that this seems to contradict the findings of Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich, Eksten, and Terry (2018).
That model relies on a "wait and see" aspect of investment with nonconvex adjustment costs that is not
present in our setting. Thus we focus largely (though see below) on the effects of dispersion rather than
volatility. The findings in Bachmann and Bayer (2014), Berger, Dew-Becker, and Giglio (2020) and Cooper
and Schott (2013) and create considerable doubt that uncertainty dominates volatility effects. This further
motivates our emphasis on pricing as the source of countercyclical dispR .
    Due to price setting behavior, dispR responds to other shocks. Holding fixed the distribution of TFPQ,
money shocks alone can impact the distribution of TFPR through pricing decisions of sellers. In this case,
the money shocks also generate countercyclical dispersion in price changes and in the frequency of price
changes, but the dispersion of TFPR is again procyclical.
    Finally, if fluctuations are driven by (aggregate) shocks to the mean of TFPQ, denoted µQ , then extreme
shocks to the mean of TFPQ will reduce the dispersion in TFPR while increasing output. Interestingly, the
   8 Other  papers in the literature make assumptions that limit the power of state dependent pricing. For example, Christiano,
Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005) invoke a Calvo pricing framework so that adjustment probabilities are exogenous and prices are
indexed to the rate of lagged inflation. A similar approach is taken by Smets and Wouters (2007).
   9 Thus the overlapping generations framework is used here to provide a framework for conducting experiments in a stochastic

equilibrium setting. The results are intended to be qualitative and suggestive for more detailed empirical analyses.
  10 This is sometimes called the Abel-Hartman effect and is discussed by Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich, Eksten, and Terry

(2018) alongside the effects of uncertainty (see their section 5.2.4). These reallocation effects are emphasized in Cooper and
Schott (2013).
  11 The distinction between the dispersion in TFPQ and TFPR is not discussed in Vavra (2014). The analysis does not evaluate

the cyclicality of dispR and considers variation in dispQ along with the mean of TFPQ as sources of fluctuations




                                                              3
                                                                                                                    2   MODEL


same goes for the employment response to the shock: for extreme shocks aggregate employment increases
with aggregate productivity, else it falls.12 But in this setting the frequency of price adjustment is procyclical
and the correlation of output and the dispersion of price changes is very close to zero.
    Throughout these exercises, one theme emerges: there are non-linearities in the response of dispR to
various shocks. Regardless of the source of aggregate fluctuations, dispR is generally lowest for extremely
low and high realizations of the money shock and highest for the average state.
   This suggests that allowing the monetary authority to respond to shocks to either dispQ or µQ shocks
might alter the cyclical patterns. To study this, Section 5.1 adds a monetary feedback rule. Depending on
the feedback rule and the source of the shock, we are able to match all of these moments. In particular, if
fluctuations are driven by dispQ shocks and the monetary authority tightens money growth when dispQ is
high, then the equilibrium displays countercyclical dispersion in TFPR (despite having procyclical dispersion
in TFPQ), countercyclical frequency and dispersion of price changes as well as countercyclical employment
dispersion. A similar finding about the role of monetary policy applies when both dispQ and µQ shocks
are present and are perfectly negatively correlated. However, the monetary feedback, making money shocks
dependent on dispQ , produces a negative correlation between monetary innovations and dispR , contrary to
the data.
    Section 6 looks at two additional properties of the model economy. First, as discussed by Vavra (2014)
as well, there is another link between dispersion and monetary policy. An increase in the dispersion of real
productivity reduces the effectiveness of monetary policy.13 This reflects the fact that following an increase
in dispQ , both the frequency of adjustment and the dispersion of price adjustment increase.
    Second, the model also provides insights into the pricing and output effects of uncertainty, as distinguished
from dispersion shocks. In general, dispersion shocks refer to variations in the ex post distribution of
idiosyncratic or aggregate shocks. The uncertainty effect arises ex ante as agents are uncertain of the future
distribution from which the shocks are drawn.14 In our model, an increase in ex ante uncertainty over the
future distribution of idiosyncratic productivity influences the ex ante price set by sellers. Quantitatively
we find that these effects are tiny.15
    Returning to our motivating question, in the end it does not appear that the endogenous evolution of
the distribution of prices is enough to match the basic facts on pricing and to generate a countercyclical
dispersion in TFPR. While we do succeed in finding setting in which all these moments are matched, this
requires, as argued below, monetary interventions that are quite different from those observed in the data.


2     Model
We study these issues in an infinite horizon overlapping generations model with differentiated products and
market power. Agents live for two periods, youth and old age. Generation t young agents produce and,
when old, these agents consume a basket of goods produced by the next generation of young producers. The
sequence of choices is shown in Figure 1.
   12 This is clearly related to the findings in Gal´
                                                    i (1999) and the literature that followed. Here we link these patterns to price
setting at the plant-level.
   13 There is some additional empirical support for this proposition. Tenreyro and Thwaites (2016) argue that the response of

the economy to monetary (federal funds rate) innovations is considerably stronger in expansions compared to recessions. The
findings reported in Bachmann, Born, Elstner, and Grimme (2019) provide additional evidence linking price setting behavior
to uncertainty.
   14 Under some assumptions, increases in uncertainty reduce economic activity. Bloom (2009) and related papers focus on the

effects of uncertainty on spending on durables, such as firm capital.
   15 This is consistent with Vavra (2014) and Bachmann, Born, Elstner, and Grimme (2019).




                                                                4
2.1       Choice of Old Agents                                                                                            2   MODEL



                                             set p
                                                 ¯         max{W a (·) - F, W n (·)}            Consume CES Bundle
                           t Youth       ex ante                    ex post             t+1         Old Age

                                                     Figure 1: Time Line: Generation t


      Saving occurs through the holding of fiat money. The quantity of fiat money is stochastic, representing
monetary shocks.
      Young producers are distinct in three dimensions. First, they produce a differentiated product. Second,
their output is a stochastic function of their labor input. Finally, they have an idiosyncratic cost of price
adjustment.
      The focus of the analysis is on price setting by sellers. Each young agent freely sets a price ex ante.
After the realization of their idiosyncratic and aggregate shocks, they decide to adjust their price or not.16
Importantly, this ex post decision on readjustment depends on the realization of all shocks. In this way, the
dispersion of the distribution of productivity shocks impacts the frequency of adjustment and thus the real
effects of money shocks.
      As in Lucas (1972), in the absence of price stickiness, there would be a stationary rational expectations
equilibrium in which money was neutral. This is because money transfers are made to the old in proportion
to money holding earned in youth. And, as in that paper, the analysis rests on the coexistence of real
and nominal shocks. But, in our setting the friction of costly price adjustment replaces his assumption of
imperfect information.17


2.1            Choice of Old Agents
                                                                      c1-
Lifetime utility is represented by u(c) - g (n) =                     1-     - g (n). Here c is a CES aggregator given by c =
                      
              i - 1   -1
      i   c                , with  > 1.18 The function g (·) is increasing and convex in hours worked, with 0  n  1.
      When old, agents take their money holdings from income earned in youth and allocate it across goods
                                              
                                        -1    -1
                                   i
to maximize u                  i (c )
                                                     , subject to a budget constraint of        i   ci pi = M where M is their nominal
income and pi is the money price of good i.19
      For these preferences, the demand for good i is given by

                                                                                   p i - M
                                                          ci = d(pi , P, M ) = (      )    .                                       (1)
                                                                                   P     P
                                                                                         1
                                                                                 i 1-   1-
Here P is an aggregate price index defined as P =                            i (p )          . Note that the only shock to demand is
from variations in the stock of money, M : there are no product specific taste shocks common to all agents.
      Let V ( M
              P ) be the value of the solution to the optimization problem of an old agent with nominal income
of M with prices given by P . Given the definition of c,
   16 In this version of the model, these include idiosyncratic shocks to profitability and menu costs and aggregate shocks to

money. Appendix section 8.2 extends the equilibrium to include shocks to the distribution of productivity.
   17 Of course, in his model the real shock was to the fraction of sellers in a particular market while we focus on productivity

shocks.
   18 We normalize the number of young agents and thus products to 1. With the CES assumption, markups are constant.
   19 To simplify the notation, the time subscript is repressed. The money holdings come from income earned in youth as money

is the store of value in this economy. Many other general equilibrium models, such as Dotsey, King, and Wolman (1999), impose
money demand. In Golosov and Lucas (2007), money is in the utility function.




                                                                         5
2.2    Choice of Young Agents                                                                                      2   MODEL



                                                                                                           
                                                      -1    -1                             -1       -1
                     M                    pi  M       
                                                                                  pi       
                                                                                                         M
                  V ( ) = u              ( )-                      = u           ( )-                                     (2)
                     P              i
                                          P   P                              i
                                                                                  P                      P

                                                                                                          u (c)
with P given above. From this, the marginal value of nominal income is given by VM =                       P .
      At this point, these are generic demands and values for an old age given nominal income and prices. We
will take this structure and use it to study the choices of young agents in the OG framework, summarizing
the utility they obtain when old through V ( M
                                             P ).



2.2      Choice of Young Agents
We start with the pricing decisions of generation t young agents. When young agents choose the price of
their product ex ante, they take into account the option, at a fixed cost, of adjusting their price ex post. Since
this is a model of a menu rather than a quadratic cost at the micro-level, the ex ante price will influence the
frequency of adjustment but not the ex post price conditional on adjustment.
      As is common in the literature, see for example Gal´
                                                         i (2015), agents are assumed to meet the demand
forthcoming at their price. Thus the prices they set will determine their nominal income in youth.
      This nominal income is held over time in the form of money to purchase consumption goods when
old. Holdings of money are altered through monetary policy. Thus in our framework, money holdings and
monetary policy interventions are made explicit.
      To study the pricing choice, consider the ex post decision of generation t sellers. If they choose to adjust,
these sellers choose a price p
                             ~ to solve

                                                                                                   d(~
                                                                                                     p, Pt , Mt )
              W a (zt , Mt-1 , xt , Pt ) = maxp                  p, Pt , Mt ))xt+1 /Pt+1 ) - g (
                                              ~Ext+1 ,Pt+1 V ((R(~                                                ).      (3)
                                                                                                        zt
Here the demand, denoted d(~
                           p, Pt , Mt ) and specified in (1), is the spending of the old agents on the
product of this seller. The function V ((R(~
                                           p, Pt , Mt ))xt+1 /Pt+1 ) is given by (2) with, in that notation,
M = R(~
      p, Pt , Mt )xt+1 being the nominal revenue earned as a seller in period t supplemented by the period
t + 1 money shock and P = Pt+1 , the period t + 1 aggregate price level.
      Since this decision is made ex post, the value and the price depend on the current state: (zt , Mt-1 , xt , Pt ).
Here zt is the current idiosyncratic productivity shock, Mt-1 is the inherited money supply, xt is the money
shock and Pt is the aggregate price level, determined in equilibrium as described below.
      There is also a seller specific menu cost, denoted Ft , that influences whether adjustment occurs or not but
not the price selected given adjustment. The adjustment cost is written as a utility loss. This specification
has a convenient property that the optimal price is independent of the adjustment cost. So, the extensive
margin of adjustment will depend on the realized menu cost and idiosyncratic productivity but the intensive
margin does not so that the price dispersion of adjusters reflects only heterogeneity in zt .
      Notice that the price set by these sellers is independent of any price they may have set ex ante so that
the ex ante choice does not appear in the state. Importantly, once the cost of adjustment is incurred, the
price reflects both the monetary shock and seller specific productivity. In this sense, there is an underlying
complementarity at work. If a seller pays an adjustment cost to respond to one type of shock, then the
marginal cost of responding to another type of shock is zero. This is important for the analysis that follows
as it explains why price dispersion and thus TFPR dispersion is influenced by monetary policy.




                                                              6
2.3    SREE                                                                                                                 2   MODEL


                                                                                                                d(p,P
                                                                                                                  ~ t ,Mt ) 20
      With the production function of y = zn, the labor input of the seller is given by                             zt     .     As the
seller meets all demand, the labor input varies inversely with productivity, given demand.
      The first-order condition is

                                             d(pt , Pt , Mt )(1 - )            d(pt , Pt , Mt )     d(pt , Pt , Mt )
              Ext+1 ,Pt+1   u (ct+1 )xt+1                               =g(                     ) -                         .       (4)
                                                      Pt+1                            zt                 pt zt
Denote this ex post optimal price by pt = p
                                          ~(zt , Mt-1 , xt , Pt ) for all a seller with realized productivity zt .
      This is the standard condition for optimal price setting, equating marginal revenue with marginal cost.21
But in this overlapping generations model, the value marginal revenue is determined by the marginal utility
of the future consumption that can be acquired with the additional money income. And that income is itself
impacted by future monetary policy, through the stochastic transfer xt+1 .
      Alternatively, if the seller does not adjust, then expected lifetime utility is given by:

                                                                                                        d(¯
                                                                                                          p, Pt , Mt )
                W n (zt , Mt-1 , xt , Pt , p                      p, Pt , Mt ))xt+1 /Pt+1 ) - g (
                                           ¯) = Ext+1 ,Pt+1 V ((R(¯                                                    ).           (5)
                                                                                                             zt
Here, expected utility depends on the preset price, p
                                                    ¯.
      Given this, consider the ex ante choice. When this price is set, the young agent just knows the money
supply from the past. Let W xa (Mt-1 ) be the value to a young agent of setting the price ex ante. The value
is given by:

                                                                        
               W xa (Mt-1 )                                                     n
                                     ¯E(zt ,xt ,xt+1 Pt ,Pt+1 ) [(1 - (F (t )))W (zt , Mt-1 , xt , Pt , p
                                = maxp                                                                  ¯) +
                                          F  (t )
                                                    W a (Mt-1 , xt , Pt ) - F ]d(F )                                                (6)
                                      0


where F  (zt , Mt-1 , xt , Pt ) is the critical menu cost in state (zt , Mt-1 , xt , Pt ) such that price adjustment
occurs iff F  F  (zt , Mt-1 , xt , Pt ). Here the menu cost F has a cdf of (·). Let p
                                                                                    ¯(Mt-1 ) denote the optimal
ex ante choice.


2.3       SREE
The analysis is based on a stationary rational expectations equilibrium (SREE) with valued fiat money.22
The current aggregate state is represented as (M, x) where M is the inherited money supply and x is the
current shock, so that the current money supply is M x. At the individual supplier level, productivity and
the cost of price adjustment are the two elements in the idiosyncratic state: (z, F ).
      There are four state dependent functions to be determined. The ex ante price set knowing only M is
denoted p
        ¯(M ). The ex post price set by sellers who choose to adjust their price is given by p
                                                                                             ~(M, z, x),
indicating the price depends on both the realized money shock and productivity. There is a critical level
of the adjustment cost, F  (M, x, z ), such that adjustment occurs iff F  F  (M, x, z ). Finally, the ex post
money price of goods, P (M, x), clears the goods market.
  20 When  we discuss below the case of an aggregate TFP shock, µQ , then y = µQ zn.
  21 To                                                            p -
       understand this condition in a static setting, let d = ( P   ) y be the level of produce demand if the seller sets the price p
and the aggregate price is P and the level of real spending is y . So dp = - d
                                                                             p
                                                                               . Further, revenue is given by R = pd = p1- ( P1 -
                                                                                                                               ) y.
                                                                          u (ct+1 )xt+1
Hence Rp = (1 - )d. The left side of (4) is the product of Rp and             Pt+1
                                                                                        .   The right side is the product of dp and the
                                d(p ,P ,M ) 1
marginal disutility of work, g ( t zt t ) z    .
                                      t      t
  22 The more general SREE including shocks to the distribution of idiosyncratic productivity is presented in Appendix Section

8.2 for the linear-quadratic economy.



                                                                    7
2.3    SREE                                                                                                  2   MODEL


      At this point of the analysis, the distribution of the idiosyncratic productivity shocks is not in the state
vector. An equilibrium is defined and characterized given that distribution.

Definition 1 A SREE is a set of functions (¯      ~(M, z, x), F  (M, x, z ), P (M, x), W n (M, x, z ), W a (M, x, z ))
                                           p(M ), p
such that:

      · p
        ¯(M ) solves the ex ante pricing problem given the state dependent price index P (M, x);

                                                                                            d(p, P (M, x), M x)
                ¯(M ) = argmaxp Ex,z,x V ((R(p, P (M, x), M x)x )/P (M x, x )) - g (
                p                                                                                               ).    (7)
                                                                                                     z

        for all M .

      · p
        ~(M, x, z ) solves the ex post pricing problem:

                                                                                             d(p, P (M, x), M x)
               ~(M, x, z ) = argmaxp Ex V ((R(p, P (M, x), M x))x /P (M x, x )) - g (
               p                                                                                                 )    (8)
                                                                                                      z

        given the state dependent price vector, P (M, x), for all (M, x, z ).

      · At the critical adjustment cost, F  (M, x, z ), the seller is just indifferent between adjusting and not:


                                         F  (M, x, z )  W n (M, x, z ) - W a (M, x, z )

        for all (M, x, z ), with W a (M, x, z ) given by:

                                                                                          d(~
                                                                                            p(M, x, z ), P (M, x), M x)
          W a (M, x, z ) = Ex V ((R(~
                                    p(M, x, z ), P (M, x), M x))x /P (M x, x )) - g (                                   )
                                                                                                         z
                                                                                                                       (9)
        and W n (M, x, z ) given by

                                                                                    d(¯
                                                                                      p(M ), P (M, x), M x)
            W n (M, x, z ) = Ex V ((R(¯
                                      p(M ), P (M, x), M x))x /P (M x, x )) - g (                           ).       (10)
                                                                                               z

      · P (M, x) is the aggregate price index in state (M, x) given by:

                                                                                                             1
                  P (M, x) = [Ez (1 - (F  (M, x, z )))¯
                                                      p(M )1- + Ez ((F  (M, x, z ))~
                                                                                   p(M, x, z )1- )] 1-               (11)

        p(M ), P (M, x), M x) = ( Pp
where d(¯                          ¯(M ) -
                                   (M,x) )         p(M, x, z ), P (M, x), M x) = ( p
                                           Y and d(~                               ~(M,x,z ) -
                                                                                    P (M,x) )  Y . Here Y =
  Mx
P (M,x)   is the equilibrium determined real value of money holdings.

      There are two main properties of a SREE that are verified in the analysis that follows.

Proposition 1 There exists a SREE in which: (i) all prices are proportional to M and real quantities are
independent of M and (ii) all prices are not proportional to x and so real quantities are not independent of
x.

      First, the inherited money supply is neutral: i.e. prices are proportional to M and all real quantities
are independent of M . Formally, this amounts to guessing and verifying that there is a SREE in which
p
¯(M ) = QM where Q is an unknown constant and p  ~(M, x, z ) = M ~ (x, z ). From this all relative prices and
thus quantities demanded (and thus supplied) are independent of M .


                                                            8
                                                                                          3   QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS


    The second property is money non-neutrality. If prices were not costly to adjust, i.e. the distribution
of F was degenerate at F = 0, then there would exist a SREE with prices proportional to M x. In this
case, real quantities would be independent of the current money supply, M x. But, in the presence of non-
degenerate menu costs, as long as some sellers choose not to adjustment their prices ex post, a SREE with
                                                                         ¯, must be independent of x.23
prices proportional to M x cannot exist simply because the preset price, p
                                                               Mx          x
    In equilibrium, aggregate real GDP is given by: Y (x) = P ( M,x) = (x) . In this model, the difference
between TFPQ and TFPR is transparent. Here, z corresponds to the TFPQ measure of productivity. It is
                                             zp
exogenous to the seller. The variable        P    is TFPR, where p  {p  ¯} is the seller's price and P is the aggregate
                                                                     ~, p
      24
price.     It is endogenous as prices are set by sellers. The distribution of TFPR responds to shocks insofar
as sellers adjust prices in response to those shocks.25


3        Quantitative Analysis
                                                                                                             n2 26
The quantitative analysis rests upon a linear-quadratic economy where u(c) = c, g (n) =                      2 .     To be clear,
the goal of the quantitative analysis is not to match data moments. This seems off the domain of the model
as it is cast as an OG structure, with pricing decisions made once and thus apparently far from the high
frequency decision problem that underlies plant and firm-level data.
    But there is a benefit to this abstraction through an opportunity to clarify various channels of influ-
ence through the stationary rational expectations equilibrium of a monetary economy. In this setting, the
monetary shocks as well as those to productivity are part of the basic economic environment and thus the
responses are part of the equilibrium outcome. The goal is to provide a framework upon which empirics can
be generated. These points are brought out here and in the following sections on additional implications.
    Further, the OG model is not that far from the more standard models of Calvo price adjustment. In
those models, as in the OG structure, the probability of price adjustment and the price set conditional
on adjustment are both independent of the previously set price. Further, in some specifications, such as
Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005), price setters who do not adjust get to freely reset prices based
upon inflation. This added feature further reduces the role of history for price setting. Or, put differently,
the fact that ex post price setters do not look beyond the current period is also present in these other
formulations.
    This point is reinforced by the quantitative analysis which generates familiar patterns of price adjustment.
The analysis makes clear that the overlapping generations model with state dependent price adjustment
retains the essential features of the more standard infinitely lived agent specifications.
  23 Formally, this requires that the support of menu costs be large enough so that even if all other sellers adjust their prices ex

post, the remaining seller, for any x, will have a high enough adjustment cost so that adjustment will not occur. See Ball and
Romer (1991) for a discussion of this related to multiplicity of equilibria.
  24 Since TFPQ is measured directly in simulated data, there is no need to infer TFPR from revenue and thus no discussion of

output or revenue factor shares. See the discussion of these measurement issues in Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda
(2019).
  25 Using a static, flexible price version of the model and returning to a point made earlier, TFPR= pz = q - z = z 1- n- .

From the first order condition with respect to n, if marginal cost of labor is  , we have
                                                  (1 -  )n(-+-1) z 1- = .
                                                                                                                  
At  = 1, the FOC becomes (1 -  )n- z (1-) =  for this to hold for all z . This implies that TFPR is given by 1-     
                                                                                                                      and hence
is independent of z . In our model, both price stickiness and non-linear production costs will contribute to the non-degenerate
distribution of TFPR.
   26 Sub-section 8.1 of the Appendix characterizes the SREE for this special case. The methods and parameterization for the

quantitative analysis is presented in Appendix sub-section 8.3.




                                                                 9
3.1    Seller Choices                                                                  3   QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS


      For this analysis, the distribution of idiosyncratic productivity shocks is taken as given, so that z is not
in the state vector. The effects of changes in this distribution are discussed in the next section.


3.1      Seller Choices
This section illustrates the quantitative properties of the seller's choices for the linear-quadratic economy.
      As in the traditional state dependent pricing model, prices are adjusted only for sufficiently large monetary
shocks and the region of adjustment depends on the adjustment costs. This property is illustrated for a given
productivity shock to make clear that our model also contains the usual result. A second important property
is the interaction of the real productivity shock and the monetary shock: adjustment can occur even for
monetary shocks near their expected value if productivity shocks are sufficiently large.




                        This figure shows the choice to adjust or not for different realizations of the
                        money shock, x, for "high" and "low" values of the menu cost, for a given z .
                                           Figure 2: Adjustment Values

      Figure 2 illustrates the ex post choices of a seller. The figure shows the value of no-adjustment, W n ,
along with the values of adjustment for two levels of the menu cost. The blue value is associated with a
higher menu cost than the red value. As is clear, for sufficiently low (high) values of the money shock x,
adjustment is preferred to no adjustment. The region of adjustment is larger for the low menu cost.
      Figure 3 illustrates the dependence of the probability of price adjustment on the real productivity shock,


                                                              10
3.2    Aggregate Effects                                                              3   QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS




                       This figure shows the adjustment probability as a function of the idiosyncratic
                       profitability shock, for 3 values of the monetary shock xl < xm < xh .
                  Figure 3: Adjustment Probability as a function of Producitivity


for three values of x. For each value of x, there is a realization of the productivity shock such that the
likelihood firms adjustment their price in minimal. The frequency of adjustment is then U-shaped around
this minimum. The higher the money shock, the higher is this critical productivity to offset the incentive to
adjust.
      The fact that the model economy produces this shape for the adjustment rate is important for two
reasons. First, it confirms that state dependent pricing in the overlapping generations model produces
patterns that are similar to other models. Second, as the analysis develops, the aggregate economy will
display non-monotonic responses to various types of shocks. Those patterns can be traced back to the
U-shaped adjustment rate.


3.2       Aggregate Effects
Given these responses at the firm level, we now turn to briefly describe the aggregate implications of the
model in terms of the overall price level, the frequency of adjustment and output. We return to these effects
when we look at other implications of the model.
      Figure 4 shows the aggregate price, P , as well as the ex ante price, p
                                                                            ¯ and the distribution of ex post



                                                             11
3.2    Aggregate Effects                                                            3   QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS


prices as a function of the monetary shock. The aggregate price, which is a CES index, is a combination
of the state independent ex ante price and the state dependent ex post price. It is increasing in the money
shock, reflecting responses on both the extensive and intensive margins. The frequency of adjustment, as
established earlier, is U-shaped, while the ex post price is monotonically increasing in the shock.




                       This figure shows patterns of prices for different realizations of the money
                       shock, x.
                                                  Figure 4: Prices

      The distribution of prices given x illustrates the two forms of heterogeneity at the seller level. First,
there are different productivity realizations that generate differences in prices, conditional on adjustment.
Second, there are differences in adjustment costs that impact the extensive margin choice of whether to
change prices. Different realizations of x impact the firm choices on both of these margins.
      Figure 5 illustrates the dependence of the adjustment frequency on the monetary shock and the real
effects of the shock. Focusing on the blue line in the left panel, for low dispersion, the frequency of price
adjustment is a U-shaped function of the money shock. Note that the adjustment frequency does not have
a minimum at 0, reflecting the presence of the real shocks which create an independent value of adjustment.
      The response of the aggregate price (index) to the money shock is shown in the top right panel. Here,
reflecting both the extensive and intensive margins, the price level increases when the money supply expands.
But, as indicated in the bottom left panel, the level of real economic activity output is clearly increasing in
the monetary shock as well. This reflects both the stickiness of some prices and the choice of adjusted prices


                                                           12
                                                                    4   CYCLICALITY OF TFPR DISPERSION




                      This figure shows the effects of money shocks on the price adjustment rate,
                      output, employment and the aggregate price.
                                     Figure 5: Aggregate Implications


that are not proportional to the money supply.
    This is summarized by the first row of Table 1. For the benchmark parameterization, about 25% of the
sellers adjust their prices ex post. The average dispersion in the price change is about 0.10, reflecting the
underlying distribution in productivity. The correlation of output and the money shock is nearly 1.


4     Cyclicality of TFPR Dispersion
The model of state dependent prices provides a basis to study the cyclicality of TFPR dispersion. As noted
earlier, many theories are about the dispersion in TFPQ while, as emphasized by Foster, Haltiwanger, and
Syverson (2008), the measurement commonly taken from plant-level studies is TFPR not TFPQ. Output
and revenue measures of productivity are not same and their distributions may covary in different ways over
the business cycle.
    The question is whether the model of price setting can reproduce the countercyclical dispersion in TFPR
seen in the data, as well as other pricing facts. This depends both on price setting behavior and exogenous
variations. Here the exogenous variations include changes in dispQ , money shocks and changes in the mean



                                                          13
4.1    Effects of Variation in TFPQ Dispersion                         4   CYCLICALITY OF TFPR DISPERSION




                   Case                                 Mean (F reqP )      Mean (dispP )       corr(y, x)
                   Benchmark                                 0.2556              0.0975          0.9959
                   Higher Product Substitutability           0.4799              0.0737          0.7035
                   High Labor Supply Elasticity              0.2166              0.1081          0.9956
          This table shows basic moments in response to money shocks, for the baseline model and other parameteri-
          zations discussed in sub-section 5.2.

                                             Table 1: Pricing Moments


of TFPQ, hereafter denoted µQ .27
      Table 2 summarizes our findings. It displays for the three sources of variation, the cyclical patterns of
dispersion in TFPR, the dispersion of price changes, employment and the frequency of price adjustment.28
The table is constructed using our baseline parameters. Variations on these parameters are reported in
sub-section 5.2.
      The table is discussed in detail in this section, first by looking at each shock independently. This allows
us to focus on the cyclical effects of each shock independently. We then allow the monetary authority to
respond to variations in the mean and dispersion of TFPQ and study the implications for the dispersion of
TFPR.
      The results are best evaluated relative to moments from the data, which are provided as well. From
various studies, the dispersion of TFPR is countercyclical, the dispersion of price changes and frequency of
price changes are countercyclical as is the dispersion of employment growth. In the data row, The correlation
of output (growth) and dispR comes from Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich, Eksten, and Terry (2018). Kehrig
(2011) finds that the correlation of (detrended) output and the dispersion of productivity is -0.293 for non-
durables and -0.502 for durables, in Table 2. His Table 4 makes clear that the countercyclicality is robust to
various output measures. The moments on the dispersion and frequency of price changes comes from Vavra
(2014), Table 4, and calculated at the business cycle frequency. The correlation of employment (growth) and
dispersion is from Table I.3 in Ilut, Kehrig, and Schneider (2018).


4.1      Effects of Variation in TFPQ Dispersion
The analysis of countercyclical variation in TFPR dispersion starts with an obvious hypothesis: variations
in dispQ drive the cyclicality of dispR . To order for this explanation to be consistent with data patterns,
it must be that: (i) increased dispersion in TFPQ creates increased dispersion in TFPR and (ii) increased
dispersion in TFPQ causes economic downturns. We demonstrate that the model does not produce these
patterns: variations in the dispersion of TFPQ do not generate countercyclical fluctuations in
the dispersion of TFPR.
      Specifically, here we study the effects on dispR of an increase in dispQ , modeled as a mean preserving
spread in the distribution of z .29 To be clear, the effects highlighted here come from realized changes in the
  27 The SREE characterized above is for the case of money shocks alone. Exogenous variations in the dispersion of the

idiosyncratic productivity shocks, dispQ , is introduced as a mean preserving spread of z . Variations in the mean of TFPQ,
denoted µQ , infuence the production function at the individual level which becomes y = µQ zn. For both cases the SREE is
redefined and computed with the additional state variable in Appendix sub-section 8.2.
  28 Here we report correlations with the level of output as there is nothing to detrend. The same properties emerge from

splitting the sample into "expansions" and "contractions" and computing conditional moments as displayed in Bloom, Floetotto,
Jaimovich, Eksten, and Terry (2018) and Ilut, Kehrig, and Schneider (2018).
  29 This is parameterized to match the cyclical change in TFPR dispersion as reported in Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich,




                                                             14
4.1    Effects of Variation in TFPQ Dispersion                              4     CYCLICALITY OF TFPR DISPERSION




                     Case       corr(y, dispR )    corr(y, dispP )         corr(y, dispn )   corr(y, f req )
                     Data            -0.45               -0.41                   -0.50           -0.27
                                                                  dispQ
                     Model           0.4292             -0.1348                 -0.3413         -0.1695
                     Flex. P         0.9977             0.8626                   0.9974            na
                                                                      x
                     Model           0.4574             -0.2397                 -0.4863         -0.1311
                                                                      µQ
                     Model          -0.0183             -0.0010                 -0.3863         0.1878
                     Flex. P        0.9402              -0.5259                 -0.3264           na


           This table shows the correlation between output and the dispersion of TFPR, the dispersion and frequency
           of price changes and the dispersion of employment for three different types of shocks.

                                              Table 2: Cyclical Variations


distribution of TFPQ. Another channel, studied below, is on the uncertainty caused by future changes in
this distribution. Throughout, dispR is always less than dispQ , as it is in the data summarized by Foster,
Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2008). Again, the magnitude of this difference depends on the state of the
economy.
      Variations in dispQ will impact dispR in two ways. First, of course, there is the direct effect: given prices,
an increase in dispQ will translate into an increase in TFPR dispersion. Second, pricing behavior will adjust,
potentially magnifying (reducing) the effects of the increase in dispQ . The sign and size of this latter effect
will depend on the properties of the revenue function and, as emphasized by our model, the pattern of price
adjustment.
      Figure 6 illustrates the effects of variations in dispQ on the dispR , for different values of the money shock.
Clearly an increase in dispQ leads to an increase in dispR . The magnitude of this effect though does depend
on the money shock, as discussed further below.
      What are the effects of an increase in dispQ on output? If the increased dispersion causes a reduction in
output, then shocks to dispQ will create countercyclical dispersion in TFPR, as in the data.
      In an economy with flexible prices, a mean preserving spread in plant-level productivity will typically
increase output as factors are reallocated to take advantage of high productivity plants. This property holds
in our overlapping generations model with monopolistic competition as well if there are no costs of price
adjustment.
      In a setting with price rigidities this reallocation will be weaker and may not even occur. To see why,
consider a seller with a high productivity realization and a high adjustment cost. Without price adjustment,
the high productivity means that the seller will supply a relatively low level of labor to meet demand.30 But
if the realized adjustment cost was low, the seller would choose a lower price and expand production and
employment. Thus the output response to increased dispersion is hampered by price inflexibility.31
      Returning to Figure 5, at x = 1, the response of the economy to an increase in dispQ is a slightly
lower aggregate price level and thus slightly higher aggregate output. In this case, without a response by
Eksten, and Terry (2018). This determines the magnitude not the cyclicality of the change in the dispersion of TFPR. This
parameterization applies when all the shocks, (dispQ , x, µQ ), are present to match the unconditional movements in the dispersion
of TFPR. More details on the parameterization are provided in Appendix sub-section 8.3.3.
  30 This reflects the assumption that the seller meets demand at the posted price.
  31 As discussed in sub-section 5.2, the magnitude of the effect also depends on the marginal cost of employment.




                                                                 15
4.2    Money Shocks                                                        4   CYCLICALITY OF TFPR DISPERSION




                          This figure shows the effects of variations in dispQ on dispR and the dispersion
                          of price changes.
                       Figure 6: Response of Dispersion in TFPR and Price Changes


the monetary authority, variations in dispQ are procyclical and lead to procyclical variations in dispR as
indicated in Table 2.
      Also from Table 2, the model predicts that the dispersion in price changes is countercyclical, consistent
the evidence provided in Vavra (2014). The dispersion in employment is positively correlated with dispQ .
This makes sense, as the dispersion in productivity increases, so will the dispersion in employment. This
effect is particularly strong for sellers who choose not to adjustment their price. Finally, the frequency of
price adjustment is countercyclical in the model driven by dispQ shocks.
      The findings about the cyclicality of the dispersion in price changes and frequency are consistent with the
findings of Vavra (2014). But the model is inconsistent with the data in terms of the motivating
observation of countercyclical dispersion in TFPR.


4.2       Money Shocks
A second shock comes from monetary innovations, x. Due to price rigidities, monetary shocks impact real
output. From Figure 5, output and aggregate prices both respond positively to monetary shocks. Here we
focus on the effects of money shocks on the dispersion of TFPR holding fixed the distribution of TFPQ.
      Can they produce countercyclical TFPR dispersion? Figure 6 illustrates the effects of money shocks on
the standard deviation of TFPR. As indicated in the top left panel, for either extremely low or high monetary
shocks (around ± 10%), the dispersion in TFPR is actually lower than it is at the mean value of the money
shock.
      As indicated by the right panel, the price changes for the adjusters are less dispersed in the tails of the
money shock distribution since sellers with less dispersed values of the productivity shock are induced to
adjust their price when x is either very high or low. In doing so, they respond largely to the common shock
to the money stock, thus reducing the dispersion in TFPR.32
 32 So,   in contrast to Vavra (2014), it seems that dispersion and frequency can move in the same direction for some monetary



                                                                16
4.3    Shocks to the Mean of TFPQ                                       4   CYCLICALITY OF TFPR DISPERSION


      Since real output increases with the money shock, the model implies that the standard deviation of
TFPR is not a monotone function of economic activity when fluctuations are induced by money shocks. It
can be lower in recessions and also lower in expansions when the money shocks take relatively extreme values.
Thus, the model can produce countercyclical dispersion in TFPR, for a given distribution of
TFPQ, but only when money shocks are surprisingly large.
  This suggests an empirical exercise that goes beyond the traditional focus on correlations between output
and the dispersion of TFPR. From this model, the effects of the money shock on output and dispR depend
on whether the money shock is above or below its average value, here x = 1. To the extent fluctuations are
driven by money shocks correlation of output and dispR ought to be positive conditioning on below average
innovations and negative for above average.
      Leaving aside the nonlinearities, the basic correlations are indicated in Table 2. Here the overall cor-
relation of output and dispR is positive, contrary to data. The model does reproduce a reduction in the
dispersion of price changes during expansions. The dispersion in employment is lower in the expansion. This
is because the higher frequency of price changes reduces the response of employment to productivity. Finally,
the frequency of adjustment is countercyclical, but again this is a nonlinear relationship, partly masked by
looked at this correlation.


4.3      Shocks to the Mean of TFPQ
The final source of variation is the more standard shock to the average productivity, i.e. the mean of TFPQ,
denoted µQ . As before, the interest is in the cyclicality of the dispersion in TFPR, as reported in Table 2
for this case.
      Figure 7 summarizes the findings. The horizontal axis measures the ex post realization of µQ . The left
panel shows the dispersion in TFPR and the right indicates the dispersion in price changes. These are shown
for two different levels of dispQ .
      From the left panel, the relationship between µQ and dispR is not monotone. When the mean of TFPQ
is either very large or very small, then dispR is lower. This again reflects the response of price setters. In
the tails, the mean of TFPQ becomes a dominant force so that the dispersion of price changes falls. Note
the asymmetry: the response of dispR is much larger for large realizations of µQ than for small ones. These
patterns hold for both values of dispQ .
      As for the cyclical properties of a µQ shock, Figure 8 illustrates the effects of TFPQ shocks on output
and employment, for two levels of TFPQ dispersion. Shocks to µQ are always procyclical. This is the case
for both low and high dispersion in TFPQ.
      Combining this with Figure 7, the relationship between output and the dispersion in TFPR is not
monotone. If an economy with a relatively high aggregate TFPQ shock is compared with one with an
average shock, then dispR appears to be procyclical. But if the comparison is between an average economy
and one in a low µQ state, both output and dispersion are below average.
      The right side of Figure 8 returns to the point about employment and productivity in modelprice models
made in Gal´
           i (1999). Except for the lowest and highest productivity states, employment is falling produc-
tivity. This arises from the assumption that producers meet demand at the posted price. Hence sellers that
do not adjust their price will decrease employment in the face of a productivity shock, be it aggregate or
idiosyncratic. From Figure 8, this effect is dominating for most of the aggregate productivity states. But, in
shocks. Though clearly a reduction in x, increases the frequency but reduces the dispersion of change.




                                                             17
4.3    Shocks to the Mean of TFPQ                                   4   CYCLICALITY OF TFPR DISPERSION




                        This figure shows the effects of shocks to µQ , the mean of TFPQ, on the
                        standard deviations of TFPR and price changes.
                                        Figure 7: Effects of µQ shocks


the highest set of µQ realizations, there are enough sellers adjusting their prices in response to the aggregate
shock, that employment increases with productivity.
      This interpretation is supported by behavior at the producer level. Table 3 reports regression results
estimated from simulated data for three experiments characterized by the type of shocks: (i) idiosyncratic
productivity shocks alone, (ii) idiosyncratic and aggregate productivity shocks and (iii) idiosyncratic and
aggregate productivity and monetary shocks. The dependent variable is either the (log of) producer employ-
ment or output. The independent variation is the product of the idiosyncratic and the aggregate productivity
shock, as in the revenue function.
      For the employment column, the negative coefficients for those sellers choosing not to adjust their price
indicate the role of these rigidities on the employment response. The negative effective is present, though
weaker, even when monetary shocks are in the model. For the adjusters, the effect of productivity on
employment is always positive.
      The same is true for the output of adjusters: output expands with either productivity or money shocks.
For non-adjusters, idiosyncratic productivity shocks have no output effects since demand is given. But, if
there is a positive aggregate productivity shock then the sales of non-adjusters decline. Though nominal
spending is held fixed, aggregate prices are lower so that a seller not adjusting its price has a high relative
price and thus lower sales. When there is a money shock as well, the overall impact is to create a positive
correlation of output and productivity, even for the non-adjusters.
      Returning to the evidence, there are two issues. First, the aggregate response shown in Figure 7 clearly is
dependent on the fraction of each type of producer, i.e. on the adjustment rate. This will determine the size
of the two regions and the slope within each. At the aggregate level, the analysis points to a very non-linear
response of employment to productivity, where the magnitude of the response depends on the underlying
adjustment rate which itself is state dependent.
      Second, at the plant level, there is ample evidence, for example in Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and
Miranda (2019) that plant-level employment is increasing in profitability. To what extent this response


                                                          18
                                                                             5   EXTENSIONS AND ROBUSTNESS




                     This figure shows the effects of shocks to µQ on output and employment.
                      Figure 8: Response to Aggregate Productivity Shocks


interacts with price setting at the plant-level remains an open question, made difficult to address by the lack
of evidence on prices and employment at the micro-level.


                                  Shock          Employment             Output
                                               Adj.   No Adj.       Adj.   No Adj.
                                  z            0.331   -0.656       1.007      0
                                  (z, A)       0.472   -0.847       1.164   -0.172
                                  (z, A, x)    0.482   -0.444       1.192   0.180
                     This table shows the effects of idiosyncratic,(z ), aggregate productivity, (A),
                     and monetary shocks, x, on producer-level employment and output condi-
                     tioning on price adjustment status.

               Table 3: Dependence of Employment and Output on Productivity

    Overall, our findings for the case of shocks to the mean of TFPQ are summarized in Table 2. The
dispersion in TFPR is indeed countercyclical, as in the data, though the magnitude is very small. This is
driven by the asymmetric response of the dispR to aggregate TFPQ shocks. The dispersion in price changes
in also countercyclical, but again only slightly. Finally, the frequency of price adjustment is procyclical,
counter to the data. Thus shocks to the mean of TFPQ cannot match the data patterns.


5     Extensions and Robustness
Here we undertake some extensions of the analysis. Given that the shocks, taken alone, are not able to
match data patterns, a key extension looks at active monetary policy. A discussion of robustness is included
as well.




                                                           19
5.1    Monetary Feedback Rules                                                5   EXTENSIONS AND ROBUSTNESS


5.1       Monetary Feedback Rules
From Figures 5 and 6, the effects of changes in the dispersion of profitability shocks, dispQ , on the dispersion
of TFPR, dispR , were clearly dependent on the money shock. For example, from Figure 5, output actually
falls slightly when there is an increase in dispQ along with a large positive money shock. And, from Figure
6, the effects of an increase in dispQ on dispR were quite small for extreme values of the money shock,
particularly when money growth is low.
      To study these interactions further, this sub-section allows some response by the monetary authority to
the shocks to the mean and dispersion of TFPQ.33 As we see, allowing the monetary authority to link the
distribution of x to the aggregate state can alter the cyclicality of dispR . In this way, the implications of the
model can be brought closer to some features of the data.
      In particular, we highlight two cases which produce countercyclical dispR as well as countercyclical price
changes. In the first, the economy is driven by fluctuations in dispQ . When this dispersion is above average,
the monetary authority intervenes so that the mean value of x is below average, i.e.  < 0. In the second,
the economy is driven by fluctuations in µQ . When aggregate productivity is above average, the monetary
authority intervenes and selects a mean value of x that is above average as well, i.e.  > 0. In addition,
following the evidence in Vavra (2014), only when there are dispQ shocks do we also produce countercyclical
frequency of adjustment.



                      Case         corr(y, dispR )   corr(y, dispP )    corr(y, dispn )   corr(y, f req )
                      Data              -0.45              -0.41             -0.50            -0.27
                                                          dispQ
                         = 2 .0        0.2066             0.0089            -0.3909          0.1470
                         = 1 .3        0.1296            -0.0334            -0.4602          0.1522
                         =0            0.4292            -0.1348            -0.3413          -0.1695
                         = -1.3       -0.0093            -0.0146            -0.2517          0.0099
                         = -2.0       -0.0254             0.0065            -0.1257          -0.0812
                                                            µQ
                         = 2 .0       -0.3044             0.0682            -0.2829          0.4294
                         = 1 .3       -0.0596            -0.0868            -0.3630          0.3130
                         = 0 .0       -0.0183            -0.0010            -0.3863          0.1878
                         = -1.3        0.2459            -0.0865            -0.3665          0.0320
                         = -2.0        0.2340            -0.0621            -0.3505          0.1814


           This table shows the correlation between output and the dispersion of TFPR, the dispersion and frequency
           of price changes and the dispersion of employment for different monetary feedback rules.

                          Table 4: Cyclical Variations: Monetary Feedback Rules

      Specifically, suppose that the evolution of the money supply is given by:


                                         Mt+1 = Mt xt+1 = Mt [(st+1 ) + x
                                                                        ~t+1 ].                                       (12)

In this specification, the money stock follows the same stochastic process as above, with xt+1 representing
the period t + 1 money shock that is not predictable given period t information. But here, the growth of
the money supply, [(st+1 ) + x
                             ~t+1 ] has two components. The first is the feedback rule where (st+1 ) allows
 33 In   doing so, it makes clear the advantage of using an economy with valued money to study monetary policy.




                                                             20
5.1    Monetary Feedback Rules                                                5   EXTENSIONS AND ROBUSTNESS


money growth to depend on the period t + 1 state of the economy. The second is the money shock, as above
denoted x
        ~t+1 .
      Following Table 2, we focus on two specific cases, distinguished by the source of fluctuations in the
aggregate economy. In the first, the monetary authority responds to changes in the dispersion of TFPQ. Let
µdispQ be the average value of dispQ and consider

                                             (dispQ ) =  (dispQ - µdispQ ).                                               (13)

In a similar fashion, let µµQ be the average value of the mean of TFPQ and consider


                                                  (µQ ) =  (µµQ - µQ ).                                                   (14)

In both formulations, the feedback is characterized by  .
      Given a monetary feedback rule, it is straightforward to extend the analysis of a SREE from sub-section
8.1 to include (12). Note that the monetary feedback rule impacts agents both as young price setters and
as old agents, both in terms of the distribution of the stochastic transfer and the equilibrium prices they
face as buyers. As in the previous analysis, all of the newly created money is distributed as a proportional
transfer. But in this specification, it is feasible for the monetary authority to link these transfers to the
current state of the economy. If prices were perfectly flexible, there would be no real effects of this monetary
policy. Further, since private agents share the information of the monetary authority, there is no information
transmitted to the private sector by this policy.
      The SREE was characterized for both shocks to µQ and dispQ , allowing both negative and positive
responses by the monetary authority. The results are reported in Table 4 for a couple of values of  . In
addition, the moments calculated under the assumption of flexible prices is included for comparison. There
are two cases that generate countercyclical dispersion in both TFPR and prices changes and thus match
data patterns. Only one of these also creates countercyclical adjustment frequency.
      Consider first the results when the economy is driven by variations in dispQ, along with money shocks. In
this case, the only feedback rules that generate countercyclical dispersion in dispR arise when the monetary
authority sets  = -1.3 and  = -2.0. With this policy, the monetary authority responds to higher than
average dispersion in idiosyncratic profitability shocks by reducing the average growth of the money supply.
As output is positively correlated with dispQ , the monetary authority appears to be leaning against the
wind.
      The mechanics are, in part, made clear by the panel in Figure 6 relating dispR to x. Since dispR is
asymmetrically related to x, if the realized money shock (through the feedback rule) falls when the dispersion
in TFPQ rises, then the dispersion in TFPR can fall. And, from Figure 5, the lower than average stock of
money will imply higher output when dispQ is higher. Putting the pieces together, a high value of dispQ
triggers, through the feedback rule, a lower realization for the money shock so that: (i) output on average is
higher, (ii) dispR is lower and (iii) the dispersion in price changes in lower as well.34 That is, while dispQ is
procyclical,  < 0 induces, through optimal pricing behavior a countercyclical dispR .
      This case matches other features of the data. For  = -1.3 the model generates countercyclical dispersion
in price changes. And at  = -2.0, the frequency of price adjustment is countercyclical as well. But none of
these correlations are as large as in the data moments taken from Vavra (2014).
  34 Here the statements are on average since the feedback influences the mean of the stochastic transfer, leaving some random-

ness.




                                                              21
5.2    Alternative Parameters                                                       5    EXTENSIONS AND ROBUSTNESS


      Note that this result does not occur without monetary feedback. As noted earlier, with  = 0 the model
does match both the countercyclical dispersion in price changes and generates countercyclical frequency of
price changes but it does not create procyclical dispersion in TFPR. Further, the result clearly requires state
dependent pricing. If prices are flexible, then again the dispersion in TFPR is procyclical.
      The lower block studies variations in aggregate TFPQ, denoted µQ . If aggregate fluctuations are driven
by a combination of shocks to the mean of TFPQ and monetary injections, the model is able to generate
countercyclical dispR for   0. And in some cases, the model also generates countercyclical variations in
dispp . But, in no cases is the frequency of adjustment countercyclical.


5.2      Alternative Parameters



                  Case                   corr(y, dispR )    corr(y, dispp )    corr(y, dispn )    corr(y, f req )
                  Data                       -0.45               -0.41                  -0.50          -0.27
                                                                         Baseline
                  dispQ ,  = 0               0.4292            -0.1348         -0.3413               -0.1695
                  dispQ ,  = -1.3           -0.0093            -0.0146         -0.2517               0.0099
                  muQ ,  = 0.0              -0.0183            -0.0010         -0.3863                0.1878
                  muQ ,  = 2.0              -0.3044             0.0682         -0.2829               0.4294
                                                            High Product Substitutability
                  dispQ ,  = 0               0.2020             0.0412         -0.2066                0.0822
                  dispQ ,  = -1.3            0.0842             0.0812         -0.1555                0.1272
                  muQ ,  = 0                 0.1656            -0.2432         -0.4949                0.2213
                  muQ ,  = 2.0              -0.1669            -0.3750         -0.5912                0.5640
                                                            High Labor Supply Elasticity
                  dispQ ,  = 0               0.0348             0.0889         -0.2521                0.1785
                  dispQ ,  = -1.3           -0.1156             0.0258         -0.2493                0.0161
                  muQ ,  = 0                 0.0770            -0.0124         -0.2388                0.0667
                  muQ ,  = 2.0              -0.2111            -0.1221         -0.4239                0.3641
                                                               Larger dispQ Variation
                  dispQ ,  = 1.3             0.3871             0.3855          0.4300                0.4417
                  dispQ ,  = 0              -0.0065             0.0274          0.0521                0.1142
                  dispQ ,  = -1.3           -0.4568            -0.4300         -0.4232               -0.3693
          This table shows moments for different monetary policy rules at the baseline and alternative parameter
          values.

                                    Table 5: Cyclical Variations: Robustness

      This sub-section looks at the robustness of our findings with respect to the parameterization of the
problem. There are two key parameters: (i) the elasticity of substitution between products,  and (ii) the
                                                     n1+
convexity in the disutility of work, g (n) =         1+ .   The point is to understand how the shapes of these functions
                                    35
impact the results in Table 4.
      The baseline model has a quadratic disutility of work so that  = 1.0 and  = 3. In the high elasticity of
substitution case,  = 4. With products more substitutable, a sellers whose price is, for example, very high
compared to competitors will lose a lot of sales and this will create an incentive for price adjustment. So all
else the same, monetary shocks will have smaller effects on output. Further, in the case of an increase in the
dispersion of productivity, there will be a larger output gain since demand and therefore production is more
easily reallocated to high productivity production sites.
  35 Vavra  (2014) has linear disutility of work and an elasticity of substitution of 6.8. Golosov and Lucas (2007) also have linear
disutility with an elasticity of substitution of between 6 and 10. They also include money in the utility function.


                                                                22
5.2    Alternative Parameters                                                 5     EXTENSIONS AND ROBUSTNESS


      The high labor supply elasticity sets  = 0.4. The reduction in the curvature of the disutility, towards
being more linear, makes the marginal cost of production less variable. This reduces the probability of
adjustment as the cost of not adjusting the price is lower. It also impacts the price chosen by adjusters.
      The last two rows of Table 1 present the pricing moments for these two alternative parameterizations.
Indeed, with higher product substitutability, price adjustment is more frequent and the correlation of output
and the money shock is lower. The dispersion of price changes is also lower since sellers respond more to
common than idiosyncratic shocks.
      From Table 1, equilibrium outcomes with a lower  looks more like the baseline. It is important to keep
in mind that  has no direct impact on the output (employment) response of sellers who do not adjust
their price. These sellers, by assumption, meet demand. The lower  reduces the adjustment rate since the
marginal cost of meeting fluctuations demand is lower, as shown in Table 1.
      A final robustness check looks at an alternative parameterization in the dispQ case. The baseline spec-
ification set the process for dispQ to match the magnitude of changes in the dispersion of TFPR reported
in Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich, Eksten, and Terry (2018) in an economy with multiple shocks, including
those to the mean of TFPQ.36 Here we allow only shocks to the standard deviation in z as well as monetary
shocks and set the distribution of the standard deviation of the idiosyncratic shocks to match the changes
in the dispersion in TFPR. The result leads to more dispersion in the standard deviation of z relative to the
baseline.



                                           Case                       corr(x, dispR )
                                           Data                           0.045
                                                           dispQ Shocks
                                           Baseline
                                            = 1.3                         0.8534
                                           =0                             0.1083
                                            = -1.3                        -0.7367
                                           Larger dispQ Variation
                                            = 1.3                         0.3857
                                           =0                             -0.0257
                                            = -1.3                        -0.4790


           This table shows the correlations between dispR and monetary innovations for different monetary policy
           rules at the baseline and alternative parameter values for dispQ shocks.

                                    Table 6: Correlation between x and dispR


      Table 5 shows the resulting patterns of correlations for these cases. The top panel reproduces the patterns
from the baseline parameters and the others are the three experiments.
      In terms of fitting the moments, the increased competitiveness through higher product substitutability
never produces countercyclical adjustment frequencies. Only when there are shocks to the mean of TFPQ
and  = 2 is the dispersion of TFPR countercyclical. In this case, so is the dispersion of price changes.
      With a high labor supply elasticity, the model produces countercyclical dispersion in TFPR for both
dispQ . In some of these cases, the dispersion of price changes is also countercyclical but the frequency
remains procyclical throughout.
 36 For   further detail see Appendix sub-section 8.3.3.




                                                               23
5.3    Correlated Shocks                                                         5   EXTENSIONS AND ROBUSTNESS


      For the final specification with higher dispersion in the standard deviation of z , the model seems to match
the moments. For  = -1.3, all of the key variables are countercyclical, as is the dispersion of employment.
      Given this "success" we explore the issue of how well this monetary feedback matches the data. Table 6
displays the correlation between the money shock, x, and the dispersion of TFPR, dispR . Here the focus in
on dispR rather than dispQ as the former is observed.
      For Table 6, the data row is calculated as follows. First, x refers to the monetary policy shocks proxied
with the high frequency/narrative shock series of Miranda-Agrippino and Ricco (2018). This series proxies
for the changes in monetary policy which are not captured by the endogenous component reacting to the
output or inflation gap. Second, following Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich, Eksten, and Terry (2018), Decker,
Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (2019) we identify TFPR shocks using a cost-share approach at the firm
level.37 We calculate dispR at the sectoral level by year and obtain annual dispR by averaging over the
sectoral dispersion each year. Finally, the correlation between x and dispR is calculated.
      For the baseline parameterization, if the feedback rule entails  < 0, then the correlation of monetary
innovations and dispR is negative. That is, the negative correlation between x and dispQ created by the
feedback rule carries over to the correlation of the monetary innovation and dispR . As indicated in the two
bottom panels of the table, this pattern is sustained in parameterizations where the variation in dispQ is
larger. Notably, in the case of the larger variation in dispQ , the correlation is strongly negative and thus
further from the data. In this sense, the monetary policy that generates moments qualitatively matching
the data in Table 5, are far from the monetary innovations seen in the data.
      This finding is strengthened by computing the corr(x, dispR ) for a range of values of   {-0.1, -2.5}.
The results are shown in Figure 9. Clearly, for none of these values was the corr(x, dispR ) computed from
the simulated data positive.


5.3       Correlated Shocks
In many studies, such as Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich, Eksten, and Terry (2018) and Vavra (2014) the
shock to dispersion and to the mean of TFPQ are studied jointly. Given the prominence of this case in the
literature, it is important to study this case in detail. Here we follow the baseline model in Vavra (2014)
and assume the shocks are perfectly negatively correlated: corr(dispQ , µQ ) = -1.
      The moments from this exercise are shown in the bottom panel of Table 7. There are two cases. One in
which both dispQ and µQ took on the same three values as in the baseline model and using the values for
dispQ from the "Larger dispQ variation" parameterization. We also vary the size of µQ variation relative to
the baseline in the last two blocks.38 For each, we assume two values of  .
      Of the cases explored, the ones that most closely matches the four data moments occur when the variation
in dispQ is large relative to µQ and, once again,  < 0. In these two cases the correlations are more strongly
negative compared to the model with large dispQ variations alone. When  = 0, the models do not generate
countercyclical variation in the frequency of price adjustment.
      But again, looking at the correlations in simulated data between the monetary innovations and dispR ,
reported in Table 8, the monetary policy needed to match these moments is again counter to the data. That
is, with  < 0, the correlation of the monetary innovation and dispR is negative.
 37 This    is based upon a Compustat annual sample from 1971 to 2018.
 38 The    exact values and relationship to the literature are reported in Appendix sub-section 8.3.3.




                                                                24
                                                                                   6   OTHER IMPLICATIONS




                     This figure shows the correlation between x and dispR for   {-0.1, -2.5}
                     from the baseline parameterization.
                                      Figure 9: x and dispR Correlation


6     Other Implications
This section looks at other implications of the model. The first is the interaction between the dispersion of
productivity shocks and the impact of monetary policy. The second is the effects of uncertainty rather than
dispersion on pricing.


6.1    Real Dispersion and the Effects of Monetary Policy
This section continues to study the interaction between money shocks and TFPR dispersion. But instead
of asking whether money shocks can create TFPR dispersion, here we study how the real effects of money
depends on TFPQ dispersion.
    There are two important empirical findings that guide this discussion. First, Vavra (2014) argues that
the dispersion of price changes is countercyclical as is the frequency of price adjustment. Second, Tenreyro
and Thwaites (2016), output is less responsive to monetary policy during recessions.
    Putting these pieces together, if TFPR dispersion is countercyclical than recessions are associated with
more frequent price adjustment and thus a smaller impact of monetary policy. This leads Vavra (2014) to
argue that shocks to nominal spending will have a smaller effect on output when the dispersion of firm level


                                                       25
6.1    Real Dispersion and the Effects of Monetary Policy                                   6    OTHER IMPLICATIONS




                  Case               corr(y, dispR )   corr(y, dispp )    corr(y, dispn )       corr(y, f req )
                  Data                    -0.45             -0.41              -0.50                -0.27
                                                                    Baseline
                  dispQ ,  = 0           -0.1945           -0.2621          -0.4789                 0.1378
                  dispQ ,  = -1.3        0.0181            -0.4690          -0.5616                -0.1323
                                                                Larger dispQ
                  dispQ ,  = 0           -0.6740           -0.6255          -0.8448                 0.8450
                  dispQ ,  = -1.3        -0.7807           -0.6856          -0.6101                -0.5894
                                                                Smaller muQ
                  dispQ ,  = 0           -0.2222            0.0389          -0.0553                0.1655
                  dispQ ,  = -1.3        -0.5453           -0.4618          -0.5225                -0.3950
                                                                 Larger muQ
                  dispQ ,  = 0           -0.8533           -0.3893          -0.6577                0.5959
                  dispQ ,  = -1.3        -0.8574           -0.3119          -0.6622                0.3344

          This table shows moments for different mixtures of dispQ and µQ shocks as well as monetary policy rules
          at the baseline and alternative parameter values.

                              Table 7: Cyclical Variations: Combining Shocks


productivity is higher.
   We use our model, with its explicit distinction between TFPQ and TFPR, to study the effects of monetary
shocks. The question is whether the real impact of these shocks is lower when dispR is higher, given that
this dispersion is endogenous.39
      As we have already seen, changes in the distribution of z will influence price setting and thus will the
impact of monetary policy in a SREE. Intuitively, more variability in the distribution of z implies that price
adjustment, given a monetary shock, is more likely and thus the real effects of the monetary shock will be
reduced. This is a variant of the point made by Vavra (2014).
      This is illustrated in Figure 6 which compares low and high dispersion cases. Here the focus is on the
response of real output and prices to x, rather than on the shifts in these curves due to variations in TFPQ
dispersion. Clearly the frequency of adjustment is higher when the dispersion of z is higher. From the right
diagram, prices are more responsive to monetary shocks in the high uncertainty case so that output, left
bottom, is less responsive.
      Table 9 quantifies the effects of changes in dispersion on the response of output to a monetary innovation.
It does so by regressing the log of real GDP on the (log of the) monetary shock. From that table, the response
of output to a monetary innovation is 9% points higher in the low dispQ case. The bottom part of Table 9
shows the complementary effects of money shocks on prices.
      Does this analysis support the finding of Tenreyro and Thwaites (2016) on the cyclical effectiveness of
monetary policy? It would iff recessions were associated with large dispersion in TFPR. But, as discussed
above, the sources of aggregate fluctuations studied here, particularly variations in dispQ , do not generate
countercyclical dispersion in TPPR.
  39 In contrast to Vavra (2014), we do so in a model with exogeneous variations in money rather than nominal spending

"shocks".




                                                            26
6.2    Effects of Uncertainty                                                          6   OTHER IMPLICATIONS




                                      Case                           corr(x, dispR )
                                      Data                               0.045
                                                       dispQ , µQ
                                      Baseline
                                       = 1 .3                            0.8361
                                      =0                                 0.0765
                                       = -1.3                           -0.6732
                                      Larger dispQ Variation
                                       = 1 .3                            0.0796
                                      =0                                -0.3834
                                       = -1.3                           -0.5993
                                      Smaller muQ Magnitudes
                                       = 1 .3                           -0.0252
                                      =0                                -0.1963
                                       = -1.3                           -0.5351
                                      Larger muQ Magnitudes
                                       = 1 .3                            0.2017
                                      =0                                -0.1058
                                       = -1.3                           -0.5733


          This table shows the correlations between dispR and monetary innovations for different monetary policy
          rules at the baseline and alternative parameter values when both dispQ and µQ shocks are present.

                                 Table 8: Correlation between x and dispR



                                                          Constant     Slope
                                                    Output Response
                                             Low dispQ    -0.4298      0.8866
                                             High dispQ -0.4381        0.7993
                                                     Price Response
                                             Low dispQ    0.4303       0.1167
                                             High dispQ 0.4392         0.2087


                                Table 9: Regression of output and prices on log(x)


6.2      Effects of Uncertainty
The distinction between uncertainty and dispersion is often blurred. The main effect of uncertainty, again
expressed in Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich, Eksten, and Terry (2018), is to create an incentive to wait and
allow the uncertainty to be resolved. To the extent this leads to a decrease in spending, largely on durables,
the uncertainty can be recessionary. This is often quite different from the positive effects of dispersion which
can lead to an expansion in output, as discussed above.
      The previous discussion highlighted the effects of dispersion on the frequency of price adjustment and thus
the real effects of monetary shocks. Here we focus on how ex ante price and ex post respond to uncertainty
over a distribution, not the realization of that change.
      Our analysis includes distributions over three dimensions: (i) idiosyncratic productivity, (ii) money trans-
fers, and (iii) aggregate productivity. Thus in principle one can study the effects of uncertainty with respect
to each of these three distributions.


                                                           27
                                                                                                           7   CONCLUSION


    To do so, it is natural to create a Markov switching process for the dispersion of, say, idiosyncratic
productivity. Price setters in period t would know the distribution of these shocks last period but in setting
their ex ante price, the period t distribution, as well as that for period t + 1 would not be known. Further,
for those who adjust ex post, the uncertainty would remain over the distribution in the following period when
they are consumers.40 This is the nature of the uncertainty.
   One extreme version of this Markow switching process is for the dispersion to be permanently high (low).
It turns out that for the price setting problem of young agents, the ex ante price is essentially the same with
high dispersion of the idiosyncratic productivity shock as it is for the low dispersion case. In fact, this is
true when the uncertainty is over the money transfer or the aggregate productivity distributions.
    Given this, it is unlikely that ex ante uncertainty matters for the price setting problem. This is verified
explicitly for the case of uncertainty over idiosyncratic productivity. Even if there is a positive probability
of a regime shift in the distribution of z , the ex ante price is essentially unchanged.
    This is an important finding. It makes clear that the effects come from dispersion not uncertainty. This
is consistent with Berger, Dew-Becker, and Giglio (2020) who argue, at least for aggregate shocks, that
uncertainty per se, had a negligible effect on real activity.


7     Conclusion
The analysis characterizes the properties of TFPR in a stationary rational expectations equilibrium in a
monetary economy with state dependent pricing. A quantitative version of the model is used to determine
the cyclicality of the dispersion in TFPR as well as other key pricing moments, the cyclicality of both the
frequency of price changes and their dispersion. This is studied by determining pricing decisions and thus
the distribution of TFPR in the face of aggregate shocks to: (i) the dispersion of TFPQ, (ii) the money
supply, (iii) the mean of TFPQ. These are very conventional shocks for an aggregate economy, with recent
attention given to variations in the dispersion of TFPQ.
    The findings are not supportive of the view that variations in the dispersion of TFPQ drive countercyclical
variations in TFPR. As indicated in the analysis, this can only arise from a particular form of monetary
intervention: the money supply innovation must be negatively correlated with variations in the dispersion of
TFPQ. This is the case even when the dispersion shock is accompanied with an offsetting change in the mean
of TFPQ. Absent such monetary interventions, dispersion in TFPQ and TFPR are procyclical, reflecting
the gains to reallocation associated with increased productivity dispersion.
    Focusing on the case in which the model can reproduce both countercyclical TFPR and match pricing
patterns, the paper provides evidence that the resulting monetary policy is not consistent with the data. In
particular, the correlation between monetary innovations and the dispersion in TFPR is slightly positive.
But, in order to match moments, the model requires this correlation to be quite negative.
    Admittedly these results are suggestive rather than definitive. The OG model, with only one period of
price setting, misses some of the forward looking aspect of price adjustment. But, as argued in the text, the
pricing behavior in the model is similar to that produced by other state dependent pricing models. On the
data side, it would be desirable to have higher frequency observations on both prices and quantities upon
which to base a structural estimation exercise.
    Throughout these exercises, one theme emerges: non-linearities in the response of the economy to mon-
etary and dispersion shocks. Regardless of the source of aggregate fluctuations, the dispersion of TFPR is
 40 Thus   the expectation on the left side of (16) is extended to include the conditional expectation over the future dispersion.



                                                                28
REFERENCES                                                                                  REFERENCES


generally lowest for extremely low and high realizations and highest for the average state. This property of
the model, driven by the U-shaped response of the frequency of price changes to money surprises, makes it
useful to study the impact of monetary and productivity shocks using non-linear statistical models.
   Finally, the model is used to study the effects of uncertainty on pricing. It seems clear that the effects
highlighted in our analysis stem from dispersion not uncertainty. One interesting extension of our model
would be to include some of the adjustment cost structure that creates a real options effect, as in Bloom
(2009), coupled with state dependent pricing.


References
Bachmann, R., and C. Bayer (2014): "Investment Dispersion and the Business Cycle," American Eco-
  nomic Review, 104(4), 1392­1416.

Bachmann, R., B. Born, S. Elstner, and C. Grimme (2019): "Time-varying business volatility and
  the price setting of firms," Journal of Monetary Economics, 101, 82­99.

Ball, L., and D. Romer (1991): "Sticky Prices as Coordination Failure," The American Economic Review,
  81(3), 539.

Berger, D., I. Dew-Becker, and S. Giglio (2020): "Uncertainty shocks as second-moment news shocks,"
  The Review of Economic Studies, 87(1), 40­76.

Bloom, N. (2009): "The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks," Econometrica, 77(3), 623­685.

Bloom, N., M. Floetotto, N. Jaimovich, I. S. Eksten, and S. J. Terry (2018): "Really Uncertain
  Business Cycles," Econometrica, 86(3), 1031­1065.

Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (2005): "Nominal rigidities and the dynamic
  effects of a shock to monetary policy," Journal of political Economy, 113(1), 1­45.

Cooper, R. W., and I. Schott (2013): "Capital reallocation and aggregate productivity," Discussion
  paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Decker, R. A., J. C. Haltiwanger, R. S. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2019): "Changing business
  dynamism and productivity: Shocks vs. responsiveness," Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Dotsey, M., R. G. King, and A. L. Wolman (1999): "State-dependent pricing and the general equilib-
  rium dynamics of money and output," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(2), 655­690.

Dotsey, M., and A. L. Wolman (2019): "Investigating Nonneutrality in a State-Dependent Pricing Model
  with Firm-Level Productivity Shocks," FRB of Philadelphia Working Paper.

Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger, and C. Syverson (2008): "Reallocation, firm turnover, and efficiency:
  Selection on productivity or profitability?," American Economic Review, 98(1), 394­425.

   i, J. (1999): "Technology, employment, and the business cycle: do technology shocks explain aggregate
Gal´
  fluctuations?," American economic review, 89(1), 249­271.



                                                     29
                                                                                                 8   APPENDIX


          (2015): Monetary policy, inflation, and the business cycle: an introduction to the new Keynesian
    framework and its applications. Princeton University Press.

Golosov, M., and R. E. Lucas (2007): "Menu costs and Phillips curves," Journal of Political Economy,
    115(2), 171­199.

Hsieh, C.-T., and P. J. Klenow (2009): "Misallocation and manufacturing TFP in China and India,"
    The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4), 1403­1448.

Ilut, C., M. Kehrig, and M. Schneider (2018): "Slow to hire, quick to fire: Employment dynamics
    with asymmetric responses to news," Journal of Political Economy, 126(5), 2011­2071.

Kehrig, M. (2011): "The cyclicality of productivity dispersion," US Census Bureau Center for Economic
    Studies Paper No. CES-WP-11-15.

Krusell, P., and A. A. Smith, Jr (1998): "Income and wealth heterogeneity in the macroeconomy,"
    Journal of political Economy, 106(5), 867­896.

Lucas, R. E. (1972): "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money," Journal of economic theory, 4(2),
    103­124.

Miranda-Agrippino, S., and G. Ricco (2018): "The transmission of monetary policy shocks," Discussion
    paper, CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP13396.

Smets, F., and R. Wouters (2007): "Shocks and frictions in US business cycles: A Bayesian DSGE
    approach," American economic review, 97(3), 586­606.

Tenreyro, S., and G. Thwaites (2016): "Pushing on a string: US monetary policy is less powerful in
    recessions," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 8(4), 43­74.

Vavra, J. (2014): "Inflation dynamics and time-varying volatility: New evidence and an ss interpretation,"
    The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1), 215­258.


8      Appendix
8.1     SREE: Linear Quadratic
For the case of linear quadratic preferences, the SREE defined in section 2.3 becomes a set of functions
(¯      ~(M, z, x), F  (M, x, z ), P (M, x)) such that:
 p(M ), p

     · p
       ¯(M ) solves the ex ante pricing problem given the state dependent price index P (M, x);

                                            x                                 p(M ), M, x))2
                                                                      (Ez,x d(¯
                         ^
                         p ¯(M )Ex,x                d(¯
                                                      p(M ), M, x)) =                        .            (15)
                                        P (M x, x )                             z2

     · p
       ~(M, z, x) solves the ex post pricing problem given the state dependent price index P (M, x)

                                                         x          d(~
                                                                      p(M, z, x), M, x)
                                  ^
                                  p ~(M, z, x)Ex (               )=                     .                 (16)
                                                     P (M x, x )            z2



                                                          30
8.2    Generalized Definition of SREE                                                                          8       APPENDIX


      · At the critical adjustment cost F  (M, x, z ), the seller is just indifferent between adjusting and not:
         F  (M, x, z ) = W a (M, z, x) - W n (M, z, x)

      · P (M, x) is the aggregate price function in state (M, x) given by:

                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                       1-
                  P (M, x) = Ez (1 - (F  (M, x, z ))¯
                                                    p(M )(1- ) + Ez (F  (M, x, z ))~
                                                                                   p(M, z, x)(1-                   )
                                                                                                                            .   (17)

                           p(M ), M, x) = ( Pp
      Throughout, again, d(¯                 ¯(M ) -
                                             (M,x) )         p(M, z, x), M, x) = ( p
                                                     Y and d(~                     ~(M,z,x) -
                                                                                    P (M,x) ) Y and Y =
  Mx
P (M,x) .
      The analysis builds on this case to add in both dispQ and µQ variations. The SREE for that more general
model is defined in sub-section 8.2. The linear-quadratic economy is constructed from that definition using
the linear-quadratic functional form.


8.2       Generalized Definition of SREE
Here the definition of a stationary rational expectations equilibrium is generalized to include shocks to the
distribution of plant-level productivity through µQ and dispQ . Let S = (x, µQ , dispQ ) be the aggregate state
and s = (z, F ) be the idiosyncratic state.41 As earlier, M is the previous money stock and thus is known at
the time prices are chosen ex ante. This definition is for the linear-quadratic economy.
      A SREE is a set of price functions (¯      ~(M, S, s), P (M, S )), value functions (W n (M, S, s), W a (M, S, s)),
                                          p(M ), p
and a critical value of the price adjustment cost, F  (M, S, s) satisfying: (i) individual optimization by young
price setters and old consumers, (ii) market clearing and (iii) consistency of beliefs and expectations for all
states. These conditions can be written:

      · p
        ¯(M ) solves the ex ante pricing problem given the state dependent price index P (M, S );

                                                                                               d(p, P (M, S ), M x)
               ¯(M ) = argmaxp ES,z,S V ((R(p, P (M, S ), M x)x )/P (M x, S )) - g (
               p                                                                                                    )           (18)
                                                                                                        z

         for all M .

      · p
        ~(M, S, s) solves the ex post pricing problem:

                                                                                                d(p, P (M, S ), M x)
             ~(M, S, s) = argmaxp ES V ((R(p, P (M, S ), M x))x /P (M x, S )) - g (
             p                                                                                                       ).         (19)
                                                                                                         z

         given P (M, S ), for all (M, S, s);

      · At the critical adjustment cost, F  (M, S, s), the seller is just indifferent between adjusting and not:


                                            F  (M, S, s)  W n (M, S, s) - W a (M, S, s)

         for all (M, S, s), with W a (M, S, s) given by:

                                                                                              d(~
                                                                                                p(M, S, s), P (M, S ), M x)
          W a (M, S, s) = ES V ((R(~
                                   p(M, S, s), P (M, S ), M x))x /P (M x, S )) - g (                                        ).
                                                                                                            z
                                                                                                                          (20)
 41 So   here the notation is different from that in the text to be more explicit about aggregate and idiosyncratic variables.



                                                                31
8.3    Quantitative Approach                                                                                  8   APPENDIX


        and W n (M, S, s) given by

                                                                                             d(¯
                                                                                               p(M ), P (M, S ), M x)
             W n (M, S, s) = ES V ((R(¯
                                      p(M ), P (M, S ), M x))x /P (M x, S )) - g (                                    ).   (21)
                                                                                                         z

      · P (M, S ) is the aggregate price index in state (M, S ) given by:

                                                                                                                   1
                    P (M, S ) = [Ez (1 - (F  (M, S, s)))¯
                                                        p(M )1- + Ez ((F  (M, S, s))~
                                                                                    p(M, S, s)1- )] 1-                     (22)

        p(M ), P (M, S ), M x) = ( Pp
where d(¯                           ¯(M ) -
                                    (M,S ) )         p(M, S, z ), P (M, S ), M x) = ( p
                                             Y and d(~                                ~(M,S,z ) -
                                                                                      P (M,S ) )  Y . Here Y =
  Mx
P (M,S )   is the equilibrium determined real value of money holdings.


8.3        Quantitative Approach
We first discuss how a SREE is computed and then present the various shocks and parameterization used in
the analysis. For the price setting component of the SREE, all of the state variables are exogenous except
for the aggregate price level, P (M, S ).42 In contrast, the aggregate price level is an equilibrium object, and
is therefore calculated from the choices of the sellers, as in (17). Thus the focus of the solution approach is
to find the equilibrium price function, P (M, S ).

8.3.1       Computational Algorithm

Step 1 Start with an initial guess of the aggregate price function, P (0) (M, S ). This is a 3-dimensional
matrix, since aggregate state variable set includes 3 elements S = (x, µQ , dispQ ) .

Step 2 Calculate the new implied aggregate price function, P (1) (M, S ), by solving the system. Specifically,

   1. Solve the nonlinear system governed by (20) and (21). Note that (21) is not an independent equation
        per se, but a set of equations for each point in the state space. Solution to the system yields ex ante
        price, p
               ¯(M ) and ex post prices, p
                                         ~(M, S, s) .

   2. Using the ex ante p                        ~(M, S, s), calculate the values of adjustment W a (M, S, s)
                        ¯(M ) and ex post prices p
        and non-adjustment W n (M, S, s), given by (20) and (21) respectively, for each point in the state space.

   3. Compare the values of adjustment W a (M, S, s) and non-adjustment W n (M, S, s) for each point in
        the state space, and store the maximum value of each case and also store whether adjustment or
        non-adjustment yield this maximum value.

   4. Given the decisions about adjustment, pick the corresponding price (ex ante or ex post ) and construct
        the realized price matrix for each point in the state space.

   5. Given the probability of occurrences of each idiosyncratic state, calculate the new aggregate price
        matrix, P (1) (M, S ) for each point in the aggregate state space.
 42 See    Section 8.2 for the components of state variable set, along with the full definition of SREE.




                                                                 32
8.3    Quantitative Approach                                                                                     8   APPENDIX


Step 3      If the distance between P (0) (M, S ) and P (1) (M, S ) is within the error tolerance level, the aggregate
price function converges, which yields the aggregate price function and price policy functions. If not return
to Step 1, setting the initial guess to the updated aggregate price function, i.e. P (0) (M, S ) = P (1) (M, S ).
Keep iterating until the aggregate price function converges.
   Note that there is no approximation involved here. The approach simply solves a system of equations
to find a SREE. So unlike an approach based upon Krusell and Smith (1998), there are no moments per se
used to characterize an equilibrium.

8.3.2     Shocks

Idiosyncratic productivity shock                In the model, idiosyncratic productivity shocks (TFPQ shocks) are
one of the main sources of heterogeneity. In the baseline scenario, firms perfectly know the distribution which
they are going to draw their productivities. Particularly, idiosyncratic productivity shocks have a mean of 1
and a standard deviation denoted by z .43 We employ Rouwenhorst algorithm to produce a Markov matrix
for a given value of standard deviation of z and mean of z .
      Furthermore, as we discuss below, in the later steps, we relax the assumption of agents knowing the
distribution which they are going to draw. In this setup, standard deviation z (dispQ shocks) and mean of z
( µQ shocks) are now stochastic processes, as well. Therefore, when dispQ and µQ shocks are imposed, firms
do not know not only the value they will draw as their idiosyncratic productivity, but also the dispersion
and the mean of the distribution.

dispQ Shock        When imposed, the spread of idiosyncratic productivity distribution itself becomes a stochas-
tic process. dispQ shocks change the dispersion of idiosyncratic productivity shocks for everyone, therefore
is an aggregate shock. When dispQ shocks applied, agents ex ante do not know whether they are going to
draw their idiosyncratic productivity from a wider or a narrower distribution.

µQ Shock         µQ shocks move the mean value of TFPQ, and similar to dispQ shock, when imposed ex
ante agents do not know the mean value TFPQ distribution. This shock is included to capture aggregate
productivity shocks.

Combined µQ and dispQ Shock                  In Table 7, to impose perfectly negatively correlated combined shocks
of dispQ and µQ , first we decrease the number of states in µQ to be equal the number of dispQ states, 3.
Therefore, as in Vavra (2014) we associate the highest state of dispQ to the lowest state of µQ , and vice
versa.

Menu Cost          Firms are heterogeneous due to the realization of firm-specific price adjustment costs. Fur-
thermore, firm heterogeneity stems not only from the realizations of menu costs, but we also impose another
form of heterogeneity in the distribution of menu costs. A small fraction  of firms face zero price adjust-
ment cost and thus have perfectly flexible prices. The remaining fraction 1 -  draws from a nondegenerate
distribution of adjustment cost. Figure 10 exhibits the shape of menu cost distribution.
      The menu cost distribution follows Dotsey and Wolman (2019), using a tangent function given by:

                                                       1           F - 2
                                             G(F ) =        tan(         )+·                                              (23)
                                                                     1
 43 Given   the one period nature of price setting, there is no gain to specifying the AR(1) for these shocks.


                                                                33
8.3    Quantitative Approach                                                                             8   APPENDIX


      with

                                               ¯
                                               F
                      1 =          -1                             ;          2 = arctan( ·  ) · 1 .               (24)
                              [tan      ( -  ·  ) + tan-1 ( ·  )]
                                         ¯ , controls the extent of price stickiness. As F
      The upper bound on the fixed cost, F                                               ¯ increases, higher
values for menu cost is now available, making the adjustment harder. The curvature parameters (,  ), are
chosen so that G(F ) is monotonically increasing. As noted above,  governs the fraction of flexible-price
firms, and thus increasing this value leads to a larger number of small price changes and a higher overall
frequency of price adjustment. Corresponding values can be found in Table 10.




                          This figure shows the non-degenerate distribution of price adjustment costs.
                                          Figure 10: Menu Cost Distribution



8.3.3        Parameters

Standard deviations of idiosyncratic productivity, dispQ are parameterized to match some related the uncon-
ditional movements in the dispersion of TFPR moments reported in Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich, Eksten,
and Terry (2018) and Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2008). Our calibration strategy applies when all
the shocks, (dispQ , x, µQ ) are imposed, however results do not significantly change, when we calibrate the
model to separately include shocks to (dispQ , x) or (µQ , x).
      More elaborately, we tried to match: (i) the mean value of dispR : 0.08 taken from Foster, Haltiwanger,
and Syverson (2008), and (ii) the standard deviation of idiosyncratic productivity shocks in the low dispersion
state of 0.051 taken from Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich, Eksten, and Terry (2018) and (iii) the ratio of high
volatility to low volatility of 4.1 taken from Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich, Eksten, and Terry (2018). We
choose our three dispQ values to match these moments. However, given the limitations of the model it is


                                                              34
8.3    Quantitative Approach                                                                         8   APPENDIX




 Parameter                Value    Description                                                  Source
 Utility Parameters
                          3        Elasticity of substitution between products                  see sub-section 5.2
                          1        Elasticity of labor supply                                   see sub-section 5.2

 Dispersion
 Low dispQ                0.051    Volatility in the low idiosyncratic state                    Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich, Eksten, an
 High dispQ
 Low dispQ
                          4 .1     High dispQ to Low dispQ ratio                                Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich, Eksten, an
 Mean dispR               0.08     Mean value of dispersion in TFPR                             Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2008
 Low dispersion of µQ     0.0067   Volatility in the low aggregate state                        Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich, Eksten, an
 Dispersion Ratio, µQ     1 .6     The ratio of high to low volatility in the aggregate state   Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich, Eksten, an

 Menu Cost Distribution

                          0.053    Probability of zero menu cost                                Dotsey   and   Wolman   (2019)
 ¯
 F                        0.033    Upper bound on menu cost                                     Dotsey   and   Wolman   (2019)
                          41.9     Curvature parameter                                          Dotsey   and   Wolman   (2019)
                          2.8      Curvature parameter                                          Dotsey   and   Wolman   (2019)


                                         Table 10: Parameterization


not possible to closely match all these moments simultaneously. Under the baseline scenario, the calibrated
values of dispQ = {0.0571, 0.1284, 0.2111} can match 0.0917 as the mean value of dispR , and 0.0447 as the
low volatility state of dispR , and 3.3 as the ratio of high to low volatility.
      In order to match the data moments, we relax first and second targets, and keep the third moment as our
only calibration target. When we follow this strategy, calibrated values are dispQ = {0.004, 0.015, 0.024}.
Under this new calibration strategy, model yields the following moments: (i) 0.0470, (ii) 0.0156, and (iii)
4.08. As Table 5.2 presents, when  = -1.3 model performs much better than other calibration strategy to
match the data moments.
      When calibrating muQ shocks, we follow a similar approach as in dispQ shocks. This time our calibration
target is the standard deviation of aggregate productivity shock distribution presented in Bloom, Floetotto,
Jaimovich, Eksten, and Terry (2018). Specifically, the baseline calibration sets the mean value of high and
low volatility as stated in Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich, Eksten, and Terry (2018), which is 0.0087. Related,
when we combine dispQ and µQ shocks, we also imposed low and high variations. In Table 7 and 8, in
smaller muQ panel, the volatility is 0.0067 and in larger muQ panel, it is 0.0174.




                                                         35
