                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      NATURAL BARRIERS AND POLICY BARRIERS

                                            Yang Jiao
                                          Shang-Jin Wei

                                       Working Paper 28171
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28171


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020




This research is financed by the authors' university research budgets. We thank Bob Staiger,
David Weinstein, and seminar participants at Columbia University, Fudan University, and World
Bank for very helpful comments. Part of the work was done when Yang Jiao was a Postdoctoral
Fellow at Dartmouth College, whose hospitality is greatly appreciated. All errors are our own
responsibilities. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Yang Jiao and Shang-Jin Wei. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Natural Barriers and Policy Barriers
Yang Jiao and Shang-Jin Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 28171
December 2020
JEL No. F1,O24

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper investigates whether "natural" trade barriers of a country due to geography and other
factors outside the country's control stimulate more or less policy barriers such as tariffs. Our
theory predicts that the politician's relative weight on private benefits over social welfare in a
"protection-for-sale" setup depends on these "natural" features. The key mechanism is that a
society's willingness to invest in improving institutions that constrain rent-seeking behavior is
influenced by the natural barriers. Two types of empirical evidence support the theoretical
predictions. First, "natural" barriers beget policy barriers - countries with more "natural" barriers
tend to have higher tariffs and more NTBs. Second, liberalization begets liberalization - in
response to unilateral trade reforms in China in the early 2000s, those other countries that benefit
more from the Chinese liberalization also undertake more liberalization of their own.


Yang Jiao
Fanhai International School of Finance
Fudan University
Shanghai
China
yang.jiao.0606@gmail.com

Shang-Jin Wei
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
Uris Hall 619
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027-6902
and NBER
shangjin.wei@columbia.edu
1     Introduction
Countries differ in their levels of "natural" trade barriers due to geography and other fac-
tors outside their control. For example, as Fiji and Argentina are physically more distant
from any of the major markets in North America, Europe, and East Asia, than Portugal
and Panama, the former face intrinsically higher physical costs of engaging in international
trade. This paper investigates whether "natural" trade barriers of a country tend to induce
more man-made trade barriers such as higher tariffs, making the country even less open, or
to stimulate more effort at trade liberalization, offsetting the disadvantage associated the
"natural" barriers. We aim to develop a political economy theory of policy barriers that goes
beyond the standard "protection-for-sale" model (Grossman-Helpman, 1994) by linking the
politician's relative weight on private benefits over social welfare to these "natural" barriers.
As such, it provides a novel interpretation for why the average tariff rates vary by country,
and how a country's trade regime responds to trade liberalization in other countries. The
part of a country's policy barriers (e.g., tariff or tariff-equivalent of other barriers) that can
eventually be traced to natural trade barriers by our mechanism will be called "natural tariffs"
as a shorthand.
   Global average tariffs have trended downward over the last few decades (see Panel A of
Figure 1). At the same time, there is still a wide dispersion in the average level of import
tariffs across countries (see Panel B of Figure 1). Using tariff data at the HS 4 digit averaged
over 1995-1997 for 92 countries, we perform a simple decomposition of the total variance of
the tariff rates (in percentage term) into a part due to the variations across products within a
country (within-country variation for short) and a part due to the variations across the mean
tariff rates of the countries (between-country variation). We find that the total tariff variation
(123.5) = Within-Country Variation (61.8) + Between-Country Variation (61.7). In other
words, the two parts are basically equally important. Similar patterns hold for other time
periods. As the existing empirical tests of the tariff theories tend to focus on within-country
variations, we aim to explore between-country variations in our empirical work.
   What explains the variations? The classic optimal tariff theory (dating back to Edgeworth,
1894) points out that if a country has a market power over a traded product, it can exploit
it by setting a non-zero tariff. Generally, the greater the market power, the less elastic is
the foreign supply of the product, the higher the optimal tariff. For a panel of 15 countries
which are not WTO members, Broda, Limao, and Weinstein (2008) show that their relative
tariff rates across sectors are indeed inversely proportional to the elasticities of foreign export
supplies.
   An alternative explanation is political economy. The state-of-art political economy theory


                                                2
is Grossman and Helpman's (1994) "Protection for Sale" model.1 Goldberg and Maggi (1999)
and Gawande and Bandyopadhyay (2000) show that the variations across US sectors in the
coverage ratios of the non-tariff barriers are consistent with the model. Mitra, Thomakos
and Ulubasoglu (2002) show that the cross-sector variations in the protection rates in Turkey
in 1983, 1984, 1988 and 1990 are also consistent with the protection-for-sale model. These
studies all focus on within-country variation of the tariff rates.
   It is noteworthy that the relative weight on social welfare in the politician's objective
function in both the theoretical model of Grossman and Helpman (1994) and the empir-
ical work of Goldberg and Maggi (1999) and Gawande and Bandyopadhyay (2000) is an
exogenous (and constant) parameter. One interesting exception in the empirical literature
is Mitra, Thomakos, and Ulubasoglu (2002), who study the experience of Turkey in four
separate years (1983, 1984, 1988 and 1990). 1983 was the last year of a dictator regime
in the country, whereas democracy characterizes the other three years. They find that the
estimated weights on the social welfare in two of the three democratic years are higher than
the corresponding one in the dictatorial year. This find is interpreted as suggesting that the
politician's relative weight on social welfare versus private benefits is influenced by the broad
institutional environment that restraints rent seeking behavior by politicians. Given the very
small number of years in their sample, this hypothesis is not formally tested in their paper.
   In this paper, we propose a theory that endogenizes the relative weight that the politician
places on the social welfare versus his private benefits. We argue that a country's exogenous
features - or certain factors outside the control of the politician such as geographic features,
relative population size, and other countries' policy choices - affect the social preference for
certain institutional quality which in turn affect the politician's relative weights. The un-
derlying mechanism is this: certain natural features make it more appealing for a country
to invest for better institutional quality (for example, by raising the salaries of judges and
government officials to reduce the temptation of corruption or investing in electronic ac-
counting and tax-collecting systems to make it easier to discover illicit transactions between
firms and government officials) in order to respond to these exogenous natural features. A
higher quality of institutions places more constraints on the politician's ability to convert
private sector "donations" or bribes to private benefit. As a result, the politician in such an
economy finds it optimal to pursue a lower level of policy barriers to trade. This framework
provides a novel explanation for variations in the tariff rates across countries. We will show
that a similar logic implies that changes in other countries' trade policies can also induce
changes in domestic institutional constraint on rent seeking behavior. As a result, this theory
also helps to explain some time series variations in policy barriers (or transmission of trade
  1
      For earlier political-economy models, see Findlay and Wellisz (1982), Hillman (1982), and Mayer (1984).


                                                      3
liberalization from one country to other countries).

                       Figure 1: Country-level Average Import Tariff
                        (a) Mean of Country-level Average Import Tariff
                        in Different Years




                                                                     12
                         mean of average tariff (%, balanced sample)
                                 9           10  8        11




                                                                          1995             2000                     2005                    2010
                                                                                                         year




                        (b) Country-level Average Import Tariff Distribu-
                        tion (averaged across 3-year 1995-1997)
                                             .08
                                             .06
                         Density
                          .04                .02
                                             0




                                                                           0         10                 20               30            40
                                                                                 average import tariff (%): 1995-1997 3-year average




   The existing literature has confirmed that poor institutional quality appears to add trans-
action costs to international trade (see e.g., Jiao and Wei (2019), Beverelli et al. (2018)).
A lower degree of natural barriers increases the marginal benefit of improving institutional
quality for the median voter, whose willingness to pay for better institutions then rises. In
this paper, we introduce this insight into the Grossman and Helpman (1994) protection-for-
sales model of tariff determination. Better institutions induced by a lower degree of natural
barriers place more constraints on politicians' ability to convert bribery to personal benefits.
This effectively makes politicians to care more about the social welfare, leading to a more

                                                                                                     4
liberal trade policy in equilibrium.
   We provide a set of empirical tests for the key predictions of our theory. We examine
both trade policies across countries at a given time and the responses of the tariffs to some
big shock to a country's external trading environment (e.g., unilateral trade liberalization by
China). We find that countries with a smaller population, and certain geographical features
that give them smaller natural barriers exhibit a lower average tariff. In other words, natural
barriers appear to beget policy barriers.
   Since our theoretical story is about unilateral tariff determination, we expect the empirical
results to be stronger for countries without much international constraint on their tariff
setting. Since the WTO (and its predecessor the GATT) imposes far less liberalization
obligations on developing country members (under the "special and differential treatment"
principle), we expect and indeed find that the empirical pattern is stronger for the sample of
non-OECD countries.
   Beyond the cross-sectional pattern, we examine tariff changes by small and medium-sized
countries during 1997-2007 in response to a large and unilateral trade liberalization by China
(which changes other countries' trading environment). China's unilateral liberalization dur-
ing this period reduced its average import tariff from around 15% to 5% within a decade.
While the tariff change was endogenous for China, it was exogenous for most other countries,
especially for small and medium sized countries. Interestingly, this Chinese policy change
represents uneven shocks to different countries due to the natural differences in proximity to
China and comparative advantage in export bundles. For example, those countries that are
geographically closer to China see a disproportionately greater increase in their export oppor-
tunity. Those countries whose specialization patterns happen to coincide with what China
wanted to import also see a disproportionately greater increase in their export opportunity.
We find that those countries experiencing a relatively greater expansion in their trading op-
portunity due to the Chinese reform shock indeed engage in a larger tariff reduction of their
own. The effect is stronger for countries whose tariff settings are less constrained by WTO
rules.
   As a third type of empirical exercise, we explore implications of tariff changes across prod-
ucts with differential dependence on contracting institutions. An extension of our baseline
model shows that, holding constant the average foreign tariff changes, a country should en-
gage in more tariff reduction if the expansion of its trade opportunity takes place on those
exportable products that are more dependent on contracting institutions. The data confirms
this prediction too.
   The relationship between the natural tariff and optimal tariff needs to taken into account.
The theoretical argument for the "optimal tariff" was made by Edgeworth (1894). Given a


                                               5
country's market power over the products, the optimal tariff exploits this. Broda, Limao and
Weinstein (2008) provide the first empirical support that show that countries do try to exploit
their market power, especially before they become WTO members. While the optimal tariff is
meant to raise social welfare, the natural tariff in our theory is the tariff in a political-economy
equilibrium that is consistent with a country's public governance institutions constraining
rent seeking behavior. Sometimes a country that is predicted to have a higher natural tariff
may also has a higher optimal tariff. For example, a large country may simultaneously have a
higher optimal tariff level (due to greater market power) and a higher natural tariff level (due
to a worse institutional quality). It is an empirical challenge to distinguish the two channels.
In our empirical work, we will estimate each country-sector's market power (the inverse of
the elasticity of foreign export supply) and include it as a control variable. In other words,
we examine, after controlling for optimal tariff, whether a country's population size has any
additional predictive power for the tariff level. We will show that our argument continues to
hold after controlling for optimal tariff. South Korea and India are an informative comparison.
As their estimated elasticities of foreign export supply are nearly identical, they are predicted
to have the same level of optimal tariff. In the data, the Indian tariff of 32% during 1995-1997
is much higher than South Korea's 7% during the same period. This pattern is consistent
with our theory: As Indian's natural barriers are higher, its natural tariff rate is higher. In
other words, the natural tariff hypothesis provides additional information that goes beyond
the optimal tariff argument.
   To place our paper in the literature, we begin with endogenous trade policy. Grossman
and Helpman (1994) pioneered a theory of lobby for protection by interest groups. Using US
data, Goldberg and Maggi (1999) estimate that the government places a far larger weight on
social welfare than on campaign contributions. Gawande and Bandyopadhyay (2000) finds
support for both the protection side and the lobbying side using non-tariff barriers data in
US. Bagwell and Staiger (1999) emphasize terms of trade as a motive for the world trade
system. Broda, Limao and Weinstein (2008) empirically confirm the importance of terms of
trade as countries' incentives to set import tariffs. Our contribution is to connect natural
features and exogenous trading opportunities to the domestic political incentives in choosing
equilibrium tariffs.
   Our paper is also related to the literature on effects of trade policy, which is too extensive
to be comprehensively summarized here. As a relatively recent example, Pavcnik (2002)
evaluates how Chilean plants' exits and productivity are affected by a trade liberalization.
Amiti and Konings (2007) highlight the role of imported intermediate inputs in raising firms'
productivity. Dix-Carneiro (2014) trace the labor market dynamics after a trade liberaliza-
tion. McCaig and Pavcnik (2018) study the labor allocation between informal sector and


                                                 6
formal sector in Vietnam after a shock in US import policy against Vietnam. We offer a new
perspective: domestic trade policy may adjust endogenously in response to foreign policy
shocks that alter the home country's exogenous trading opportunities.
    Krishna and Mitra (2005) propose a theory of "reciprocated unilateralism" based on the
formation of lobbying groups in a country's exporting sector in response to foreign trade
liberalization. Our contribution is to add an institutional dimension as a new pathway from
foreign trade policy shock to domestic policy adjustment - a large foreign trade shock first
alters domestic institutions that constrain rent-seeking opportunities, which then induce a
change in the domestic tariff. Separately, while they do not provide empirical tests, we show
empirical evidence that a country's trade policy indeed responds to changes in foreign trade
policies. In addition, the country's institutional quality also responds to changes in foreign
trade barriers.
    Maggi, Mrázová and Neary (2018) endogenize red-tape barriers (wasteful trade barriers)
and tariff simultaneously. They argue that lower natural trade barrier will make politicians
less tempted to use red-tape barriers for a given level of tariffs, reducing the need for keep-
ing tariffs high. In their framework, politicians' objective function is exogenous while in
our framework it is endogenous to deeper determinants linked to the country's natural fea-
tures or trading partner's policy choices. While their contribution is on the theory side, we
complement our theory with extensive empirical evidence.
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we provide the model and derive
the key propositions. In Section 3, we investigate the cross-sectional patterns across countries
to show they are consistent with our theory predictions. In Section 4, we conduct a long
difference exercise as our main identification strategy. In Section 5, we explore product-
level heterogeneity to further highlight the role of institutional quality as our key mechanism
linking natural barriers and import tariff. In Section 6, we conclude.


2     The Model
2.1    Model Setup
Our model is a two-stage Stackelberg game. The second stage is characterized by a protection-
for-sale game a la Grossman and Helpman (1994), in which the politician and the lobbyists
exchange tariffs (protection) for lobbying contributions (bribes). In particular, the politician
sets the tariff rate to maximize a weighted average of her private benefits and social welfare.
In the original Grossman-Helpman (1994) model, the relative weight is set as an exogenous
parameter. We will instead let the relative weight on private benefit be a function of the


                                               7
strength of public institutions. The idea is that the weaker the public institutions, the easier
it is for the politician to convert bribes or lobbying contributions to her private benefits with
impunity. This will translate into a greater relative weight on the private benefit in the
politician's utility function. In the first stage, the median voter anticipates the equilibrium
outcome in the second stage, and optimally decides how much resource to devote to improving
public institutions. Natural barriers will turn out to affect the median voter's cost-benefit
analysis in this context.
    Consider an open economy (Home) with three industries. Industry 0 produces a freely
tradable homogeneous good (the numeraire), industry 1 competes with imports, and industry
2 produces a good that is sold both at home and abroad. This 3-industry setup is similar
to that in Krishna and Mitra (2005). Home is endowed with L workers, each supplying
inelastically c units of effective labor.
    Industry 0 uses only labor as an input, and each unit of effective labor produces one
unit of Good 0. The wage rate is then given by c. In the import-competing industry,
Industry 1, a continuum of domestic firms compete with foreign imports, and each employs
a constant-returns-to-scale production function that combines labor with a specific factor T.
The exportable industry, Industry 2, features a continuum of firms, with each, denoted by
i  [0, 1], employing a constant-returns-to-scale technology to produce one variety of good.
    All consumers have an identical preference taking the following quasi-linear form
                                                                     1
                                      u = x0 + u(x1 ) +                   (x2i )di.2            (1)
                                                                 0


Here x0 and x1 are the consumption of industry-0 good and industry-1 good, respectively,
and x2i is the consumption of the variety provided by firm i in industry 2 in the home country.


2.2       Social Welfare
Denoting by p1 the domestic price in industry 1 and p2i the domestic price of firm i's variety
in industry 2, we can write the budget constraint of a representative domestic consumer as
                                                           1
                                       x0 + p 1 x1 +           p2i x2i di = w,                  (2)
                                                       0


where w is the income of the representative consumer in Home. The consumer's utility
function then gives the domestic demand functions for industry 1 and industry 2 goods,
respectively:
                                     u (x1 ) = p1 ,                                (3)
  2
      Our theoretical results will not change if there is a continuum of goods in industry 1.


                                                        8
                                                       (x2i ) = p2i .                                        (4)

   We assume that the rest of the world's demand function for variety i in Industry 2 is
similar to the domestic demand function:

                                                      (x         3
                                                        2i ) = p2i ,                                         (5)

where x                         
        2i is the quantity and p2i is the price. Since the solutions to the prices and quantities
of Industry 2 goods will be symmetric, we will drop subscript i when there is no risk of
confusion.
   The indirect utility of an individual consumer at home with income w is derived as
                                                 1
                            w + s1 (p1 ) +           s2 (p2i )di = w + s1 (p1 ) + s2 (p2 ),                  (6)
                                             0


where s1 (p1 ) = u(x1 (p1 )) - p1 x1 (p1 ) is the the worker's consumer surplus on industry 1 good,
and s2 (p2 ) =  (x2 (p2 )) - p2 x2 is the worker's consumer surplus on industry 2 good.
   The world price of Industry 1 good is denoted by p           1 , and the domestic price of Industry
1 good is
                                               p1 = p1 (1 + t),                                    (7)

where t is the home country's import tariff.
   We use (p1 ) to denote Industry 1 firms' total profit. The per capita profit then is
             p1 )
1 (p1 ) = (L      . A higher import tariff t will raise p1 and thus domestic firms' profit in
Industry 1. Using the Envelope theorem, we obtain that the domestic per capita output in
Industry 1 is
                                       y (p1 ) = 1 (p1 ).                                 (8)

The total tariff revenue is
                                        R(p1 ) = p1 t(Lx1 - Ly (p1 )),                                       (9)

and the per capita tariff revenue is

                                                 R(p1 )
                                     r(p1 ) =           = p1 t(x1 - y (p1 )).                              (10)
                                                  L

Finally, per capita income  is the summation of the labor income, the profits from both
Industries 1 and 2, and the tariff revenue, i.e.,

                                       = c + 1 (p1 ) + 2 (p2 ) + r(p1 ),                                   (11)
  3
      We can specify the foreign utility function in a similar way as the domestic one to arrive at this result.


                                                             9
where 2 (p2 ) is the per capita profit in the exportable industry 2. The social welfare (before
paying the cost of improving institutions) in per capita term can be written as

vb =  + s1 (p1 ) + s1 (p2 )
  =        c         +            1 (p1 ) + s1 (p1 ) + r(p1 )                +               2 (p2 ) + s2 (p2 )                 .
      labor income       component related to the mport-competing industry       component related to the exportable industry

                                                                                                                         (12)

   As equation (12) shows, the overall social welfare can be decomposed into three parts:
a labor income, a second component related to the import-competing industry, and a third
component related to the exportable industry. The second component can be further decom-
posed into domestic Industry-1 firms' profit, the consumer surplus from consuming Industry-1
good, and the tariff revenue. The third welfare component is the sum of Industry-2 firms'
profit and the consumer surplus from Industry-2 goods.


2.3     The Welfare Component Related to the Exportable Industry
We now discuss the role of institutional quality in the exportable industry. When a country
has poor public governance (e.g., a high level of corruption or a judicial system that is not
independent or fair), exporting firms that do not fulfill their contractual obligations may
not face serious consequences in their home country. For instance, they may bribe judges or
government officials to evade their contractual obligations or legal punishment for violations
of the obligations. The notion that weak institutional quality is a burden on businesses has
been highlighted in the existing literature, see Fisman and Svensson (1999), Wei (2000) and
Tamirisa and Wei (2002) among many others.
   For our theory, a key is that poorer public governance raises the cost of conducting in-
ternational trade transactions. We provide a micro-foundation for this idea below. All our
theoretical propositions in subsequent discussions will also hold if we assume that poorer
public governance raises the cost of doing both domestic and cross-border business transac-
tions.
   Consider a domestic firm in the exportable industry, and a foreign buyer which repre-
sents a unit mass of foreign consumers. We assume that foreign consumers have the utility
                    1- 1
function   (x) = x 1- 1 , where x is the quantity consumed. The domestic firm has an innate

productivity, normalized to 1.
   The exporting firm and the buyer can jointly make relationship-specific investment ex
ante to improve the exporting firm's productivity and benefit both parties. The benefit to
the importer is a lower price of the good for the consumer in the importing country. Assume

                                                            10
if the buyer pays fixed cost Ib and the exporting firm pays fixed cost Is (s denotes "seller" and
b denotes "buyer"), then that particular exporter's productivity is raised to G. On the other
hand, if only the buyer pays the fixed cost Ib , then the firm's productivity is only raised to
Gb < G. If only the exporter pays fixed cost Is , then the firm's productivity is only raised to
Gs < G.
    Given the foreign consumers' utility function, the exporting firm's profit is

                                    1                                1-
                                          d(1 + t )c                        A-1 ,
                                    -1 -1

and the foreign consumers' surplus is

                                    1                                1-
                                          d(1 + t )c                        A-1 ,
                                    -1 -1

where A denotes the firm's productivity.
   We will assume that joint investment is beneficial to both parties ex ante. That is, for the
firm
                       1                      1-
                                   d(1 + t )c      (G-1 - 1) - Is > 0,                     (13)
                     -1 -1
and, for the buyer

                            1                             1-
                                  d(1 + t )c                   (G-1 - 1) - Ib > 0.                             (14)
                            -1 -1

However, if the exporting firm cannot commit to making the investment, the buyer would not
make the investment.4 In this case, neither sides would invest. In other words, we consider
a scenario in which the best outcome occurs when both parties make a relationship-specific
investment, but a Pareto-inferior outcome (a prisoners' dilemma) occurs when a contract on
the mutual commitments cannot be enforced.
   We will use q to denote the quality of public governance institutions in the home country.
Denote by µ(q ) the fraction of the contracts will be enforced.5 It is natural to assume
µ (q ) > 0, i.e., more contracts will be respected by private agents in a country with a higher
                                                                            1-
                                                                                     -1
   4
       This requires parameter restrictions that    1
                                                    -1
                                                          
                                                          -1 d(1   + t )c        (Gi    - 1) - Ii < 0, i = s, b; and
                       1-
                                       -1
 1
 -1
         
              + t )c
         -1 d(1           (G-1 - G   b    ) - Is < 0.
   5
    Theoretically, µ should depend on foreign institutional quality q  as well. Since the small open economy
takes foreign institutions as given, we omit q  to save notations.




                                                         11
institutional quality. As a result, the total profit of the firm from selling abroad is

    1                       1-               1                        1-
       L         d(1 + t )c    G-1 µ(q ) +       L        d(1 + t )c     [1 - µ(q )]
   -1        -1                            -1        -1
                  1                       1-
   - L µ(q )Is =     L         d(1 + t )c      µ(q )G-1 + [1 - µ(q )] - L µ(q )Is > 0.
                 -1       -1
                                                                                     (15)

                                                   1
Denote h(q ) = {µ(q )G-1 + [1 - µ(q )]} 1- . It can be easily verified that h (q ) < 0, which
means that worse institutional quality has the same effect as raising the variable cost of doing
international trade. In Tables 14 and 15 in the Appendix, we present evidence from gravity
regressions that worse institutional quality reduces international trade.
   With the above functional forms, we can derive the per capita profit in industry 2 as

                   1                  1-       L                               1-              L
   2 (p2 (q )) =               c           +              d(1 + t )h(q )c           - ( - 1)     µ(q )Is .
                   -1       -1                 L       -1                                      L

An improvement in the institutional quality leads to a smaller variable trade cost and a
higher firm's profit.
   Note that the per capita domestic consumer surplus from industry 2 goods is

                                   s2 (p2 (q )) =  (x2 (p2 )) - p2 x2 (p2 )
                                                    1     1-         -
                                                =      1 p2    - p12
                                                  1- 
                                                    1                 1-
                                                =                 c        .                             (16)
                                                  -1 -1

Without risk of confusion, we now write firm profit 2 (p2 (q )) and consumer surplus s2 (p2 (q ))
as 2 (q ) and s2 (q ), respectively.
   Ignoring the cost of achieving a given level of institutional quality, the per capita social
welfare is

vb = c + 1 (p1 ) + r(p1 ) + s1 (p1 ) + 2 (q ) + s2 (q )
  = c + 1 (p1 ) + r(p1 ) + s1 (p1 )
      1                  1-       L                              1-              L           1                  1-
  +                c          +          d(1 + t )h(q )c              - ( - 1)     µ(q )Is +         c               .
      -1        -1                L   -1                                         L           -1 -1
                                                                                                (17)


   If improving institutional quality is costless, better institution quality always improves


                                                        12
the home country's social welfare. But institutional improvement may cost resources. For
instance, rampant corruption in some countries is sometimes associated with under-paid
judges, policemen, and civil servants.6 Hong Kong and Singapore use very high public sector
pay, sometimes pegged to the level of multinational companies' executive compensation, to
deter corruption.7 In general, countries have to spend resources to set up anti-corruption
agencies and to pay government officials and civil service workers sufficiently well in order to
deter corruption.8 We use (q ) to denote the per capita cost for achieving a given level of
institutional quality, q . The post-institutional-cost per capita social welfare is

v = vb - (q )
  =         c         +        1 (p1 ) + s1 (p1 ) + r(p1 )            +           2 (q ) + s2 (q )              -        (q )            .
       labor income       import-competing industry related welfare       exportable industry related welfare       institutional cost

                                                                                                                                  (18)

As it will be clear in the next section, import tariff policy p1 (or t) is also a function of
institutional quality q . We will study a Stackelberg game in which institutional quality q is
first chosen by the median voter and then trade policy p1 (or t) is determined by politicians'
choice.


2.4      Equilibrium Tariff in the Import-Competing Industry
We are now in a position to consider tariff determination. As stated, we consider a two-stage
game. In the first stage, the median voter (in the whole economy) determines the level of
institutional quality (by deciding on the amount of resources used to build institutions that
constrain the politician's ability to "sell" trade protection for private benefits). In the second
stage, given the level of institutional quality, the politician and the domestic firms in Industry
1 enter a "protection-for-sale" game to determine the equilibrium level of tariff. The firms
form a lobby group and offer a compensation schedule as a function of tariff, b(p1 ), to the
incumbent politician.
   The objective function of the politician - the decision maker on the tariff - is given by

                                                   [1 -  (q )]b + av (p1 ),                                                       (19)
   6
     Van Rijckeghem and Weder (2001) report that countries with a lower public sector wage tends to have
a higher level of corruption.
   7
     "The Singapore government believed that an efficient bureaucratic system is one in which the officers are
well-paid so the temptation to resort to bribes would be reduced." - Rahman (1986), p. 151.
   8
     See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_anti-corruption_agencies for a list (perhaps incomplete) of
countries' anti-corruption agencies. The comprehensive data on the exact money spent on these agencies is
not available unfortunately.


                                                               13
where b is the bribe that the Industry-1 firms pay to the politician, and a is a parameter that
represents the weight that the politician puts on the social welfare. With institutional quality
q , the politician faces an expected loss as a fraction of the bribery described by  (q )  0. A
better quality of institutions reduces the amount of private benefit that can be accrued to
the politician to for a given dollar of bribe. This is represented by  (q )  0.
     The politician's objective function can be rewritten as:

                                                    a
                                            b+             v (p1 ).9                                       (20)
                                                 1 -  (q )
                   a
Denote a(q ) = 1-    (q )
                          . When a  +, the politicians are social welfare maximizers. Since
 (q )  0, a (q )  0. In other words, better public governance effectively induces the
politicians to place a greater weight on the social welfare. Recall that

                    v (p1 ) = c + 1 (p1 ) + r(p1 ) + s1 (p1 ) + 2 (q ) + s2 (q ) - (q ).                   (21)

Note that 2 (q ), s2 (q ) and (q ) are not affected by import tariff policy p1 . We denote
(p1 ) = 1 (p1 ) + r(p1 ) + s(p1 ). Then the politician's objective function can be rewritten
again as
                                        b + a(q )(p1 ).                                 (22)

   Using the results in Grossman and Helpman (1994), the equilibrium import tariff t after
solving for a sub-game perfect Nash equilibrium is

                                     t     I - 1             y (p1 )
                                        =                              ,                                   (23)
                                    1+t   a(q ) + 1         -m (p1 )p1

or
                                     I - 1      y (p1 )      I - 1 z
                               t=               
                                                          =             ,                                  (24)
                                    a(q ) + 1 -p1 m (p1 )   a(q ) + 1 e
where 1 is the fraction of the voting population that owns the specific factor of production
in industry 1. I is an indicator on whether an industry is politically organized or not. We
follow Broda, Limao and Weinstein (2008) and assume that the import-competing industry
is organized,10 so we set I = 1. In addition, the output-import ratio z = m(py  (p1 )
                                                                               1 )/(1+t)
                                                                                         , where
   9
     When  (q )  1 if q is larger than some threshold q    ¯, politicians will simply choose b=0 and maximize
social welfare, so that the weight on social welfare a(q) is +.
  10
     Broda, Limao and Weinstein (2008) consider sector-level data but assume all industries are organized
when they control for the protection-for-sale effect. A primary reason is that there is no systematical data
at the industry level for the degree of "organizedness" in most countries. In Goldberg and Maggi (1999),
they find that in U.S. all 3-digit SIC industries have positive campaign contributions. A literal interpretation
would imply that all industries are organized. They further use an "intuitive method" and set 2/3 industries as
organized since there seems to be a natural break in the campaign contributions when they plot contributions'


                                                      14
y is the domestic Industry 1 output and m/(1 + t) is the import (excluding tariffs), and
e = - mm (p1 )p1
          (p1 )
                 is the import demand elasticity.
       z
    If e were a constant, then equilibrium tariff t would clearly be a decreasing function of
q . However, as z    e
                       is likely a function of tariff t, the relationship between t and a is more
complicated. In a polar case with perfect institutional quality (q goes to infinity) and a(q )
going to infinity, the equilibrium tariff t collapses to 0 (the lowest possible level) and the
social welfare  is maximized.
    From a calibrated numerical exercise (see Appendix A.1), we find it reasonable to expect
the equilibrium tariff t to be monotonically related to weight a. Thus, in the rest of the
paper, we will assume that equilibrium tariff t is decreasing in weight a. Intuitively, when
the politician puts a larger weight on social welfare, the equilibrium trade policy is closer to
the social optimum (i.e., with a zero tariff).
    We then can prove that welfare  is monotonically increasing in weight a (or institutional
quality q ).

Lemma 1 When the domestic import demand function for industry 1 good is downward
sloping, i.e.,
                         m (p1 ) = x1 (p1 ) - y (p1 ) < 0,                  (25)

then the welfare component related to industry 1  is decreasing in weight a (or institutional
quality q ),
                                    d            d
                                        > 0 and     >0                                   (26)
                                    da           dq
Proof. The component of the social welfare related to industry 1 is

(p1 ) = 1 (p1 ) + r(p1 ) + s1 (p1 ) = 1 (p1 ) + (p1 - p1 )  [x1 (p1 ) - y (p1 )] + u(x1 (p1 )) - p1 x1 (p1 ),


where
                                            x1 (p1 ) = u -1 (p1 ),

                                             y (p1 ) = 1 (p1 ),

                                               u (x1 ) = p1 .

   The first order derivative is

d(p1 )
       = 1 (p1 ) + {[x1 (p1 )] - y (p1 )} + (p1 - p1 )[x1 (p1 ) - y (p1 )] + u (x1 (p1 ))x1 (p1 ) - x1 (p1 ) - p1 x1 (p1 )
 dp1
         = (p1 - p1 )[x1 (p1 ) - y (p1 )]                                                               (27)
distribution.

                                                     15
                                                                                           d(p1 )
  Since x1 (p1 ) - y (p1 ) < 0 and p1 - p                         
                                          1 = p1 (1 + t) - p1 = tp1 > 0, we get that        dp1
                                                                                                    < 0.
We then have
                                       d      d dp1
                                           =          < 0.                                          (28)
                                       da    dp1 da
As a (q ) > 0, we get d
                      dq
                         > 0.
   In a nutshell, when institutional quality improves, the politician's choice of the import
tariff becomes closer to the socially optimal level. We use function (q ) to denote the social
welfare component related to Industry 1 as a function of the institutional quality q . As
discussed,  (q ) > 0.


2.5     Equilibrium Institutional Quality
After solving for equilibrium tariff t given institutional quality q , we go back to the first stage
to determine optimal institutional quality q . For expositional convenience, we assume that
the median voter owns an average level of specific factor. In other words, the median voter's
welfare coincides with the social welfare. (In Appendix A.2, we study the case in which
the median voter has less than the average level of the specific factor. This happens if the
ownership of specific factor is concentrated. We find that all of our important conclusions go
through qualitatively.)
   The median voter's utility is given by

                             v (q ) = c + (q ) + 2 (q ) + s2 (q ) - (q ).                           (29)

Here c is labor income. (q ) = 1 (p1 (q )) + r(p1 (q )) + s1 (p1 (q )) includes the labor income, the
per capita firm profit in Industry 1, the tariff revenue per capita, and the consumer surplus
for consuming Industry-1 good. 2 (q ) is the total profit of the firms in Industry 2, s2 (q ) is
the consumer surplus for consuming Industry 2 goods, (q ) is per capita cost of achieving
institutional quality q . Note that (q ), 2 (q ), s2 (q ) and (q ) are all increasing in institutional
quality q .
   Plugging in the expressions for profit function 2 (q ) and consumer surplus function s2 (q ),
respectively, we obtain the first order condition with respect to q as follows

    L                            1-        d log h(q )           L dµ(q )
            d(1 + t )h(q )c           (-               ) - ( - 1) Is      +  (q ) =  (q ).          (30)
    L    -1                                    dq                L   dq

Equation (30) determines the equilibrium institutional quality. The left hand side is the
marginal benefit of improving institutional quality and the right hand side is the marginal
cost of improving institutional quality.


                                                   16
    Drawing on an analogy from a firm's optimal investment problem, we assume that the
marginal benefit of improving institutional quality is decreasing in q and the marginal cost
is increasing q . (Mathematically speaking, we only need a weaker assumption that the slope
of the marginal cost curve is greater than the marginal benefit curve in the neighborhood of
the equilibrium. An upward-sloping marginal cost curve and a downward-sloping marginal
benefit curve certainly satisfy the requirement.) This ensures that the optimal solution to
institutional quality q is unique if it exits. If the assumption were to be reversed, the optimal
solution will be a corner solution, i.e., either the worst possible institutional quality or the
best possible institutional quality will prevail in all countries, which is refuted easily by what
we observe in real world. To check if this assumption can be satisfied, we choose some
simple functional forms for h(q ), a(q ), µ(q ) and (q ), and trace out the marginal benefit and
marginal cost curves in Figure 2. The numerical exercise suggests that it is not too demanding
to obtain a downward-sloping marginal benefit curve and an upward-sloping marginal cost
curve. In such a diagram, the intersection point gives the equilibrium institutional quality q.
    Based on equation (30), we perform several comparative statics and obtain the following
propositions.

Proposition 1 (Market Size) A smaller population increases the country's institutional
quality and reduces its import tariff.

Proof. We can re-write the first two terms on the left hand side of equation (30) as

                L                       1-                            dµ(q )
                         d(1 + t )c          (G-1 - 1) - ( - 1)Is            > 0.
                L     -1                                               dq

         L
Smaller L  means that in equation (30), the marginal benefit of improving institutions is

larger. Therefore, the equilibrium institutional quality is better. From the section on tariff
determination, we see that better institutional quality leads to a lower import tariff t.

Proposition 2 (Geography) A lower degree of natural barriers due to favorable geographic
features (smaller d) increases a country's institutional quality and reduces its import tariff
level.

Proof. From the equation that determines the optimal institutional quality (30), we see that
a smaller d implies a larger marginal benefit of improving institutions, so that the equilibrium
institutional quality will be higher. Again, better institutional quality leads to a lower import
tariff.
   Note that geography is assumed not to affect import costs in the baseline model. This is
done to simplify the exposition. In Appendix A.3, we extend the model to allow for both

                                               17
geography and institutional quality to affect the transport cost on the import side. While the
extended model is messier, our calibrations confirm that the proposition continues to hold
under reasonable assumptions.

Proposition 3 (Foreign Trade Policy) A decline in a country's natural barriers due to
foreign trade liberalization (smaller t ) improves the country's institutional quality and lower
its import tariff.

Proof. Similar arguments as in the proof of proposition 2.
  We will empirically test these propositions.




                                              18
                    Figure 2: Equilibrium Institutional Quality q Determination



              1.2
                                                                             Marginal Benefit
                                                                             Marginal Cost
              1.1


                1


              0.9


              0.8


              0.7


              0.6


              0.5
                    2   2.2    2.4     2.6     2.8     3      3.2      3.4    3.6     3.8       4
                                             Institutional Quality q

Notes: This figure displays the marginal benefit and marginal cost of improving institutional quality q with
a numerical example, which determines the equilibrium institutional quality. We set the following
                                                                                  a            a
functional forms and parameter values: µ(q ) = exp(- qµ ), (q ) =    2
                                                                  2 q , a(q ) = 1- (q ) = 1-exp(- a ) ;
                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                          q
L = 1, L = 10,  = 0.3, t = 10%, d = 2,  = 2,  µ = 1, c = 1,  a = 1, Is = 0.1, G = 1.02, a = 1,  = 1 - e   q   .
In Appendix A.1, we have a numerical relationship on welfare  and politicians' weight a. So with
functional form a(q ), we are able to calculate the numerical derivative  (q ).




                                                     19
3       Empirics 1: From Natural to Policy Barriers?
3.1       Regression Specification and Data
We start with a cross-sectional regression of a country's average tariff level on some natural
features of the country that our theory predicts are important, namely, population size and
geography. The regression specification will take the following form:

                average tariffi =  +   {Market Size, Geography, Controls}i + i ,             (31)

where subscript i denotes country i and {Market Size, Geography}i include population, re-
moteness, coastline length/area and landlock dummy.
   For tariff, we use the average value over 1995-1997. We use the average population over
1992-1994 as one regressor. We choose this period to strike a balance between an ease of
comparison with Broda, Limao and Weinstein (2008) on market power and optimal tariff
which focus on a similar period and a sufficient coverage of countries. (Our results are robust
to other years, e.g., year 2001-2003, see Table 16 in Appendix A.7.) Our sample consists of all
countries with available data and with a population size of at least 0.5 million people. Smaller
countries tend to suffer from data quality problem. They also tend to have a diaspora that
are big relative to people who are left behind, making population count less reliable. The
resulting sample consists of 92 countries that have data on tariffs (from WITS), population,
and geography.
   We obtain Most Favored Nation (MFN) import tariff data from the World Integrated
Trade Solution (WITS). The country coverage is poor before 1995. On the other hand, many
developing countries have engaged in big trade liberalizations after 1997. For the cross-
sectional patterns, our key dependent variable is the average tariff rate over 1995-1997. We
linearly interpolate the data at the product level (HS4) when possible if there is missing data
during 1995-1997. In a later section, we will examine change in the tariff rates from 1997 to
2007 as the dependent variable.
   Throughout the paper, we focus on import tariff rates in the manufacturing sectors.11
Trade barriers on agricultural products tend to take the form of specific tariffs or quotas rather
than ad valorem tariff. Imputing ad valorem equivalents is unreliable as world commodity
price fluctuations can lead to large volatility in the imputed tariffs. For this reason, Bagwell,
Staiger and Yurukoglu (2018) also exclude agricultural products in their study.
   The average import tariff (%) across all HS-6 digit products - henceforth known as the
 11
      These are HS chapters 28-97.




                                               20
average tariff - of country i is computed as

                                            1 1997          jt   log(1 + tariff
                                                                           100
                                                                               ijt
                                                                                   )  100
                          average tariffi =                                               ,                  (32)
                                            3 t=1995                    Nit

where tariffijt is country i's import tariff (in percentage) of a HS good j in year t. We use
log(1 + tariff
          100
               ijt
                   ) to moderate the impact of the extreme values in some product-level tariffs on
the average tariff. The cross-country mean of the average tariff is 11.75 percent. There is
substantial variation in the average tariff across countries, with a standard deviation of 7.75
percent.
   The benchmark institutional quality data is taken from the International Country Risk
Guide (ICRG). The political risk indicators report various components of institutions. We
take the summation of the 3 components (in total 24 points) that are most relevant for
our story: the "Investment Profile" (12 points), corruption control (6 points), and law and
order (6 points). The Investment Profile is an index that is meant to measure the degree of
protection against expropriation risk,12 contract violation, repatriation and payment delays.
These three measures turn out to be highly correlated with each other. As such, we will not
try to identify their separate effects.
   These institutional features likely affect the extent of politicians' rent seeking behavior, and
the cost of doing business. To ensure sufficient country coverage, our measure of institutional
quality will be the average value over 2001-2003. There is a wide variation in the measured
institutional quality. For example, Democratic Republic of Congo has a score of 7.7 (out of
24), while Finland has a score of 24.
   The population data is from the World Bank World Development Indicators (WDI)
database and we use the average over 1992-1994 as our measure of population.13 The re-
moteness of economy i is defined as follows

                                     remotenessi =             wj log(dij ), 14
                                                        j =i


                                                                       tradej
where j = i denotes all other countries except i. wj =                   tradek
                                                                                  is the international trade share
                                                                      k

of country j in total international trade volume of all countries, where tradej = importj +exp
                                                                                          2
                                                                                               ortj

(then averaged across year 1992-1994) and dij is the great-circle distance between country i
  12
     See Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001) footnote 3 for a discussion on using expropriation risk as
institutional quality measure: expropriation risk is related to all the following institutional features including
constraints on government expropriation, independent judiciary, property rights enforcement, and institutions
providing equal access to education and ensuring civil liberties.
  13
     See https://databank.worldbank.org/source/world-development-indicators.
  14
     see Wei (1996) for an early exposition of this concept.


                                                       21
                         Table 1: Summary Statistics in the Cross Section

          Panel A: Country Level

                    Variable                       Obs      Mean      Std. Dev.      Min      Max       Median
                 average tariff                     92      11.75        7.75         0       41.94      10.78
                log(population)                     92      16.39        1.50       13.16     20.88      15.96
                  remoteness                        92       8.76        0.38       7.68       9.52       8.85
                 coastline/area                     92      0.037        0.10         0        0.90      0.01
               landlock dummy                       92       0.20        0.40          0         1          0
            log(GDP per capita)                    91       7.33         1.43        5.09     10.59       7.39
                OECD dummy                          92       0.08        0.28          0         1          0
             institutional quality                 114      14.49        3.96        2.67       24       13.83
              log(export/GDP)                      131      -1.23        0.60       -2.85      0.56      -1.25

 Panel B: Product Level (four-digit HS)

                    tariff                        87,364    12.12       11.11         0       109.86      9.53
       log(1/inverse export elasticity)           51,294    0.92         3.48       -15.46    14.87       0.28

Notes: This table reports summary statistics of key variables we use in the cross-sectional study in Section
3.



and j computed using CIA World Factbook latitude and longitude information.
   The data on each country's coastal length and area size are from the World Resource
Institute15 and the World Bank World Development Indicators, respectively. The ratio of
the two will be a key regressor. There are 19 landlocked countries in our full sample of 92
countries. We will use a dummy for landlocked countries. However, in some specifications
when the country coverage shrinks due to missing data for some regressors, the coefficient
for the landlocked dummy cannot be precisely estimated, as many landlocked developing
countries tend to be both poor and small, and have a disproportionate tendency to have
missing data. Note also that, since a landlocked country has no coastline, the landlock
dummy and the ratio of coastline length and area size are negatively correlated. However,
the correlation, at -0.2, is not too high.
   We obtain total exports and GDP in current dollars by country from the World Bank
World Development Indicators (WDI). Table 1 reports the summary statistics of the key
variables used in this section's regressions.
   Table 2 reports the pairwise correlation matrix between different dimensions of natural
  15
   See the archive https://web.archive.org/web/20120419075053/http://earthtrends.wri.org/text/coastal-
marine/variable-61.html.



                                                     22
               Table 2: Pairwise Correlation Matrix: Population and Geography

                       log(population)      remoteness      coast/area     landlock dummy
  log(population)           1.0000
    remoteness             -0.0477             1.0000
   coastline/area          -0.1792             0.0498          1.0000
 landlock dummy            -0.1768             -0.0754        -0.1976            1.0000

Notes: This table reports pairwise correlations of log(population), remoteness, coastline length/area and
landlock dummy. The sample size is 92.



barriers. The correlations among most dimensions of natural barriers are low. For example,
the correlation between log population and remoteness is -0.05, and that between coastline
length/area and remoteness is 0.05.



3.2     Discussion on Identifying Assumptions
Before presenting the main results, we first discuss some of the key identifying assumptions.
One important assumption is that geographic features and relative population size are pre-
determined, but these can be challenged. First, both population size and geographic features
can affect a country's market power, which may affect the tariff choice even without our
political economy story. For this reason, we will include an estimate of market power as a
control variable.
   Second, the population of a country is not constant and changes literally every day with
birth, death, and immigration, and can also respond to trade policies. Nevertheless, we show
in Figure 3 that relative population size has been quite "sticky" in the data. The correlation
between 1960 and 1995 log(population) across countries is 0.99. Since what matters for our
identification is the relative population size, there is less concern on the endogenous response
of population to trade policy.
   Third, countries' geographic features might change via wars and other political or military
events. In our analysis, we will drop all countries that have any significant border changes
after 1975 as a robustness check.16 This gives us a sample of 79 countries with relatively
stable borders. We will show that this change makes little difference to our inferences. See
Table 18 in the Appendix on the results with this sample.17
  16
     Table A.5 in the Appendix provides a list of countries that have experienced significant changes in
borders.
  17
     One may also be concerned that in the construction of the remoteness measure, there is each country's
trade weight information, which can change over time too. But we find that the remoteness measures using


                                                    23
                                                      Figure 3: log(population) in 1995 versus 1960


                                    22
                                                        45 degree line                                                    CHN
                                                                                                                        IND

                                    20                                                                            USA
                                                                                                             IDN
                                                                                                           BRA
                                                                                                        PAK    RUS
                                                                                                              JPN
                                                                                                        BGD
                                                                                                        NGA
                                                                                                       MEX DEU
                                                                                                    PHL
                                                                                                    EGY
                                                                                                   IRN VNM
                                                                                                     THA
                                                                                                     TURFRA
                                                                                                         GBR
                                    18                                                             ETH   ITA
                                                                                                        UKR
                                                                                                    KOR
                                                                                                   MMR
                                                                                                 COD
                                                                                                  ZAF
                                                                                                  COL ESP
                                                                                                     POL
                                                                                               TZA
                                                                                               DZA ARG
                                                                                                  CAN
           ln(population) in 1995




                                                                                             KEN
                                                                                            SDN MAR
                                                                                               PER
                                                                                              UZB
                                                                                             VEN  ROU
                                                                                        SAU  MYS
                                                                                            UGA
                                                                                            IRQ PRK
                                                                                               NPL
                                                                                              LKA
                                                                                               AUS
                                                                                       CIV GHA
                                                                                            MOZ
                                                                                          YEM
                                                                                         SYR
                                                                                          CMR AFG
                                                                                              KAZ
                                                                                             CHLNLD
                                                                                       ZWEMDG
                                                                                          AGO
                                                                                         ECUCUB
                                                                                       MWI
                                                                                       NER
                                                                                      ZMB
                                                                                      SEN KHM
                                                                                        GTM
                                                                                         BFA
                                                                                          MLI
                                                                                        TUN  GRC
                                                                                               HUN
                                                                                              CZE
                                                                                             BLR
                                                                                              BEL
                                                                                              PRT
                                                                                            SWE
                                                                                      DOM
                                                                                       GIN
                                                                                        HTI
                                                                                        AZE
                                                                                       BOL
                                                                                      TCD   AUT
                                                                                          CHEBGR
                                    16                                          LBY
                                                                                     SOM
                                                                                     BDI
                                                                                      HKG
                                                                                    BEN
                                                                                     RWA
                                                                                   TJK
                                                                                     SLV
                                                                                   HND
                                                                                   ISR
                                                                                     SSD
                                                                                   LAO  SVK
                                                                                         DNK
                                                                                         FIN
                                                                             JOR  PRY
                                                                                  PNG
                                                                                  NIC
                                                                                   KGZ
                                                                                 TGO
                                                                                 TKM
                                                                                   SLE GEO
                                                                                        HRV
                                                                                       NOR
                                                                                      BIH
                                                                                 SGP
                                                                               CRI
                                                                                CAF
                                                                                 ALB
                                                                                ERI PRI
                                                                                    MDA
                                                                                    NZL
                                                                                  ARMLTU
                                                                                     IRL
                                                                                    URY
                                                                                  LBN
                                                               ARE            PAN
                                                                              COG
                                                                            MRT
                                                                             MNG   LVA
                                                                                 JAM
                                                                          OMN LBR
                                                                             XKX SVN
                                                                                MKD
                                                                      KWT   LSO
                                                                           NAM
                                                                          BWA  EST
                                                                            TTO
                                                                           GNB
                                                                           MUS
                                                                         GAB
                                                                        GMB
                                    14                                  SWZ
                                                                         TLS
                                                                          CYP
                                                              DJI BHR FJI GUY
                                                                         MNE
                                                           QAT       BTN
                                                                    COM
                                                                     GNQ
                                                                      SUR
                                                                  MAC
                                                                SLB CPVLUX
                                                                       MLT
                                                              BRN
                                                                BHS
                                                               MDV ISL
                                                                     BRB
                                                              PYF
                                                               BLZ
                                                              NCL
                                                             VUTWSM
                                                               LCA
                                                             GUM CUW
                                                                CHI
                                    12                  VIR
                                                          FSMSTP
                                                              VCT
                                                               GRD
                                                             TON
                                                            ABW
                                                          KIR
                                                          SYC
                                                           IMN
                                                             DMA
                                                            ATG
                                                   AND
                                                 MNP ASM  BMU
                                                        GRL
                                                   MHL  FRO KNA
                                             MAF
                                               CYM  LIE
                                                      MCO
                                                      GIB
                                                    SMR
                                    10          VGB
                                              TCAPLW
                                             NRU
                                              TUV


                                     8
                                         8             10          12          14          16            18             20      22
                                                                           ln(population) in 1960


Note: This figure displays the raw data of ln(population) in year 1995 against that in year 1960. The red
line is the 45 degree line. The correlation between ln(population) in year 1995 and 1960 is 0.987. Our cross
sectional evidence is barely changed if we drop the outlier ARE (United Arab Emirates) in the above figure.



   Besides the relationship between natural barriers and tariff rates, we will undertake ad-
ditional exercises. First, we will check whether institutional quality is also correlated with
natural barriers as our theory suggests. Second, we will examine whether and how import
tariffs of small and medium sized countries respond to changes in their natural barriers,
due to unilateral trade reforms in China. This approach differences out all time-invariant
determinants of import tariffs. Third, we will explore cross-product heterogeneity in other
countries' unilateral trade policy change.
   As a key mechanism in the natural tariff theory is that natural barriers reduce export
opportunities, which in turn reduce a country's incentive in improving domestic institutional
quality, we check for the plausibility of this link in the data. In Appendix Table 19, we report
three sets of statistical results.
1972-1974 trade weight and 1992-1994 trade weight have a very high correlation of 0.99.


                                                                                    24
    We check how a country's export volume, measured by log(export/GDP ), is linked to
natural barriers. In Column (1) of Panel A, we find that countries with a larger population,
a greater distance to other economies, or a lower ratio of coastline length/area tend to have
a smaller log(export/GDP ). Since richer countries may export more, but being rich could
also be a consequence of having better institutions, we need a "pure income" variable that
is purged of the effect of natural barriers on the income. We construct this variable as the
residual term from regressing log income on log population, remoteness, ratio of coastline
length/area size, and a landlocked dummy. In Column (2), we add the pure income term.
A positive and statistically significant coefficient confirms that richer countries on average
export more. As the tariff data are available for a smaller set of countries (90 as opposed to
130), in Column (3) and (4), we restrict the sample to those countries with tariff data. The
results are similar: a smaller population, a smaller distance to major markets, or a longer
coastline relative to area size tends to be associated more export openness. Note that a
country's distance to other countries, coastal length relative to area size, and population size
during 1992-94, are all pre-determined with respect to export volume in 1995-1997.
    In Panel B-1, the dependent variable is institutional quality as measured by the Political
Risk Index (a greater value means better institutions). In Panel B-2, the dependent variable
is control of corruption as measured by the Transparency International index. In both cases,
the results show that countries with a larger population, a greater distance to other economies,
a lower ratio of coastline length to area size tend to have a worse institutional quality, in
both the full sample as well as in the restricted sample of the countries with tariff data.
    In summary, the data confirms that natural barriers raise the costs of exports and reduce
the volume of exports (not surprisingly), and appear to be associated with a lower institu-
tional quality (which is not ex ante obvious but is consistent with our theory). Since the
natural barriers are pre-determined (with unchanged geography at least since 1975), they
cannot respond to institutional quality in the 1990s. We will interpret the data patterns
as the existence of a political economy force that shape a country's institutional quality in
response to the configurations of its natural barriers.


3.3    Effects on Tariffs: Initial Evidence
We now examine relative heights of import tariffs around the world. We use country-level
average tariff rate during 1995-1997 as the dependent variable, and investigate whether and
how they are linked to a country's natural barriers. Table 3 reports the regression results.
   The most parsimonious regression is reported in column (1) of Table 3, where log(population)
and remoteness (besides the constant) are the only regressors. Both coefficients are positive


                                              25
                   Table 3: Population, Geography and Average Import Tariff

                                     (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)
    Dependent Variable: average import tariff
    log(population)               1.626**       1.480**       1.555**     1.431***     1.621***
                                   (0.618)      (0.615)       (0.623)      (0.530)      (0.593)
    remoteness                    5.149***     5.207***      5.320***     5.600***      5.069**
                                   (1.714)      (1.731)       (1.780)      (1.387)      (2.033)
    coastline length/area                     -13.488***    -12.623***   -15.009***   -14.553***
                                                (4.292)       (4.212)      (4.077)      (4.238)
    landlock dummy                                             1.070
                                                              (1.631)
    log(population)*OECD                                                                 -1.259*
                                                                                         (0.656)
    remoteness*OECD                                                                       -2.098
                                                                                         (1.969)
    coastline length/area*OECD                                                          13.063*
                                                                                         (7.228)
    OECD dummy                                                                          34.807*
                                                                                        (20.449)
    log per capita income*                                                -2.398***    -1.920***
                                                                           (0.519)       (0.642)
    Observations                      92          92            92            91             91
    R2                              0.146        0.179         0.182        0.320          0.337
    Robust standard errors in parentheses
    
     p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01


Notes: This table reports the relationship between natural barriers' measures and the country level average
import tariff. In columns (4) and (5), Myanmar GDP per capita data is missing. log per capita income* is
the residual from regressing log per capita GDP on the four natural barrier variables.




                                                    26
and statistically significant at the 5% level. In other words, either a larger population or a
greater distance to other countries is associated with a higher import tariff. This is consistent
with the theoretical prediction.
   In Columns (2) and (3), we progressively add coastline length/area and a landlock dummy
as additional regressors. The coefficient before the ratio of coastline length/area is negative,
and that for the landlock dummy is positive. These signs are both consistent with the model
prediction. The first coefficient is statistically significant at the 1% level but the landlock
dummy is not. Since there are only a small number of landlocked economies in the sample,
the last coefficient may not be well identified.
   To understand the economic significance of the natural barriers, we use the estimates
in Column (3) as an illustration. An increase in log population by one standard deviation
(which is 1.5 according to Table 1) tends to lead to an increase in the tariff rate by 2.1
percentage points (=1.431x1.5). An increase in a country's remoteness by one standard
deviation (which is 0.38) gives rise to an increase in the tariff rate by 2.1 percentage points
(=5.6x0.38). A lower ratio of coastline/area by one standard deviation (which is 0.10) leads to
an increase in the tariff rate by 1.5 percentage points (=15.0x0.1). These are all economically
significant effects. It is worth remarking that many countries suffer from a combination of
these disadvantageous natural barriers. Rather than making a greater effort at trade reforms
to offset the disadvantage of high natural barriers, our empirical work confirms our theoretical
prediction that such countries tend to erect additional man-made trade barriers, making their
economies even less open to international trade.
   As the history of GATT / WTO negotiations suggests, developed countries are likely to
have cut their tariffs more than developing countries. This suggests that the income level
may be a predictor for tariff levels too. However, the income level itself could be an outcome
of a country's natural features: if natural features of a country cause it to pursue better
institutions, as the empirical results in the previous subsection show, then income could also
rise faster over time in countries with fewer natural barriers (see Frankel and Romer, 1999).
To check if a country's income has any additional effect on tariff beyond what may come from
the configurations of the natural barriers, we regress log(GDP per capita) on the natural
barrier variables and denote the residual from the regression by "log (GDP per capita)".18
In Column (4), we include residual log (GDP per capita) as an additional regressor. The
point estimate of the coefficient is negative and statistically significant. This is consistent
with what we know about the GATT liberalization rounds - rich countries indeed have more
liberal trade regimes on average more than what their natural features would suggest.
  18
    The GDP per capita data of Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Moldova in 1992-1994 are missing in WDI
and are extrapolated using their 1995 and 1996 data by assuming a constant annual growth rate.



                                                 27
3.4     Controlling for Market Power
According to the optimal tariff theory, market power is a predictor of tariffs too (see the
evidence in Broda, Limao and Weinstein, 2008). This creates a confounding effect for us,
since larger countries may also have more market power on their imports (i.e., facing a less
elastic foreign supply).
   To address this challenge, we will include a direct measure of market power as an additional
control variable. We follow the Feenstra-Broad-Weinstein approach (see Feenstra, 1994 and
Broda and Weinstein, 2006) to estimate the inverse of export elasticities  ig for each 4-digit
HS product g of each importing country i. This is the same estimation procedure used in
testing the validity of the optimal tariff argument by Broda, Limao, and Weinstein (2008).
The details can be found in Appendix A.6.
   We now run country-product level regressions. The dependent variable is import tariff
of country i on HS-4 digit product g (as in Broda, Limao and Weinstein (2008)).19 The
key additional control variable is the inverse export supply elasticity  ig facing country i on
product g . The regression specification is as follows:

                 tariffig =  +   {Market Size, Geography}i +  log  ig +              ig .           (33)

   According to the results reported in Table 4, a greater market power indeed leads to a
higher tariff. However, this moderates the size of the point estimates of the natural barrier
variables only slightly. In column (1), we only include population and geography as explana-
tory variables and confirm our findings in Table 3 that countries with smaller population and
favorable geographic conditions (shorter distance to the rest of the world, larger coastline
length/area and not landlocked) produce a lower tariff rate. The magnitudes of these esti-
mates are in line with those in Table 3. In column (2), we add industry fixed effects following
Broda, Limao and Weinstein (2008), where industry is defined as the section classifications
of the HS system. It changes little of column (1) results.
   In column (3), we consider the market power story by adding logarithm of inverse export
supply elasticities as an additional control variable. The point estimate turns out to be
positive and statistically significant. It supports the market power argument that countries
set higher tariff if their trading partner's supply is inelastic. Note that the impact of market
size is slightly weakened. This is due to the fact that market size is correlated with market
power (see Table 13 in Appendix A.7). Overall, market size and geography continue to have
similar effects on tariffs as in column (2). Finally, adding inverse export supply elasticities
   We use 3-year (1995-1997) average of log(1 + tarif
  19                                                   f
                                                   100 ) × 100 as the left hand side variable in order to
minimize the impact of extreme values and data noises.


                                                   28
only increase R2 modestly from 0.158 to 0.182. In sum, the natural tariff prediction goes
beyond the optimal tariff theory.


3.5     The Design Features of the World Trade System
Our theory assumes that the tariffs are chosen voluntarily by the country in our theory. The
optimal tariff theory also requires this assumption. But the tariffs in the data come from
a mixture of countries, some of which may be constrained in their ability to set their own
tariffs under the WTO rules.
   As pointed out by Subramanian and Wei (2007) among others, the World Trade Orga-
nization (and its predecessor the GATT) imposes two-tier obligations: developed country
members face binding and greater liberalization obligations. Developing country members,
on the other hand, have more leeway in setting their tariffs under the principle of special
and differential treatment. (During the GATT years, most of the international trade took
place among developed countries. As a result, the multilateral trade negotiations focused
on reciprocal tariff reductions among developed countries.) In addition, non-WTO members
are not bound by obligations imposed by the WTO. These asymmetries are supported in the
data (see Subramanian and Wei, 2007, for more discussions.)
   In light of these institutional features, we distinguish between developed countries (de-
fined as countries that had joined the OECD prior to 1993) and developing countries. This
classification assigns Mexico, South Korea, Chile, and Colombia to the developing coun-
try group, and is common in the literature on trade and finance issues in emerging mar-
ket economies. Importantly, these countries were treated as developing countries when they
joined the GATT/WTO. We interact log(population) and geography with the OECD dummy.
We would expect that market size and geography have a larger impact on the non-OECD
countries since they are less or not constrained by WTO obligations. The estimation results
are reported in column (5) of Table 3 and column (4) (and (5), (6)) of Table 4. Indeed,
the signs of the estimated coefficients before the interaction terms between OECD dummy
and log(population) and geographic variables are consistent with the WTO institutional fea-
tures.20 For developed countries, log(population), remoteness and coastline length/area in
general play a much smaller role or little role in determining their average import tariffs.
   We check the role of market power by including the interaction term between log(1/inverse
export elasticity) and OECD dummy. The results are in column (5) and (6). We find that
the point estimate for the interaction term is negative and statistically significant. That is,
  20
    In our sample, there is only one country, Switzerland, that is both in the OECD group and landlocked.
The point estimate of the interaction term between OECD and landlock dummy should be interpreted with
reservation.


                                                   29
                   Table 4: Natural Barriers, Market Power and Import Tariff

                                      (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)             (6)
 Dependent Variable: import tariff
 log(population)                   1.679***       1.686***      1.390**      1.670***       1.662***          1.422***
                                    (0.613)        (0.613)      (0.571)       (0.584)        (0.585)           (0.539)
 remoteness                        4.698***        4.676**     5.052***       3.977*         3.953*           5.400***
                                    (1.785)        (1.785)      (1.758)       (2.048)        (2.045)           (1.957)
 coastline length/area            -12.163***     -12.142***   -12.198***    -12.300***    -12.307***        -15.340***
                                    (4.060)        (4.059)      (3.472)       (3.295)        (3.306)           (3.151)
 landlock dummy                      1.624          1.646        1.297         0.464          0.403              0.253
                                    (1.592)        (1.592)      (1.881)       (2.003)        (2.004)           (1.947)
 log(1/export elasticity)                                      0.118***                     0.121***           0.108*
                                                                (0.039)                      (0.045)           (0.060)
 log(population)*OECD                                                        -2.772***     -2.764***          -1.699**
                                                                               (0.614)       (0.615)           (0.669)
 remoteness*OECD                                                              -5.256**      -5.231**            -3.361
                                                                               (2.107)       (2.100)           (2.140)
 coastline length/area*OECD                                                 -22.287***    -22.258***            -0.775
                                                                               (6.608)       (6.629)          (15.037)
 landlock dummy*OECD                                                         -7.987***     -7.982***            -1.811
                                                                               (2.205)       (2.201)           (3.489)
 log(1/export elasticity)*OECD                                                              -0.120**            -0.096
                                                                                             (0.056)           (0.065)
 OECD dummy                                                                  85.965***     85.717***          54.798**
                                                                              (21.445)      (21.379)          (24.568)
 log per capita income*                                                                                      -1.994***
                                                                                                               (0.577)
 Industry Fixed Effect                 N             Y            Y               Y           Y                    Y
 No. of countries                      92            92           87              87          87                  87
 Observations                        87364         87364        50123           50123       50123               50123
 R2                                  0.091         0.158        0.182           0.240       0.241                0.275
 Standard errors clustered at country level in parentheses. Industry is defined as the section classification of HS code.
 
  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01

Notes: This table reports the relationship between natural barriers' measures and the country-product (HS
4-digit) import tariff. log per capita income* is the residual from regressing log income per capita on the
four natural barrier variables.




                                                     30
the market power story works more strongly for non-OECD countries. This is consistent
with Broda, Limao and Weinstein (2008) who test the market power as a determinant of
the tariffs. For OECD countries, we cannot reject the null of no association between market
power and tariff.


3.6    Output-import Ratio and Import Demand Elasticity
Grossman-Helpman (1994) predict that the heterogeneity in both output-import ratio and
import demand elasticity across countries and across sectors will matter for the tariff rates
at the country-sector level. In particular, the import tariff is

                                           output-import ratio
                             t =  (q )                            .                     (34)
                                         import demand elasticity

where  (q ) = a(1q- 1
                  )+1
                      .
  We can do a first-order approximation of  (q ) to arrive at an estimation equation:

                                      output-import ratio            output-import ratio
t = (1 - 1 )( 1  natural barriers                            + 2                              )
                                    import demand elasticity       import demand elasticity
                                                                                          (35)
where, if our theory is correct,  1 > 0.
    Since both country size and geography can affect the import penetration and therefore the
output to import ratio, our previous specification without these terms suffer from missing
regressors.
    For domestic output, we use United Nations Industrial Development Organization's (UNIDO)
International Standard Industrial Classification (ISIC) 4-digit. In many occasions, the data
is not presented in standard ISIC 4-digit code because different countries have different clas-
sification systems. For instance, the UNIDO data shows the output in industry 2429C in
Malaysia, which is actually a combination of industry ISIC industry 2429 and industry 2430.
This combined ISIC 4-digit industry code concordance is listed in the manual of the UNIDO
data. We use a concordance table from WITS between the standard ISIC 4-digit code and
the HS 4-digit code. Therefore, we are able to calculate the output-import ratio (excluding
tariff) at the combined ISIC 4-digit level with import data from the UN comtrade database
for each year when data is available. We finally use the 10-year average (1992-2001) of the
output-import ratios.
    The import demand elasticities are estimated along with the foreign supply elasticities
based on the methodology described in Broda, Limao and Weinstein (2008) at the HS 4-digit
level, see Appendix A.6 for details. We map those to the combined ISIC 4-digit level by using


                                                31
the simple average across the HS 4-digit codes within a combined ISIC 4-digit level industry.
    As many countries are missing in the UNIDO database, we have to contend with a smaller
sample of 59 countries in this exercise (compared to 92 countries in Table 12). The reduced
sample also means that we lose most (10 out 19) of the landlocked economies, making it
harder to identify the coefficient associated with the landlocked dummy.
    Given the potentially large measurement errors in both domestic output and import de-
                                     output-import ratio
mand elasticity, we winsorize import     demand elasticity
                                                           to a relatively large extent at the 10% level.21
Our empirical setting follows equation (35) by substituting natural barriers with measures
related to it, log(population), remoteness and coastline length/area.22 We report the OLS
estimation results in Table 5.
    Column (1) presents a simple (and naive) regression (without industry fixed effects. We
                                                                                                 output-import ratio
can see that the interaction terms between various natural barriers measures and import              demand elasticity
have the expected signs and two out of three are statistically significant. In Column (2), we
add a measure of country-industry level market power by log(1/export elasticity), which is
the simple average of all HS 4-digit measures corresponding to a given ISIC 4-digit level
industry. Since the ISIC 4-digit sectors are not standardized across countries, we include
2-digit ISIC industry fixed effects. The coefficient on log of the inverse of the export supply
elasticity is positive and statistically significant. This is consistent with the optimal tar-
iff argument. The two interaction terms involving log population and remoteness are both
positive and statistically significant, which are consistent with our theory. The coefficient
on the interaction term involving coastline/area is negative, consistent with our theory, but
statistically insignificant.
    In Columns (3) and (4), we employ an instrumental variable approach in the spirit of
Broda, Limao and Weinstein (2008). In particular, we use other countries' average values
      output-import ratio
of import demand elasticity
                            and log(1/export elasticity) as instruments for the corresponding vari-
ables. As the product classification at the combined ISIC 4-digit level is not standardized
across countries, the instrumental variables are constructed at the ISIC 3-digit level. On bal-
                                                                                         output-import ratio
ance, we find that the point estimates before natural barriers' measures* import             demand elasticity
become larger.
  21
    Winsorizing at the 5 % level shows robustness of our results.
  22
    Given that landlocked economies are disproportionately dropped and there are only a few landlocked
economies left in the sample, we don't have enough power to identify the role of the landlock dummy in this
exercise. So we instead focus on the related and finer geographical feature coastline length/area.




                                                      32
                                                             Output-Import Ratio
                              Table 5: Considering         Import Demand Elasticity


                                                             (1)             (2)          (3)                 (4)
 Dependent variable: import tariff
                                                                 OLS                               IV
                    Output-Import Ratio
 log(population)* Import Demand Elasticity
                                                        0.561***    0.524***           0.951***         0.854**
                                                         (0.134)     (0.135)            (0.324)          (0.368)
               Output-Import Ratio
 remoteness* Import Demand Elasticity
                                                        1.936***    1.817***           3.990***        3.918***
                                                         (0.520)     (0.509)            (0.980)          (0.990)
                          Output-Import Ratio
 coastline length/area* Import Demand Elasticity
                                                          -4.070      -3.549            -10.252           -9.792
                                                         (3.565)     (3.467)           (12.078)         (12.230)
   Output-Import Ratio
 Import Demand Elasticity
                                                      -25.452*** -23.771***           -49.624***      -46.908***
                                                         (5.282)     (5.346)           (12.165)         (12.851)
 log(1/export elasticity)                                            0.203*                                0.495
                                                                     (0.106)                             (0.326)
 log per capita income*                                -2.772*** -2.860***             -2.722***       -3.010***
                                                         (0.850)     (0.866)            (0.747)          (0.675)
 Industry FE                                                N            Y                 N                 Y
 No. of countries                                           59          59                 59                59
 Observations                                              4322        4322               4322             4322
 R2                                                       0.234        0.290             0.168            0.149
 Standard errors clustered at country level in parentheses. Industry is defined at the ISIC 2-digit industry level.
 
  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01

Notes: This table reports the relationship between natural barriers' measures and the country-industry
                                                                              Output-Import Ratio
(ISIC 4-digit) import tariff by taking into account the heterogeneity in Import    Demand Elasticity across
country-industry pairs. In Columns (3) and (4), the point estimates are obtained by an instrumental
                             Output-Import Ratio
variable approach, where Import  Demand Elasticity and log (1/export elasticity) are instrumented by other
countries' average values.




                                                      33
3.7    Non-Tariff Barriers
Man-made trade barriers go beyond tariffs, and include quotas on imports and subsidies to
domestic producers especially in agriculture. Our theory in principle applies to these non-
tariff barriers as well. Kee, Nicita and Olarreaga (2009) provide an estimate of the ad-valorem
equivalent for non-tariff barriers at country-product level.
   We construct total trade barriers by summing tariffs and the ad-valorem equivalents to
the non-tariff barriers. Using the total trade barriers as the dependent variable, Table 6
reports the new estimation results. All our qualitative results including the signs of the
key coefficients and the significance levels are similar as before. Quantitatively, the point
estimates related to natural barriers' measures in the table are in general larger in absolute
value than their counterparts when we do not consider the non-tariff barriers. These results
hold after we control for the market power ("the optimal tariff") effect and the role of the
GATT/WTO.




                                              34
        Table 6: Sum of Tariff and the Ad-valorem Equivalent of Non-Tariff Barriers


                                        (1)        (2)          (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)
   Dependent variable: Tariff plus the Ad-valorem Equivalent of Non-Tariff Barriers
 log(population)                     2.388**     2.258**      2.007**      2.062**          2.059**              1.366
                                     (0.933)     (0.901)      (0.969)       (1.009)          (1.014)           (0.891)
 remoteness                           6.885*     6.736*       6.874**         5.203            5.186         11.962***
                                     (3.886)     (3.785)      (3.157)       (4.277)          (4.239)           (4.298)
 coastline length/area             -22.007*** -22.849*** -22.125*** -21.798***            -21.788***        -22.920***
                                     (6.759)     (6.924)      (7.047)       (7.306)          (7.325)           (6.541)
 landlock dummy                       -1.374      0.165        0.372          0.319            0.272             3.831
                                     (3.954)     (3.415)      (3.888)       (4.105)          (4.092)           (3.780)
 log(1/export elasticity)                                      0.142                           0.115             0.106
                                                              (0.189)                        (0.204)           (0.152)
 log(population)*OECD                                                        -2.305           -2.319            0.418
                                                                            (1.461)          (1.481)           (1.391)
 remoteness*OECD                                                             -3.799           -3.849            -2.965
                                                                            (5.129)          (5.104)           (4.986)
 coastline length/area*OECD                                                   6.135            6.056           55.827
                                                                           (28.627)         (28.383)          (37.767)
 landlock dummy*OECD                                                      -16.121**        -16.287**            -5.123
                                                                            (7.055)          (7.075)           (7.587)
 log(1/export elasticity)*OECD                                                                -0.042            -0.082
                                                                                             (0.315)           (0.314)
 OECD dummy                                                                   64.156         64.954            18.250
                                                                             (60.447)       (60.858)          (60.669)
 log per capita income*                                                                                      -4.525***
                                                                                                               (0.880)
 Industry FE                           N             Y            Y              Y            Y                    Y
 No. of countries                      69            69           69            69            69                  69
 Observations                        16470         16470        11715         11715         11715               11715
 R2                                  0.037         0.068        0.091          0.101        0.101                0.131
 Standard errors clustered at country level in parentheses. Industry is defined as the section classification of HS code.
 
  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01

Notes: This table reports the relationship between natural barriers and a more comprehensive measure of
policy induced trade barriers (the sum of tariff and the ad-valorem equivalent of non-tariff barriers). The
number of observations in the table is much smaller than Table 4 partly because some countries in our
sample are not included in Kee, Nicita and Olarreaga (2009) due to data availability and partly because
some products in a country don't have a corresponding non-tariff barriers estimates. log per capita income
* is the residual from regressing log per capita GDP on the natural barrier variables.




                                                     35
4      Empirics 2: Does Liberalization Beget Liberaliza-
       tion? The Case of the China Reform Shock
The previous section reports cross-sectional results. While they are consistent with the
natural tariff theory, they do not control for time-invariant country fixed effects. We now
study tariff changes over 1997-2007 from an exercise that differencing out country fixed effects
by exploiting big and external trade policy shocks.
   In particular, the key dependent variable is the tariff change made by small and medium-
sized economies during 1997-2007. During this period, one of the biggest shocks to these
countries' trading environment is unilateral trade liberalization by China. Figure 4 presents
the dynamics of big economies' MFN import tariff (weighted average) provided by UNCTAD.
While there are variations in all big economies' import tariff, the magnitude of China's tariff
cuts clearly stands out.
   Importantly, the same set of tariff reductions in China (or G7 countries) generates differ-
ential impact on different small and medium sized economies' natural barriers, depending on
whethe those products experiencing greater tariff cuts by China are important for a given
country's export bundle. It also depends on whether a given country is physically close to
China or not.
   By employing the variations across small/medium-sized economies in the initial product
shares in their exports to China (and other big economies), we can construct exogenous
changes in the export opportunity for them during this period. We first describe the main
variables and their summary statistics.


4.1     Data Description
We define the composite natural barriers of an economy in the sample as the weighted average
of the tariffs that it faces when exporting to the big economies. Formally, composite natural barriers
of country i at year t is constructed as:

                                                  j,k   exportijk log(1 + tarif fjkt /100)  100
          composite natural barriersit =                                                               (36)
                                                                    j,k exportijk


where j denotes one of the large economies and k is HS4 product. Variable exportijk utilizes
initial years' data.23 In addition, each country's import MFN tariff data is averaged across
all HS4 products and is always linearly interpolated for missing data. As noted earlier, the
  23
    Our benchmark is 1996. If the 1996 data is not available, we use year 1997 data. If the 1997 data is not
available, we use the 1998 data.



                                                    36
          Figure 4: MFN Import Tariff Rates (%) of Big Economies 1997-2015


           15
                                                                         Canada
                                                                         China
                                                                         Japan
                                                                         US
                                                                         EU

           10




            5




            0
                 1998   2000   2002   2004   2006   2008   2010   2012     2014
                                             Year


Source: UNCTAD




                                             37
             Table 7: Summary Statistics on Key Variables in the Long Difference

             Variable                           Obs    Mean      Std. Dev.       Min     Max Median
     average import tariff (%)                   79    -4.15        5.36       -22.40    5.80  -2.19
    composite natural barriers                  79     -0.97        0.82         0.93    -2.47 -1.15
    1997 average import tariff                  79     12.45        6.58           0     33.59 12.02
 OECD & late WTO member dummy                    79     0.17        0.38           0        1    0
       log(GDP per capita)                       79    0.19         0.12        -0.08    0.53   0.18
    log(export to G7 and China)                 104     0.57        1.13        -2.81     3.60  0.55
       institutional quality                    82     -0.22        2.68        -7.16     5.66    0

Note: This table reports the summary statistics of main variables used in the long difference exercise in
Section 4.



changes in the composite natural barriers across small/medium-sized economies during 1997-
2007 are overwhelmingly driven by Chinese trade liberalization during this period, interacting
with the relative importance of the Chinese market for these economies.
   We drop Hong Kong and Macao as their special status implies possible integration with
China beyond China's tariff regime. We winsorize the change in the composite natural
barriers at the 5% level to reduce the impact of potential outliers. Table 7 reports the
summary statistics of the key variables used in our long difference exercise. We have 79
economies with available data on both change in import tariff and change in the composite
natural barriers as constructed in equation (36). For these economies, the median change in
the natural barriers is negative. This is not surprising given the trade liberalization by large
economies, especially by China. The largest drop in the big economies' tariff faced by a small
country is around 2.5% in the 10-year window. At the same time, the median change in the
average import tariff is 2.19%. In other words, many of the small/medium economies also
have reduced their own import barriers. Our theory suggests that the tariff reductions by
small/medium-sized countries are to a significant extent a response to the tariff reductions
by the large economies, especially the unilateral trade liberalization by China.


4.2     Empirical Evidence on the Long Difference
We pursue the following long-difference regression over the 1997-2007 period:

         average import tarif fi =  0 +  1 composite natural barriersi + X + i ,

where i denotes a small and medium sized economy and  means the change over the 10-year
period. Xi is a set of control variables including initial tariff, change in log per capita income,


                                                      38
the export share of unorganized industries and the China export growth shock in the spirit
of Autor, Dorn and Hanson (2013). We will explain its construction later.
    In Column (1) of Table 8, we look at whether the change in a composite measure of natural
barriers for a country has an impact on the change in its average import tariff. We find that
the estimated coefficient is positive and statistically significant. That is, a greater reduction
in a country's natural barriers due to its exposure to the China reform shock gives rise to a
greater reduction the country's own tariffs. In Column (2), we add the initial import tariff
in 1997 as a control variable. The point estimate on change in the natural barriers is still
positive and statistically significant. As the point estimate in Column (2) is 1.12, we find
that a reduction in the big economies' tariff rates by one percentage point will lead to a
small/medium economy to cut its own import tariff by 1.12 percentage points. This effect
is economically large, since the median change in the import tariffs in the sample is around
2.2 percent. Note that in this long difference setting, time-invariant country fixed effects are
already differenced out.


4.3    The Global Trading Architecture
We can enrich our estimation by taking into the design features of the global trading system.
As noted in Subramanian and Wei (2007), one improvement of the WTO over GATT is that
developing country members that join the WTO after 1995 have to fulfill more liberalization
obligations. The natural tariff force in our theory, on the other hand, would work better for
pre-existing developing country GATT members that are not subject to fewer constraints in
their tariff setting power. If our theory is right, we should see the natural barriers to play
systematically a bigger role for the less constrained countries than for the more constrained
countries. Empirically, whether we observe a difference between these two sets of countries
becomes another check of our theory.
   For this purpose, we classify all countries into two groups. The first is those developing
countries that were members of the GATT before the WTO was founded in 1995, plus all
non-WTO members in our sample (up to 2007). These countries have more discretion over
their tariff setting. The second group consists of all other countries, including both OECD
countries and other developing countries that joined the WTO after 1995. We will label the
second group by "OECD/late WTO members" and create a dummy for them.
   In Column (3) of Table 8, we include as two additional regressors the dummy for OECD/late
WTO members and its interaction with the change in natural barriers. The coefficient on the
interaction term is negative and statistically significant. Based on the estimated coefficients,
while a reduction in Chinese and other large countries' tariff rates by one percentage point


                                               39
would trigger an unconstrained small/medium country to also cut down their own tariff by
about 1.6 percentage point, the constrained countries (OECD/late WTO members) do not
respond at all (the sum of 1.593 and -1.687 is not statistically different from zero). The differ-
ence between the two groups of countries provides further confirmation that policy barriers
respond to changes in natural barriers when the policy barriers are not constrained by the
international trading system.


4.4     Organized Export Industries and the Chinese Export Shock
Krishna and Mitra (2005) theorize that foreign trade liberalization induces home country
to undertake trade liberalization, because previously unorganized export industries in home
country may now find it worthwhile to organize themselves and become a counterweight to
lobbying effort from the import competing sectors. This will result in lower import tariffs.
   Since there is no systematic cross-country information on which industries are organized
in which countries, we take the following shortcut. We assume that the technical nature of
an industry such as the presence of local increasing returns to scale plays a role in how easy
or hard for the industry to be organized, and this technical feature for a given industry is the
same across countries. Under this assumption, industries that are organized in the United
States (e.g., steel and automobiles) are also likely to be organized in other countries.
   We take the information on whether an industry in the United States is organized or not
from Goldberg and Maggi (1999) and calculate, for each small and medium-sized country, the
fraction of export sales to G7 and China that comes from organized industries. We interact
this fraction with the change in natural barriers and include it as a control in Columns
(4) and (5). The point estimate before the organized fraction * change in natural barriers
is statistically insignificant in both regressions. In fact, the sign seems inconsistent with
Krishna and Mitra (2005)'s prediction.
   A large literature starting from Autor, Dorn and Hanson (2013) has examined the con-
sequences of the Chinese export growth shock (often abbreviated as the China shock).
For a small or medium-sized country i, the China export growth shock is constructed as
  j sij,0 China_export_growthj , where sij,0 is the share of country i's import in HS 4-digit
product j in the initial year,24 and China_export_growthj is China's export growth to the
world of product j from 1997 to 2007. (We use product-level Chinese export growth to the
world rather than Chinese export growth to country i itself in order to minimize possible
endogeneity associated with country i's own import growth patterns which may be affected
by its own tariff policy.)
  24
    The initial year is usually 1996. If the weight sij,0 is unavailable using 1996 data, we use the information
in 1997 or 1998.

                                                      40
   In Column (5), we include the China export growth shock and change in income as ad-
ditional controls. It turns out that neither is statistically significant. We interpret it as
evidence that the Chinese liberalization shock (which causes a reduction in natural barriers
for small/medium sized countries) and the Chinese export growth shock (which is the shock
emphasized by Autor, Dorn, and Hanson, 2013) are distinct shocks. A typical small/medium
sized country adjusts its tariff rates in response to the Chinese trade liberalization, but not
to the Chinese export growth shock.

        Table 8: Change in Composite Natural Barriers and Change in Import Tariff

                                                                    (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)
 Dependent variable: change in average import tariff
                                                                                           × OECD/Late WTO        member
  composite natural barriers                                      1.124*    1.116***     1.593***  1.866***       2.051***
                                                                  (0.580)    (0.392)      (0.424)   (0.590)        (0.618)
 average import tariff 1997                                                 -0.615***    -0.692*** -0.698***      -0.703***
                                                                             (0.065)      (0.068)   (0.068)        (0.071)
  composite natural barriers× OECD/Late WTO members                                      -1.687*** -1.643***      -1.648***
                                                                                          (0.596)   (0.576)        (0.574)
 OECD/Late WTO members                                                                   -4.205*** -4.339***      -4.291***
                                                                                          (0.993)   (1.016)        (0.991)
  composite natural barriers×organized fraction                                                      4.299           5.552
                                                                                                    (5.618)        (5.381)
 organized fraction                                                                                  3.517          6.734
                                                                                                    (8.307)        (8.182)
  log(GDP per capita)*                                                                                              -2.860
                                                                                                                   (3.055)
 China export growth shock                                                                                          -0.943
                                                                                                                   (1.141)
 Observations                                                        79         79           79          79            76
 R2                                                                0.030      0.601        0.641       0.643         0.652
 Robust standard errors in parentheses
 * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01


Notes: This table reports the long difference results of the effects of change in natural barriers on change in
average import tariff.  log(GDP per capita)* is the residual component after projecting the variable
change in log(GDP per capita) on the change in natural barriers.




4.5     Does Institutional Quality Respond to Chinese Liberalization?
As the key mechanism of our story is political economy and endogenous adjustment in the
institutional constraint on rent seeking, we now examine the public institutions in a typical
small/medium-sized economy are adjusted in response to the Chinese trade liberalization in
a way that is consistent with our theory. We perform two exercises.

                                                      41
    In the first exercise, we check if the Chinese trade liberalization does result in an im-
provement in the external trading opportunities for other countries. The dependent variable
is the change in log(exports to China and G7) from the average value during 1996-1998 to
the average value during 2005-2007. In Column (1) of Panel A in Table 9, we find that the
coefficient on change in natural barriers is negative and statistically significant. This means
that, across small/medium-sized countries, those experiencing a greater reduction in their
natural barriers do see a greater relative increase in their exports to China (and other major
markets). In Column (2) where we have added the initial exports to the major markets and
the increase in log per capita income as regressors, there is no change in the main results.
That is, those countries that experience a greater effective reduction in their export barriers
in China (and the G7 market) indeed exhibit a faster growth in their exports to these mar-
kets. These results should not be surprising, but it is a confirmation that our measure of a
change in natural barriers contains economically useful and intuitive information.
    In the second exercise, the dependent variable is the change in institutional quality from
1997 to 2007 (or more precisely, the institutional quality scores averaged over 2005-2007
minus those averaged over 1997-1999). In Column (1) of Panel B in Table 9 , the coefficient
on the change in natural barriers is negative and significant at the 10%. This suggests
that the Chinese trade liberalization (which results in a reduction in natural barriers for
a typical small/medium-sized economy) tends to lead to an improvement in institutions in
other countries. In Column (2) where we have included initial institutional quality and change
in log per capita income as additional regressors, the effect of a change in natural barriers
on home-country institution remains the same. In other words, those countries that benefit
more from the Chinese trade liberalization also have done more to improve their institutional
quality.




                                              42
      Table 9: Foreign Liberalization, Export Growth, and Institutional Improvement


                                                 (1)                 (2)
   Panel A Dependent variable: Increase in log(exports to China & G7) from 1997-2007
    Composite natural barriers                 -0.227*             -0.213*
                                               (0.132)             (0.126)
   Initial log(export to G7 and China/GDP) -0.182**                -0.179*
                                               (0.075)             (0.093)
    log(GDP per capita)*                                           1.437**
                                                                   (0.624)
   Observations                                  104                 101
   R2                                           0.104               0.127

   Panel B Dependent variable: Improvement in institutional quality from 1997 to 2007
    composite natural barriers              -0.582*                -0.581*
                                            (0.330)                (0.337)
   Initial institutional quality             0.002                   0.014
                                            (0.107)                (0.107)
    log(GDP per capita)*                                             1.461
                                                                   (1.259)
   Observations                                82                     82
   R2                                        0.029                   0.037
   Robust standard errors in parentheses
   * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01


Notes: Panel A shows the relationship between change in natural barriers and export growth. Panel B
shows the relationship between change in natural barriers and improvement in institutional quality. 
log(GDP per capita)* is the residual component after projecting the change in log(GDP per capita) on the
change in natural barriers. To construct the initial log(export to G7 and China/GDP), we average both the
export values to G7 and China and GDP across 1996-1998. The initial institutional quality is the 1997-2001
averaged value.




                                                   43
5     Product Heterogeneity and Tariff Changes
While the Chinese trade liberalization involves a reduction in tariff rates over a large number
of products, not all products are equally important in inducing institutional reforms in other
countries. Nunn (2007) recognizes that certain products are more dependent on the quality
of contracting institutions than others. A given deterioration of contracting institutions does
more harm to international trading in products whose inputs are more specialized and more
relationship-specific. We now explore implications of this insight and ask whether a small or
medium-sized country would respond to a greater extent if its natural barriers fall more on
those products that are more intensive in contracting institutions.
   We will split a given small/medium-sized economy's export bundle into a sub-bundle
consisting of products that are intensive in contracting institutions and another sub-bundle
consisting of all other products. We will compute separate changes in natural barriers for
these two sub-bundles. Because the two sub-bundles can have different product shares across
countries, the same Chinese trade liberalization would translate into different values for the
sub-bundles for different countries.
   Our model in Section 2 can be extended to account for differential institutional sensitivities
by different products. Suppose a fraction   [0, 1] of the goods in industry 2 are contract
intensive. The remaining 1 -  fraction is not contract-intensive. We use subscripts c and
nc to denote contract-intensive and non-contract-intensive goods, respectively.
   The per capita profit from industry 2 can be rewritten as

           1       pc 1-
                                  pnc 1-    pc 1-          pnc 1-                1
2 (q ) =       L    2
                         + L(1 - ) 2     + L 2    + (1 - )L 2               =       ×
           L       -1              -1        -1             -1                   -1
               1-                     1-                                   1-                                     1-
                                               L                                           L   
        c           + (1 - )      c        +          d(1 + tc )hc (q )c        + (1 - )          d(1 + t,nc )c        ,
     -1                        -1              L   -1                                      L   -1
                                                                                                        (37)

  Here tc is the foreign import tariff on the contract intensive goods and t,nc is the foreign
import tariff on the non-contract intensive goods. For the non-contract intensive goods, we
normalize hnc (q )=1.
   The per capita profit from industry 2 comes from four parts: (1) the domestic sale of
the contract-intensive goods, (2) the domestic sale of the non-contract-intensive goods, (3)
the foreign sale of the contract-intensive goods, and (4) the foreign sale of the non-contract-
intensive goods. The key comparative statics from the extended model can be summarized
by the following proposition.

Proposition 4 (Foreign Trade Policy and Product Heterogeneity) A reduction in the foreign
import barriers on contract-intensive goods inspires an improvement in the home country's

                                                    44
institutional quality and an reduction in its own import tariff. By contrast, a reduction in
the foreign import barriers on non-contract-intensive goods does not generate any change in
the home country's tariff.

Proof. As before, the median voter chooses institutional quality q in order to maximize the
following objective function:

                               max c + 2 (q ) + s2 (q ) + (q ) - (q ).                      (38)
                                q


The consumer surplus s2 (q ) can be decomposed into two parts:

                               1              1-                1                 1-
                  s2 (q ) =          c             + (1 - )           c                     (39)
                               -1 -1                            -1 -1

The first order condition with respect to institutional quality q is given by

                  L                             1-          log hc (q )
                         d(1 + tc )hc (q )c           (-                ) +  (q ) =  (q )
                  L   -1                                      q

It is clear that the optimal q depends on (1+ tc ) but not on (1+ tnc ). A reduction in (1+ tc )
leads to a higher q . Furthermore, a higher q leads to a reduction in home country tariff.
    If these implications are borne out in the data, it will further bolster the interpretation
that the pathway from Chinese trade liberalization to tariff cuts in other countries goes
through institutional reforms in the latter countries. To test these implications, we assign all
HS4 products into a contract-intensive basket and a non-contract-intensive basket.
    Following Nunn (2007), we measure the degree of relationship specificity for each NAICS
6-digit product based on the fraction of the inputs that are differentiated (i.e., those inputs
that are not traded on an exchange). Using a concordance table available on BEA website,
we derive the degree of relationship specificity for each HS 4-digit product. The contract-
intensive basket consists of all HS 4-digit products whose relationship specificity values are
greater than the median value. The non-contract-intensive basket consists of all other HS
4-digit products.
    The correlation between whether a sector is intensive in contracting institution and whether
it is organized (in the US data) is low at -0.11. Given this, it appears unlikely that the em-
pirical support for our story is confounded by the mechanism in Krishna and Mitra (2005).
    For each small/medium sized country, we compute the share of contract-intensive products
in its export bundle to China and the G7 countries during 1996-1998, and denote the share
by i . For each country, we also compute separate natural barriers for the contract-intensive
goods and non-contract-intensive goods, respectively. The first one, denoted by "ci-composite


                                                 45
natural barriers", is calculated as i multiplied by the weighted average tariff on the goods in
the contract-intensive basket. The second one, "nci-composite natural barriers," is calculated
as 1 - i multiplied by the weighted average tariff on the goods in the non-contract intensive
basket.
   We run variations of the following regression:

 average tarif fi =  0 + 1 ci-composite natural barriersi + 2 nci-composite natural barriersi + i .

   Table 10 reports the results. In Column 1, we find that the two types of natural barriers
indeed have different impact on domestic tariff. A reduction in the natural barriers on the
contract-intensive goods significantly reduces domestic import tariff. However, a similar
reduction in the natural barriers on the non-contract-intensive goods does not produce a
statistically significant effect on domestic tariffs. This dichotomy is consistent with the
prediction of the extended model.
   In Column 2, we add an initial import tariff in 1997 as a control variable. The new
regressor has a negative and statistically significant coefficient. This means that, during
1997-2007, countries with a higher initial tariff tend to undertake more trade liberalization
on average. At the same time, the dichotomy in the effects on domestic tariffs from reduced
barriers on contract-intensive goods versus those on non-contract-intensive goods is still there
as before.
   In Column 3, we separate countries whose trade policies are more constrained by WTO
rules (OECD countries plus new members of WTO) versus those that are less constrained
(old developing members and non-WTO-members). We find that the effect of lower foreign
barriers in contract-intensive goods on domestic tariffs is driven by countries less constrained
by the WTO rules. In Column 4, we add Chinese export growth shock (a la Autor, Dorn,
and Hanson, 2013) and change in income. They turn out to be not statistically significant.
   In Table 11, we examine whether reductions in barriers on contract-intensive goods versus
non-contract-intensive goods would produce different effects on the home country's institu-
tional quality over 1997-2007. The results are also consistent with our model predictions.
In particular, lower foreign barriers on contract-intensive goods tend to lead to an improve-
ment in domestic institutions. In comparison, similar reductions in foreign barriers on non-
contract-intensive goods produce no response in home country institutional quality.
   To summarize, the regression results confirm that both institutional quality and domes-
tic tariff rates respond to foreign trade liberalization. Moreover, foreign liberalization on
contract-intensive goods produces a greater response.




                                              46
Table 10: Product Heterogeneity, Change in Natural Barriers and Change in Import Tariff

                                                                      (1)        (2)         (3)              (4)
 Dependent variable: change in average import tariff
                                                                                          × OECD/Late     WTO member
  ci-natural barriers                                               2.260**   2.424***     2.857***        2.994***
                                                                    (1.017)    (0.611)      (0.673)         (0.662)
  nci-natural barriers                                               -0.064     -0.092       0.206            0.082
                                                                    (0.839)    (0.601)      (0.663)         (0.627)
 average import tariff 1997                                                   -0.620***   -0.682***       -0.680***
                                                                               (0.061)      (0.063)         (0.065)
  ci-composite natural barriers× OECD/Late WTO member                                     -4.169***       -3.889***
                                                                                            (1.076)         (1.063)
  nci-composite natural barriers× OECD/Late WTO member                                       0.309            0.577
                                                                                            (0.845)         (0.856)
 OECD/Late WTO member                                                                     -5.453***       -5.399***
                                                                                            (1.170)         (1.213)
  log(GDP per capita)*                                                                                       -4.662
                                                                                                            (3.089)
 China export growth shock                                                                                   -1.020
                                                                                                            (1.111)
 Observations                                                          79         79          79               76
 R2                                                                  0.052      0.631       0.672             0.691
 Robust standard errors in parentheses
 * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01



Notes: This table reports the long difference results of the effects of changes in the natural barriers for
contract intensive goods and non-contract intensive goods on change in average import tariff. Variable "
log(GDP per capita)*" is the residual component after projecting the variable change in log(GDP per
capita) on the changes in natural barriers.




                                                    47
Table 11: Product Heterogeneity, Change in Natural Barriers and Change in Institutional
Quality
                                                                                     (1)         (2)          (3)
 Dependent variable: Improvement in institutional quality from 1997 to 2007
  ci-composite natural barriers                                                   -1.455***   -1.444***   -1.444***
                                                                                   (0.482)     (0.504)     (0.506)
  nci-composite natural barriers                                                    0.027       0.015       0.011
                                                                                   (0.503)     (0.511)     (0.504)
  log(GDP per capita)*                                                                          1.466       1.486
                                                                                               (1.319)     (1.318)
 Initial institutional quality                                                                              0.008
                                                                                                           (0.106)
 Observations                                                                         82          82          82
 R2                                                                                 0.068       0.077       0.077
 Robust standard errors in parentheses
 * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01


Notes: This table reports the long difference results of the effects of changes in the natural barriers for
contract intensive goods and non-contract intensive goods on change in institutional quality. Variable "
log(GDP per capita)*" is the residual component after projecting the variable change in log(GDP per
capita) on the changes in natural barriers.



6     Conclusion
The natural tariff theory that we propose here is a new political economy mechanism of trade
policy determination. Because the natural barriers of a country (market size, geography
and big trading partners' trade policy) affect a society's incentive in improving institutional
quality, they alter the constraints on politicians' rent seeking behavior. In other words, these
natural barriers affect how much "protection for sale" can take place.
   We conduct a set of empirical tests on the key predictions of the theory. First, we document
that natural barriers beget policy barriers - countries that are naturally less open, either
with a larger domestic market or less convenient geographically to do international trade,
display higher tariffs and non-tariff barriers. Second, we document that liberalization begets
liberalization - the unilateral China trade reform shock in the early 2000s induces other
countries to undertake their own liberalization. Importantly, the same China tariff change
implies differential changes in the trading opportunities for different countries depending
on their relative proximity to China or their relative comparative advantage in meeting the
Chinese import demand. We find that, as our theory predicts, those countries that see a
bigger improvement in their external trading opportunity also choose to do more to improve
their institutions and lower their own tariff barriers.
   Moreover, product-level heterogeneity matters too. A reduction in foreign barriers in

                                                     48
contract-intensive goods produces greater responses in domestic institutions and tariffs. This
provides a new perspective on the global gains from an individual country's trade liberal-
ization. A large country's unilateral trade liberalization can promote improvement of their
trade partners' institutions, inducing them to liberalize their trade policies too. This positive
feedback channel implies that the welfare gains of one country's liberalization may spill over
to other countries beyond the usual price channel. A useful future research item is to quantify
this spillover effect.




                                               49
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A Robinson. 2001. "The colonial ori-
 gins of comparative development: An empirical investigation." American economic review,
 91(5): 1369­1401.

Amiti, Mary, and Jozef Konings. 2007. "Trade liberalization, intermediate inputs, and
 productivity: Evidence from Indonesia." American Economic Review, 97(5): 1611­1638.

Autor, David, David Dorn, and Gordon H Hanson. 2013. "The China syndrome:
 Local labor market effects of import competition in the United States." American Economic
 Review, 103(6): 2121­68.

Bagwell, Kyle, and Robert W Staiger. 1999. "An economic theory of GATT." American
 Economic Review, 89(1): 215­248.

Bagwell, Kyle, Robert W Staiger, and Ali Yurukoglu. 2018. "Quantitative Analysis
 of Multi-Party Tariff Negotiations." National Bureau of Economic Research.

Beverelli, Cosimo, Alexander Keck, Mario Larch, and Yoto Yotov. 2018. "Institu-
 tions, trade and development: a quantitative analysis."

Broda, Christian, and David E. Weinstein. 2006. "Globalization and the Gains from
 Variety." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(2): 541­585.

Broda, Christian, Nuno Limao, and David E. Weinstein. 2008. "Optimal Tariffs and
 Market Power: The Evidence." American Economic Review, 98(5): 2032­65.

Dix-Carneiro, Rafael. 2014. "Trade liberalization and labor market dynamics." Economet-
 rica, 82(3): 825­885.

Edgeworth, F. Y. 1894. "The Theory of International Values." The Economic Journal,
 4(13): 35­50.

Feenstra, Robert C. 1994. "New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International
  Prices." The American Economic Review, 84(1): 157­177.

Findlay, Ronald, and Stanislaw Wellisz. 1982. "Endogenous tariffs, the political econ-
  omy of trade restrictions, and welfare." In Import competition and response. 223­244. Uni-
  versity of Chicago Press.




                                            50
Fisman, Raymond, and Jakob Svensson. 1999. "Are corruption and taxation really
  harmful to growth? - firm-level evidence." Journal of Development Economics, 83(1): 63­
  75.

Frankel, Jeffrey A, and David H Romer. 1999. "Does trade cause growth?" American
  economic review, 89(3): 379­399.

Gawande, Kishore, and Usree Bandyopadhyay. 2000. "Is protection for sale? Evidence
 on the Grossman-Helpman theory of endogenous protection." Review of Economics and
 statistics, 82(1): 139­152.

Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou, and Giovanni Maggi. 1999. "Protection for sale: An
 empirical investigation." American Economic Review, 89(5): 1135­1155.

Grossman, Gene M, and Elhanan Helpman. 1994. "Protection for Sale." The American
 Economic Review, 833­850.

Hillman, Arye L. 1982. "Declining industries and political-support protectionist motives."
 The American Economic Review, 72(5): 1180­1187.

Jiao, Yang, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2019. "Intrinsic Openness and Endogenous Institutional
  Quality." Unpublished Manuscript.

Kee, Hiau Looi, Alessandro Nicita, and Marcelo Olarreaga. 2009. "Estimating trade
 restrictiveness indices." The Economic Journal, 119(534): 172­199.

Krishna, Pravin, and Devashish Mitra. 2005. "Reciprocated unilateralism in trade pol-
 icy." Journal of International Economics, 65(2): 461­487.

Maggi, Giovanni, Monika Mrázová, and Peter Neary. 2018. "Choked by red tape?
 the political economy of wasteful trade barriers." National Bureau of Economic Research.

Mayer, Wolfgang. 1984. "Endogenous tariff formation." The American Economic Review,
 74(5): 970­985.

McCaig, Brian, and Nina Pavcnik. 2018. "Export markets and labor allocation in a
 low-income country." American Economic Review, 108(7): 1899­1941.

Mitra, Devashish, Dimitrios D Thomakos, and Mehmet A Ulubasoglu. 2002. ""Pro-
 tection for sale" in a developing country: democracy vs. dictatorship." Review of Economics
 and Statistics, 84(3): 497­508.


                                            51
Nunn, Nathan. 2007. "Relationship-specificity, incomplete contracts, and the pattern of
 trade." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(2): 569­600.

Pavcnik, Nina. 2002. "Trade liberalization, exit, and productivity improvements: Evidence
 from Chilean plants." The Review of Economic Studies, 69(1): 245­276.

Rahman, AT Rafique. 1986. "Legal and administrative measures against bureaucratic
 corruption in Asia." Bureaucratic corruption in Asia: Causes, consequences, and controls,
 109­62.

Subramanian, Arvind, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2007. "The WTO promotes trade, strongly
  but unevenly." Journal of international Economics, 72(1): 151­175.

Tamirisa, Natalia, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2002. "Bribery in Trade: Liberalizing Grease or
  Non-tariff Barrier?" IMF and Harvard University.

Van Rijckeghem, Caroline, and Beatrice Weder. 2001. "Bureaucratic corruption and
 the rate of temptation: do wages in the civil service affect corruption, and by how much?"
 Journal of development economics, 65(2): 307­331.

Wei, Shang-Jin. 1996. "Intra-national versus international trade: how stubborn are nations
 in global integration?" National Bureau of Economic Research.

Wei, Shang-Jin. 2000. "How taxing is corruption on international investors?" Review of
 economics and statistics, 82(1): 1­11.




                                            52
A      Appendices
A.1       A Calibrated Exercise on Import Tariff t(a)
We provide a calibrated exercise which gives a monotonic relationship between politicians'
weight a and import tariff t (thus the welfare component related to the import competing
industry).
   We set consumer utility as constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) form:

                                                         -
                                                      x1
                                                       1
                                          u(x1 ) =         .                           (40)
                                                      1-

Domestic production function in industry 1 is in Cobb-Douglas form:

                                      F (T, H ) = AT  H 1- ,                           (41)

where T is the specific factor in industry 1 and H is the amount of labor hired. 1 -  is the
labor share.
   With the above utility function and production function, we can derive the per capita
output
                                            T (1 -  )p1 A 1- 
                                 y (p1 ) = A [           ]  ,                           (42)
                                            H      c
and consumption in industry 1 is given by

                                                        -1
                                          x1 (p1 ) = p1  .                             (43)

    Recall that equilibrium tariff t satisfies that

                              t     1 - 1      y (p1 )
                                 =
                             1+t   a(q ) + 1 -m (p1 )p1
                                    1 - 1             y (p1 )
                                 =
                                   a(q ) + 1 -[x1 (p1 ) - y (p1 )]p1
                                    1 - 1            y (p1 )
                                 =                                     ,               (44)
                                   a(q ) + 1  x1 (p1 ) + 1-
                                             1
                                                            
                                                              
                                                               y (p1 )




                                                 1
and the social welfare component related to industry 1  is given by

             (1 - )p1 A   1         T            - 1
                                                          T (1 -  )p1 A 1-         - 1- 
                                                                                            1
  (p1 ) =[              ]          c + p 1 t [ p 1    - A   [          ]  ] +    p 1
                                                                                      
                                                                                         -
                  c         1- H                          H         c         1-           1-
                                         
             = yp1 + p 1 t(x1 - y ) +          x1 p 1
                                       1-
                          t            t                
             = p1 y +        p 1 x1 -     p1 y +           p 1 x1 ,                           (45)
                      1+t             1+t             1-

where we have dropped the constant term, which is not relevant for the comparative statics.

A.1.1    Calibration

We pick up a developing country Malaysia to calibrate our model. Malaysia is a small open
economy and joins GATT in 1957. Therefore, WTO places relatively few constraints on its
tariff setting. This feature is consistent with the home country of interest in our model in
the sense that home country can set its trade policy without external constraint.
   We calibrate the parameters.  takes standard value 2. From Penn World Table, Malaysia's
labor share in 1996 is around 1 -  = 0.3. In the data, Malaysia's import/GDP around 1996
is 90%, so we set x1 /y = 1.9. Based on Malaysia Labor Force Survey, the fraction of en-
trepreneurs in its population is around 9% from 1982 to 2013. So we set 1 = 0.09. The
average tariff rate in Malaysia in 1996 is 21%. It implies that the weight on the social
welfare is a = 3.5. This is our baseline calibration with equilibrium variables denoted by
(ass , tss , p1,ss , yss , x1,ss ). We are interested in how tariff and welfare changes when a deviates
from ass .
   For any weight a, the corresponding solution t satisfies

                                                 y (p1 )
                t    1 - 1                        yss
                   =              x1,ss   1 x1 (p1 )
               1+t   a + 1         yss     x1,ss
                                                     + 1-
                                                           y (p1 )
                                                            yss
                                                                                1-
                       1 - 1                             [(1 + t)/(1 + tss )]    
                     =                                               1                               1-   (46)
                       a + 1      1 x1,ss
                                          [(1   + t)/(1 + tss )]  +      1-
                                                                            [(1   + t)/(1 + tss )]    
                                   y1,ss                                  


and the welfare component related to industry 1, , is

                                 1+t       1     tss (1 + t)                1 + t 1-    
                  =p1,ss yss (           ) +                 p1,ss x1,ss (          ) 
                                1 + tss          t(1 + tss )               1 + tss
                        tss (1 + t)              1+t     1                            1 + t -  1
                      -             p1,ss yss (         ) +            p1,ss x1,ss (         )  .         (47)
                        t(1 + tss )             1 + tss        1-                    1 + tss

Since what matters is the relative welfare to the initial equilibrium, without loss of generality,


                                                            2
          Figure 5: Tariff t as a Function of Politicians' Weight a on Social Welfare


                                          0.5


                                         0.45


                                          0.4
                     t(q): tariff rate




                                         0.35


                                          0.3


                                         0.25


                                          0.2



                                            2.5   3                3.5                4   4.5
                                                      a(q):weight on social welfare



Note: this figure displays the relationship between politicians' weight on social welfare and equilibrium
tariff in the calibrated numerical example.



we set p1,ss yss = 1.

A.1.2     Numerical Results

We obtain numerical results using equations (46) and (47). Figure 5 shows the relationship
between politicians' weight a on social welfare and equilibrium tariff t. It is a decreasing
function: an increase in the weight a will decrease equilibrium tariff t, i.e., less protection.
Figure 6 displays the relationship between politicians' weight a on social welfare and the social
welfare component related to industry 1 . It shows that the social welfare is increasing in
the weight a. This result is intuitive: the socially optimal tariff is 0, so when equilibrium
tariff approaches 0, social welfare goes up.


A.2      Median Voters' Choice of Institutional Quality
Consider an extreme case when the median voter owns no specific factor in the import-
competing industry. The median voters' choice of institutional quality will be based on these




                                                                 3
Figure 6: Import-Competing Industry Related Social Welfare  as a Function of Politicians'
Weight a on Social Welfare


                                                                 -1.6


                                                                 -1.8
                    q(q): social welfare related to industry 1




                                                                  -2


                                                                 -2.2


                                                                 -2.4


                                                                 -2.6


                                                                 -2.8


                                                                  -3
                                                                   2.5   3                3.5                4   4.5
                                                                             a(q):weight on social welfare



Note: this figure displays the relationship between politicians' weight on social welfare and
import-competing industry (industry 1) related social welfare in the calibrated numerical example.




                                                                                        4
workers' preference. Her indirect utility is

                              c + r(p1 ) + s1 (p1 ) + 2 (q ) + s2 (q ) - (q ).                           (48)

Note that firms' profit in industry 1 no longer enters into their utility. Denote  (p1 ) =
r(p1 ) + s1 (p1 ). Since

                     (p1 ) = (p1 - p1 )[x1 (p1 ) - y (p1 )] + u(x1 (p1 )) - p1 x1 (p1 ),


we have the first order derivative

  (p1 ) = x1 (p1 ) - y (p1 ) + (p1 - p1 )[x1 (p1 ) - y (p1 )] + u (x1 (p1 ))x1 (p1 ) - x1 (p1 ) - p1 x1 (p1 )

        = -y (p1 ) + (p1 - p1 )[x1 (p1 ) - y (p1 )] < 0.                                                 (49)

Furthermore,
                                       d           dp1
                                          =  (p1 )     a (q ) > 0.
                                       dq          da
Use (q ) to denote that workers' welfare related to industry 1 as a function of institutional
quality q . So  (q ) > 0.
   Then for any scenario with the median voter owning less than the per capita level of the
specific factor, the indirect utility F (q ) is a linear combination of (q ) and (q ), which is
going to be increasing in institutional quality as well since both  (q ) > 0 and  (q ) > 0.
   The equilibrium institutional quality is then given by

                                 max
                                  q
                                     c + F (q ) + 2 (q ) + s2 (q ) - (q )

It is easy to follow discussions on equation (30) in the main text and draw conclusions as
exhibited in Proposition 1, 2 and 3.


A.3     The Role of Import Trade Cost
In our baseline model, we have deliberately ignored the role of import trade cost to facilitate
the theoretical derivations. We now introduce import trade cost in industry 1. This is rele-
vant: (1) When we consider the role of geography (parameter d in the model) since geography
affects not only export trade cost but also import trade cost; (2) institutional quality can
also have an impact on import transaction cost. When home country is geographically nearer
to the rest of the world, one can think that the world price p1 is smaller as the iceberg cost
to import is lower. Moreover, institutional quality's impact on import trade cost is denoted


                                                      5
as hm (q )  1. Our objective is to figure out how a drop in p        1 will have an impact on the
marginal value of social welfare with respect to institutional quality q .
   We now write the welfare component related to industry 1, , as a function of both trade
policy p1 , the world price p                                     
                             1 and institutional quality:  (p1 , p1 , q ).


       (p1 , p1 , q ) = 1 (p1 ) + r (p1 ) + s1 (p1 )

                    = 1 (p1 ) + [p1 - p1 hm (q )]  [x1 (p1 ) - y (p1 )] + u(x1 (p1 )) - p1 x1 (p1 ).   (50)

Here
                                               x1 (p1 ) = u -1 (p1 )

                                                y (p1 ) = 1 (p1 ).

                                                  u (x1 ) = p1 .

Note that trade policy p1 is a function of institutional quality q and world price p1 . We can
write (q, p                       
            1 ) =  (p1 (q, p1 ), p1 , q ) .
   Notice that
                                 
                                       = [ p1 - p1 hm (q )][x1 (p1 ) - y (p1 )],
                                 p1
and
                                       
                                          = -hm (q )[x1 (p1 ) - y (p1 )].
                                       p1

Therefore,

                                                             p1
                  
                    = [ p1 - p1 hm (q )][x1 (p1 ) - y (p1 )]    - hm (q )[x1 (p1 ) - y (p1 )],         (51)
                 p1                                          p1


where
                                             p1 = p1 (1 + t)hm (q ).

Then we obtain that

             2                             dp1                                            dp1 dp1
             
                 = [x1 (p1 ) - y (p1 )]  + [p1 - p         1 hm (q )][x1 (p1 ) - y (p1 )]
            p1 q                           dp1                                            dp1    dq
                                                             2
                                                            p1                                   dp1
                 + [ p1 - p 1 hm (q )][x1 (p1 ) - y (p1 )]    
                                                                   - hm (q )[x1 (p1 ) - y (p1 )]
                                                           p1 q                                  dq
                                                   dp1
                 - p 1 hm (q )[x1 (p1 ) - y (p1 )]     - hm (q )[x1 (p1 ) - y (p1 )]                   (52)
                                                   dp1


   where
                                            1 - 1         y (p1 )
                                      t=               
                                                                        .
                                           a(q ) + 1 -p1 hm (q )m (p1 )

                                                        6
       2
                                                                    
   If p  q < 0, then a drop in natural barriers (a drop in p1 ) will increase the marginal
        1
benefit of improving institutional quality. As a result, the equilibrium institutional quality q
will increase when natural barriers fall.
         2                                                        
   For p   q , the first three terms represent the channels that p1 and q affect welfare indirectly
          1
through p1 in the expression of , since

                                       dp1                                                dp1 dp1
                 [x1 (p1 ) - y (p1 )]       
                                               + [ p1 - p  1 hm (q )][x1 (p1 ) - y (p1 )]
                                       dp1                                                dp1    dq
                                                                2 p1            p1
               + [ p 1 - p1 hm ( q )][ x 1 ( p1 ) - y ( p 1 )]   
                                                                      =                   /p  1.
                                                               p1 q            p1 q

Intuitively, after tariff import price p1 drops, social welfare increases. Institutional quality
q increases tend to reduce p1 . What we want is that when natural barriers p        1 drops, the
sensitivity of social welfare with respect to q becomes larger. In extreme case, when p        1
approaches infinity, foreign goods become irrelevant for domestic social welfare. The similar
intuition shows up in the export side, which is why we can arrive at the three propositions
in the main text.
                               2                                
   The remaining terms of p      q reflect the channels that p1 and q affect welfare directly.
                                1
Some discussions are still useful even if an analytical derivation of the complete sufficient
                                                                  2                dp1    
conditions is not feasible, given the complicated structure of p    q . Note that dq = p1 (1 +
                                                                                1
              (1+t)
t)hm (q ) +p1 q hm (q ).     When q goes up, import tariff in general drops due to smaller
incentive of politicians' in protecting domestic firms' sales. Therefore, if hm (q ) is very small,
then the last three terms in equation (52) will be negative.
                                                                                     2
   In any case, we use a calibrated exercise to show that the plausible sign of p      q is indeed
                                                                                      1
negative. We use the information in our calibration in Appendix A.1: consumption demand
                                                                                             1-
                                                                   -1
and domestic supply functions are given by x1 (p1 ) = p1  and y (p1 ) = A1 p1  . We normalize
p1 = 1, then A1 = output/consumption = y/x1 = 1/1.9.
    We specify additional parametric assumptions. The transaction cost related to institu-
tional quality q is set as log hm (q ) =  m  q , which is a linear approximation. Table 14 gives
an estimate of how institutional quality affects international trade. In Column (4), a PPML
exercise with institutional quality instrumented by legal origin is presented. It gives a point
estimate of 0.337 for importers so that an importer's import value will increase by 33.7% if
its institutional quality measure increases by 1 point or

                                          log import m
                                                       = 0.337.
                                               q




                                                        7
Since
             log import m    log import m  log p1    log(x1 (p1 ) - y (p1 ))
                          =                       =                          m.
                  q             log p1      q              log p1
With the functional forms of x1 , y and parameter values  = 2,  = 0.7, we get  m = -0.220.
  Our equilibrium tariff formula is

                                       1 - 1    y/[m/(1 + t)]
                             t=+                              .
                                      a(a) + 1       e

In our empirical strategy, we follow Broda, Limao and Weinstein (2008) such that the market
power enters into the tariff in the following way

                                          1 - 1    y/[m/(1 + t)]
                          t =   log  +                           .
                                         a(a) + 1       e

We do a first-order expansion to get t =   log  + ( a q + ca )  y/[m/e(1+t)] . Table 17 shows
regressions that identify   ,  a and ca . However, there will be over-identification given that
we also have average tariff data from the data. Realizing that there could be substantial
measurement errors on import demand elasticity and institutional quality, we don't directly
use the estimates on  a , which is the coefficient before the interaction of the two variables,
both with potential measurement errors. We set ca = 17.787,   = 0.994 and import
tariff t=0.21. The average log ( ) across industries in Malaysia is 4.50. This approach gives
 a = -1.617. It is negative and at the same order of the point estimate in column (4)
                                       2                                                  
of Table 17. The calibration shows p      q < 0. Therefore, a fall in natural barriers p1 will
                                         1
increase equilibrium institutional quality.
                                 2                2
   Finally, we point out that p    q < 0 (i.e., dq < 0) offers a sufficient condition, but
                                  1
not a necessary condition since in equation (30), the first term (the export-related welfare
component's first derivative with respect to q) already increases when natural barriers fall.
What our theory needs is that the left hand side increases when natural barriers fall, i.e.,
 2       2 2             2 2
dq
      + dq   < 0, where dq   < 0 has been analytically proved.




                                              8
A.4   Economies in the Cross-Sectional Exercise

           Table 12: List of Economies in the Cross-Sectional Exercise


       Albania             Hong Kong, China           Oman
       Argentina           Honduras                   Pakistan
       Australia           Hungary                    Panama
       Burkina Faso        Indonesia                  Peru
       Bangladesh          India                      Philippines
       Belarus             Israel                     Poland
       Bolivia             Jamaica                    Paraguay
       Brazil              Japan                      Romania
       Bhutan              Kazakhstan                 Russian Federation
       Central African Rep Kenya                      Rwanda
       Canada              Kyrgyzstan                 Saudi Arabia
       Switzerland         Korea, Rep                 Sudan
       Chile               Libyan Arab Jamahiriya     Singapore
       China               Sri Lanka                  El Salvador
       Cote d'Ivoire       Lithuania                  Chad
       Cameroon            Latvia                     Togo
       Congo               Morocco                    Thailand
       Colombia            Moldova, Rep               Trinidad and Tobago
       Costa Rica          Madagascar                 Tunisia
       Cuba                Mexico                     Turkey
       Cyprus              Mali                       Tanzania
       Czech Rep           Myanmar                    Uganda
       Dominican Rep       Mozambique                 Ukraine
       Algeria             Mauritius                  Uruguay
       Ecuador             Malawi                     United States
       Egypt               Malaysia                   Venezuela
       Estonia             Nigeria                    Viet Nam
       Gabon               Nicaragua                  South Africa
       Ghana               Norway                     Zambia
       Guatemala           Nepal                      Zimbabwe
       Guyana              New Zealand




                                       9
A.5     Economies (among Table 12 in Appendix A.4) with Changes
        in Borders between 1975 and 2005
Belarus: dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991
Czechia: dissolution of Czechoslovakia in 1993
Estonia: dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991
Indonesia: East Timor independence from Indonesia in 1999
Kazakhstan: dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991
Kyrgyzstan: dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991
Latvia: dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991
Lithuania: dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991
Moldova: dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991
Russia: dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991
South Africa: Namibia independence from South Africa in 1990
Ukraine: dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991
Zimbabwe: independence in 1980



A.6     Estimating Foreign Supply Elasticities and Import Demand
        Elasticities
Our estimation procedures are guided by the Feenstra-Broda-Weinstein approach as in Broda,
Limao and Weinstein (2008). The methodology is developed in the seminal work by Feenstra
(1994) and subsequently improved by Broda and Weinstein (2006).
   Our import data draws from UN COMTRADE from 1992-2003 for all the 92 economies
used in our cross sectional evidence at six-digit 1992 HS classifications upon availability. Our
data sample is significantly larger than that in Broda, Limao and Weinstein (2008). It will
enable us to extend discussions well beyond non-WTO members.
   We introduce more notations. We define a good g as a four-digit HS (HS4) category. For
any country i, a variety v is six-digit HS (HS6) product from a particular exporter country.
Our objective is to obtain its inverse export supply elasticity  ig > 0 and another parameter
 ig > 1, the import demand elasticities. pigvt denotes the unit price of country i's import of
good g at a variety v in year t. qigvt is the corresponding quantity. migvt is the corresponding
                                                         migvt
import value in U.S. dollars. Import share sigvt =           migvt
                                                                   . Here Iigt is the set of varieties
                                                         v Iigt

that country i import of good g in year t.




                                                 10
   The estimation methodology employs the following demand and supply systems

                                                                                    kig
                            kig ln sigvt = -( ig - 1)kig ln pigvt +                 igvt ;              (53)

                                                         ig                   kig
                             kig ln pigvt =                   kig ln sigvt +  igvt .                    (54)
                                                      1 +  ig
                                          k
where kig = xigvt - xigkig t , igvtig
                                      includes demand shocks and  igvt represents shocks to
the residual export supply. Broda and Weinstein (2006) extend Feenstra (1994) and reach
the following empirical relationship that is ready to be estimated

               ¯igv = ig 1
               Y                    (
                                         1
                                                +
                                                       1
                                                               ) + ig1 X             ¯ 2,igv + u
                                                                       ¯ 1,igv + ig2 X         ¯igv .   (55)
                         T      t       qigvt       qigv,t-1

where Yigvt = ( ln pigvt - ln pigkig t )2 , X1,igvt = ( ln sigvt - ln sigkig t )2 , X2,igvt = (( ln pigvt -
 ln pigkig t )( ln sigvt -  ln sigkig t )). Here  denotes time different. The bars on top of these
variables denote their time averages (thus subscript t is dropped). kig is a benchmark variety
to be discussed later. T is the total periods of data for igv minus 1. Assumption on the error
term is Ev [¯ uigv ] = 0.
   After obtaining estimates of ig1 and ig2 (and also ig ), we can back out  ig > 0 and
 ig > 1 using the following equations

                                                             ig
                                          ig1 =                          ;                              (56)
                                                     (1 +  ig )( ig - 1)

                                                       ig ( ig - 2) - 1
                                          ig2 =                          .                              (57)
                                                     (1 +  ig )( ig - 1)
   Denote  ig = ( ig ,  ig ) and G( ig ) = Et [uigvt ( ig )] = 0. To estimate equation (55), at
least four varieties ( 4) are needed for a good g of country i in order to do the following
GMM estimation
                               ^ ig = arg min G ( ig )W G ( ig ),
                                                                                           (58)
                                                     ig B

where G ( ig ) is the sample analogy of G( ig ), and set B means { ig > 0,  ig > 1}. Weight
matrix W is to be discussed later.
   It is possible that the GMM estimation procedure returns imaginary estimates or estimates
of  ig and  ig , which are not in the set B . In this case, we do a grid search procedure in
set B . For computational easiness, instead of search over ( ig > 1,  ig > 0), we search over
                          ig ( ig -1)                    
( ig , ig ), where ig = 1+    ig  ig
                                      (hence  ig = (ig (1-ig
                                                           ig )-1)
                                                                   ).
   For grids of  ig , we let it fall into the interval [1.05, 131.5] and grids are 5 percent (0.05)
apart. For grids of ig , we let ig  [0.01, 1] at intervals 0.01 apart. To ensure that  ig > 0,

                                                            11
                                               -1
we also restrict to grids that satisfy ig < ig
                                              ig
                                                  .
   We choose the benchmark variety kig using the following way. Given a country i, suppose
that their import data is available for some years. First, within g , pick up a set of varieties
that are available for the largest number of years. Within these varieties, select the variety
that has total export value to country i is the largest.
   The weight matrix W is derived in the Appendix of Broda and Weinstein (2006) to take
                                                                               1
into account measurement errors in the trade data. Elements wigv = T 3 t ( qigvt        1
                                                                                  + qigv,t-1
                                                                                             )-1 .




                                               12
A.7      Additional Tables and Figures

                            Table 13: Market Power and Country Size

                                                  (1)                             (2)
          Dependent variable:          log(1/export elasticity)        log(1/export elasticity)
          log(population)                        0.051                          0.054
                                               (0.081)                         (0.080)
          remoteness                            0.353*                          0.323
                                               (0.210)                         (0.217)
          coastline length/area                  0.020                          0.021
                                               (0.455)                         (0.462)
          landlock dummy                       0.549**                         0.528**
                                               (0.248)                         (0.262)
          OECD dummy                                                            -0.158
                                                                               (0.258)
          Industry Fixed Effects                   Y                               Y
          Observations                           50123                          50123
          R2                                     0.066                          0.066
          Standard errors clustered at country level in parentheses.
          
           p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01


Notes: this table reports the relationship between market size, geography and market power. Industry is
defined as the section classification of HS code.




                                                    13
Table 14: Gravity Equation with Institutional Quality without Importer/Exporter Fixed
Effects



                                    (1)              (2)                 (3)         (4)
                                    OLS              OLS                OLS        PPML
                                                                         IV          IV
 Dependent variable:           log(exportij )   log(exportij )    log(exportij ) exportij
 log(GDPi )                       1.176***        1.152***             -0.129     0.301**
                                   (0.010)          (0.020)           (0.310)      (0.144)
 log(GDPj )                      0.957***         0.873***            0.595**       0.035
                                   (0.010)          (0.019)           (0.284)      (0.128)
 log(distanceij )                -1.360***        -1.251***         -1.060***    -0.501***
                                   (0.022)          (0.023)           (0.045)      (0.050)
 log(populationi )                                   0.037           1.423***    0.540***
                                                    (0.023)           (0.335)      (0.160)
 log(populationj )                                 0.087***             0.389    0.856***
                                                    (0.023)           (0.306)      (0.157)
 landlock dummyi                                     -0.001         -0.460***    -0.504***
                                                    (0.055)           (0.116)      (0.097)
 landlock dummyj                                  -0.502***         -0.628***    -0.356***
                                                    (0.054)           (0.132)      (0.102)
 coastline length/areai                            1.022***          0.548***     2.110***
                                                    (0.167)           (0.197)      (0.220)
 coastline length/areaj                            0.871***          0.747***     2.237***
                                                    (0.139)           (0.192)      (0.228)
 qi                              0.019***          0.024***          0.629***    0.218***
                                  (0.005)           (0.007)           (0.143)      (0.064)
 qj                                0.002           0.025***             0.164    0.337***
                                  (0.005)           (0.007)           (0.131)      (0.065)
 contiguousij                                      1.177***          1.664***     0.994***
                                                    (0.109)           (0.172)      (0.154)
 common languageij                                 0.703***          0.870***     0.309**
                                                    (0.053)           (0.079)      (0.120)
 hisotircal colonial linkij                        0.994***          0.474***     -0.297**
                                                    (0.111)           (0.174)      (0.132)
 Observations                      12890             12686             12394        16002
 R2                                0.675             0.696              0.517
 Robust standard errors in parentheses.
 
  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01



Notes: In column (3) and (4), we use legal origin (common law dummy) to instrument institutional quality.
The international trade data is taken from UNCTAD in 1997. Quality of institutions is measured the same
way as in our empirical sections, which are the sum of expropriation risk (investment profile), corruption
control and law and order from the Political Risk Group. exportij is export from country i to country j.
                                                   14
Table 15: Gravity Equation with Institutional Quality with Importer/Exporter Fixed Effects


                                            (1)             (2)           (3)            (4)
                                           OLS            PPML           OLS            PPML
                                            IV              IV            IV             IV
        Dependent variable:           log(exportij )     exportij    log(exportij )    exportij
        log(GDPi )                        -0.263         -0.407**
                                         (0.282)          (0.194)
        log(GDPj )                                                       0.092        -0.898***
                                                                        (0.208)        (0.193)
        log(distanceij )                -1.123***        -0.520***     -1.267***      -0.407***
                                         (0.049)           (0.054)      (0.039)        (0.052)
        log(populationi )               1.572***          1.327***
                                         (0.306)           (0.203)
        log(populationj )                                              0.954***        1.851***
                                                                        (0.224)         (0.210)
        landlock dummyi                 -0.539***        -1.005***
                                         (0.110)          (0.136)
        landlock dummyj                                                -0.852***      -1.065***
                                                                        (0.097)        (0.121)
        coastline length/areai          0.522***         1.298***
                                         (0.191)          (0.227)
        coastline length/areaj                                         0.661***        0.965***
                                                                        (0.149)         (0.145)
        qi                              0.690***         0.590***
                                         (0.131)          (0.093)
        qj                                                             0.397***        0.808***
                                                                        (0.097)         (0.095)
        contiguousij                    1.595***         1.258***      1.172***        1.462***
                                         (0.172)          (0.137)       (0.143)         (0.129)
        common languageij               0.860***         0.558***      0.856***        0.642***
                                         (0.082)          (0.074)       (0.068)         (0.071)
        hisotircal colonial linkij       0.376**         -0.732***     0.825***       -0.885***
                                         (0.178)          (0.137)       (0.146)         (0.141)
        Importer FE                         Y                Y             N               N
        Exporter FE                         N                N             Y               Y
        Observations                      12847            16638         12828           16638
        R2                                0.372                          0.493
        Robust standard errors in parentheses.
        
         p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01



Notes: In column (3) and (4), we use legal origin (common law dummy) to instrument institutional quality.
The international trade data is taken from UNCTAD in 1997. Quality of institutions is measured the same
way as in our empirical sections, which are the sum of expropriation risk (investment profile), corruption
control and law and order from the Political Risk Group. exportij is export from country i to country j.
                                                    15
            Table 16: Natural Barriers and Import Tariff: Product Level 2001-2003

                                     (1)                   (2)            (3)            (4)
  Dependent variable: import tariff
  log(population)                  0.799**              0.797**        0.968**         0.861**
                                   (0.396)              (0.396)        (0.434)         (0.408)
  remoteness                     2.893***              2.873***        3.758**        4.230***
                                   (1.098)              (1.097)        (1.452)         (1.153)
  coastline length/area         -14.353***            -14.367***     -12.352***      -14.878***
                                   (3.916)              (3.917)        (3.612)         (2.593)
  landlock dummy                    0.158                0.170          0.976           0.472
                                   (0.967)              (0.967)        (1.175)         (1.192)
  log(1/export elasticity)                                             0.090**         0.075**
                                                                       (0.035)         (0.035)
  residual log(GDP per capita)                                                        -1.760***
                                                                                       (0.361)
  Industry Fixed Effects                    N               Y             Y               Y
  Observations                           127473          127473         50578           50578
  R2                                      0.059           0.140         0.179           0.238
  Standard errors clustered at country level in parentheses.
  * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01



Notes: this table reports the product level (HS4) relationship between natural barriers and import tariff
using 2001-2003 average import tariff data. Industry is defined as the section classification of HS code.




                                                    16
                         Table 17: Institutional Quality and Import Tariff



                                                     (1)          (2)            (3)            (4)
                                                     OLS          OLS            IV             IV
 Dependent variable: import tariff
                Output-Import Ratio
 institution* Import Demand Elasticity
                                                  -0.257***
                                                       -0.224*** -0.894***                  -1.063***
                                                    (0.020)
                                                         (0.029)  (0.075)                    (0.114)
   Output-Import Ratio
 Import Demand Elasticity
                                                   5.223***
                                                        4.803*** 16.281***                  17.787***
                                                    (0.334)
                                                         (0.420)  (0.979)                    (1.314)
 log(1/export elasticity)                          0.192***
                                                        0.231***   0.698*                   0.994***
                                                    (0.052)
                                                         (0.054)  (0.389)                    (0.335)
                 Output-Import Ratio
 institution* Import Demand Elasticity *OECD              -0.018                            0.133***
                                                         (0.012)                             (0.048)
   Output-Import Ratio
 Import Demand Elasticity
                          *OECD                           -0.007                               0.247
                                                         (0.008)                             (0.160)
 log(1/export elasticity)*OECD                         -0.468***                            -0.620***
                                                         (0.064)                             (0.173)
 residual log(GDP per capita)                -2.665*** -2.446*** -1.849***                  -2.016***
                                              (0.124)    (0.132)  (0.319)                    (0.301)
 Industry FE                                     Y           Y       Y                           Y
 Observations                                   4202       4202     4202                       4202
 R2                                            0.286       0.291   -0.104                     -0.138
 Standard errors clustered at country level in parentheses.
 
  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01



Notes: Column (1) and (2) are OLS regressions, and Column (3) and (4) are IV regressions, where
institutional quality is instrumented by log(population), remoteness and coastline length/area. Industry is
defined at the ISIC 2-digit level. Quality of institutions is measured by the sum of expropriation risk
(investment profile), corruption control and law and order from the Political Risk Group.




                                                    17
Table 18: Natural Barriers, Market Power and Import Tariff: Dropping Countries with
Border Change after 1975

                                       (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)
  Dependent Variable: import tariff
  log(population)                    1.246**       1.254**        0.862       1.163**
                                     (0.573)       (0.573)       (0.525)      (0.577)
  remoteness                         3.441**       3.416**      4.135***       2.741
                                     (1.561)       (1.565)       (1.375)      (2.119)
  coastline length/area            -16.768***    -16.735***    -18.698***   -17.719***
                                     (4.037)       (4.038)       (3.175)      (3.187)
  landlock dummy                      0.075         0.107         0.000
                                     (1.782)       (1.782)       (2.119)
  log(1/export elasticity)                                        0.091         0.098
                                                                 (0.071)      (0.075)
  log(population)*OECD                                                       -1.260**
                                                                              (0.614)
  remoteness*OECD                                                              -0.066
                                                                              (2.061)
  coastline length/area*OECD                                                   5.751
                                                                             (11.732)
  landlock dummy*OECD

  log(1/export elasticity)*OECD                                                -0.080
                                                                              (0.078)
  OECD dummy                                                                  17.960
                                                                             (20.678)
  residual log(GDP per capita)       -2.657***    -2.648***    -2.936***    -2.320***
                                      (0.574)      (0.574)      (0.500)       (0.588)
  Industry Fixed Effect                  N            Y            Y              Y
  No. of countries                       78           78           74            74
  Observations                         76657        76657        44023         44023
  R2                                   0.157        0.224        0.283          0.296
  Standard errors clustered at country level in parentheses.
  * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01


Notes: This table reports the relationship between natural barriers' measures and the country-product (HS
4-digit) import tariff, after dropping countries with border changes between 1975 and 2005.




                                                     18
              Table 19: Population, Geography and Export/Institutional Quality


                                           (1)           (2)        (3)                (4)
        Panel A Dependent Variable: log(export/GDP)
                                             full sample        subsample with tariff data available
        log(population)               -0.174*** -0.174***       -0.207***         -0.205***
                                        (0.031)       (0.033)     (0.036)           (0.039)
        remoteness                     -0.226**      -0.240**    -0.262**          -0.266**
                                        (0.099)       (0.109)     (0.130)           (0.132)
        coastline length/area          1.725***      1.756***    1.789***          1.828***
                                        (0.386)       (0.350)     (0.469)           (0.455)
        landlock dummy                   -0.043        -0.045      -0.154            -0.137
                                        (0.115)       (0.110)     (0.140)           (0.140)
        residual log(GDP per capita)                 0.083**                         0.039
                                                      (0.039)                       (0.052)
        Observations                      130           128          90                90
        R2                               0.310         0.339       0.383              0.388

        Panel B-1 Dependent Variable: institutional quality from Political Risk Index
                                            full sample         subsample with tariff data available
        log(population)                 -0.549***   -0.490***    -0.590**           -0.423**
                                          (0.201)    (0.163)      (0.231)            (0.182)
        remoteness                      -4.211***   -4.121***   -3.566***          -3.737***
                                          (0.999)    (0.719)      (1.152)            (0.802)
        coastline length/area            9.508***   10.191***     9.262**          10.745***
                                          (3.323)    (1.497)      (3.611)            (1.974)
        landlock dummy                     -0.312     -0.648       -0.845             -0.705
                                          (0.900)    (0.836)      (1.103)            (1.122)
        residual log(GDP per capita)                1.735***                       1.588***
                                                     (0.221)                         (0.275)
        Observations                       114         110          85                  84
        R2                                0.294       0.595       0.262                0.516

        Panel B-2 Dependent Variable: institutional quality from Transparency International
                                            full sample         subsample with tariff data available
        log(population)                 -0.219**      -0.148*    -0.272**            -0.146*
                                         (0.110)      (0.076)     (0.126)            (0.087)
        remoteness                      -1.374**    -1.571***     -1.282*           -1.438***
                                         (0.586)      (0.329)     (0.677)            (0.366)
        coastline length/area           7.151***    7.719***     6.596***           7.853***
                                         (2.218)      (0.999)     (2.198)            (1.171)
        landlock dummy                    -0.437     -0.669**      -0.705            -0.574*
                                         (0.424)      (0.295)     (0.431)            (0.340)
        residual log(GDP per capita)                1.141***                        1.092***
                                                      (0.115)                        (0.142)
        Observations                       111          108         83                  82
        R2                                0.248        0.701      0.266               0.677
        Robust standard errors in parentheses.
        * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01


Notes: This table reports the relationship between natural barriers' measures and trade openness and
institutional quality. Panel B1 uses institutional quality
                                                      19 measure from the Political Risk Index, which is the
sum of expropriation risk, corruption control and law and order, averaged between 2001-2003. Panel B2
uses institutional quality measure from the Transparency International, which is the corruption perception
index, averaged between 2001-2003.
