                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     DYNAMICAL STRUCTURE AND SPECTRAL PROPERTIES OF INPUT-OUTPUT
                            NETWORKS

                                           Ernest Liu
                                         Aleh Tsyvinski

                                       Working Paper 28178
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28178


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020




We thank Daron Acemoglu, Ruben Enikolopov, Benny Kleinman, Stephen Redding, and Stefan
Steinerberger for comments, and Yinshan Shang and Alexander Zimin for research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Ernest Liu and Aleh Tsyvinski. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Dynamical Structure and Spectral Properties of Input-Output Networks
Ernest Liu and Aleh Tsyvinski
NBER Working Paper No. 28178
December 2020
JEL No. E0,E23

                                          ABSTRACT

We associate a dynamical system with input-output networks and study its spectral properties.
Specifically, we develop a dynamic production network model featuring adjustment costs of
changing inputs and thus gradual recovery from temporary TFP shocks. First, we explicitly solve
for the output and welfare effects of temporary shocks. We show shocks to sectors that generate
significant sales through distant linkages to the consumer are most damaging. Second, we
eigendecompose the input-output matrix and show, because higher-order linkages take longer to
recover, fewer eigenvectors are needed to represent the welfare impact of sectoral shocks in the
dynamic economy compared to the Domar weights. Third, we analyze the U.S. input-output
structure and show the welfare impact of temporary shocks has a low-dimensional, 4-factor
structure (out of 171 eigenvectors). Finally, we revisit the historical use of input-output analysis
in target selection for bombing Nazi Germany and Imperial Japan during WWII.


Ernest Liu
Princeton University
Department of Economics
Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton, NJ 08544
ernestliu@princeton.edu

Aleh Tsyvinski
Department of Economics
Yale University
Box 208268
New Haven, CT 06520-8268
and NBER
a.tsyvinski@yale.edu
1     Introduction
The study of production networks recently became an active research agenda in macroeco-
nomics, reviving and developing the classic analysis of Leontief. The most common setting
is that of the static general equilibrium environment subject to sectoral shocks.
    The recent theoretical advances in the analysis of networks and graphs take an inherently
dynamical perspective. Spectral graph theory (Chung (1997), Grigor'yan (2018), Spielman
(2019)) associates a dynamical system, typically a diffusion operator, with the static network
and studies the eigenvectors and eigenvalues of the Laplacian. The Leontief-inverse matrix
in the input-output analysis is the inverse of the Laplacian of the network and thus admits
a parallel analysis. Similarly, a classical way to analyze a non-negative matrix (Berman and
Plemmons (1994)), which is the input-output network, is by associating with it a continuous
time dynamical system, or a flow, represented by a system of differential equations.1 This
system has an explicit solution in terms of matrix exponentials and hence the properties
of solutions are intimately related to the properties of the matrix (Colonius and Kliemann
(2014)). In particular, the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the input-output matrix deter-
mine the evolution of the dynamical system and thus can be used for the analysis of shock
propagations. Our main methodological aim is to bring the techniques of dynamical systems
and spectral graph theory to the analysis of production networks.
   In this paper, such a dynamical system arises from a dynamic model of production
networks in which there are costs for changing inputs of production. Following a temporary
negative shock, adjustment costs lead to a gradual movement of the economy to the steady
state. While the steady state of the economy coincides with the static model, the transition
path of the dynamic transmission of shocks across sectors is in general different from the
standard setting and the temporary shocks have lasting impact. Our primary goal is to
characterize the dynamic path of the propagation of shocks through the input-output linkages
and the determinants of the output trajectory and welfare.
   Specifically, we extend the model of Acemoglu, Carvalho, Ozdaglar, and Tahbaz-Salehi
(2012) and Jones (2011, 2013) by introducing a cost of upward change of inputs that depends
on the speed of adjustment. The standard model corresponds to the case of zero adjustment
costs and thus an immediate adjustment to the temporary shocks. For positive adjustment
costs, the standard model is a steady state of our dynamic model. We show that analysis
of the determinants of the flow of output (that is, the solution to the dynamical system of
differential equations) is closely related to the properties of the static input-output matrix
  1
    The behavior of the Markov chain on the input-output network is a closely related dynamical system
(Kemeny and Snell (1960)).



                                                  1
as in the mathematical approaches described above. The analysis of welfare impact of
temporary shocks also adds new considerations in analyzing the temporal structure of the
flow.
    We first characterize the transition path of the sectoral outputs and consumptions. Even
when the sectoral TFP recovery is immediate, due to adjustment costs, the use of interme-
diate goods cannot jump instantaneously and only recovers gradually. The gradual recovery
of the use of inputs then translates into the gradual recovery of the output in sectors that
use those inputs. As the transition takes time, the speed of which is determined by the mag-
nitude of the adjustment costs, the path of adjustment has non-trivial welfare implications
for a consumer who discounts the future. We thus next characterize the impact of the sec-
toral TFP shock on consumer welfare. We show that the elasticity of welfare to temporary
negative TFP shocks is proportional to the difference between two terms. The first is the
sectoral Domar weight that captures the welfare impact of a permanent negative TFP shock.
The second term captures the effects of the slow recovery of the production network. This
term has a similar form to the Domar weight but where the power series of the subsequent
round of effects on production is discounted by the product of the consumer's discount rate
and the adjustment cost parameter. Temporary shocks have lasting impact on the output
and welfare precisely because input-output linkages take time to recover. These higher-order
linkages are represented by the series of the powers of input-output matrix. Importantly, the
difference between these two terms disproportionately removes the lower-order rounds of the
production effects while keeping the tail entries unchanged.
   For example, one can contrast two different networks. In a horizontal network where
there are no input-output linkages, the adjustment costs are irrelevant, and a negative TFP
shock has zero impact on the economy once the TFP reverts. In a vertical economy, where
sectors are ordered and each supplies only to the next one, in contrast, temporary shocks
have a lasting impact, and the damage is more severe when the shocked sector is more distant
from the final consumer.
   We then show that the welfare measure is similar to the concept of alpha centrality in the
network literature with the difference that the weights increase for the higher-order linkages.
One can view this also as a multi-scale representation of the economy. We show that the
importance of the higher-order links is determined by a parameter that is a combination of
the speed of adjustment and the discount rate of the consumer. This one-parameter family of
economies then shows the importance of temporary shocks' local versus global effects. That
is, the economy is represented at different scales or the levels of coarseness spotlighting the
relative importance of the higher-order links and thus the importance of the global versus
local structures.


                                              2
   Summarizing our first main result of the paper: in the presence of adjustment frictions,
we derive the explicit representation for the output and welfare effects of the temporary
shocks. Specifically, the shocks to sectors that generate significant sales through distant
linkages to the consumer are disproportionately damaging to the economy.
   Our second set of results is the characterization of the main driving forces of the welfare
impact of temporary shocks. Since we have shown the importance of the higher-order pro-
duction links, this naturally leads us to analyze the spectral or eigendecomposition of the
input-output matrix--its eigenvectors and eigenvalues. The main reason for this is that once
the matrix is diagonalized, the powers of it, which represent the higher order production
links, take a particularly simple form.
   The concise decomposition of the welfare effects of shocks as a combination of the eigen-
vectors and the power series of the eigenvalues is our second main theoretical result. Specif-
ically, consider a temporary shock vector that is itself an eigenvector. The impact of the
shock along the entire transition path becomes a continuously decayed version of the initial
shock, with rate of decay governed by the eigenvalue. An important corollary of this logic
shows a marked contrast with the eigendecomposition of the Domar weights, and thus with
the static economy. Because dynamic adjustment costs significantly down-weight the direct
and initial rounds of network effects, our model effectively up-weights the higher powers in
the power series of eigenvalues, thereby up-weighting the relative importance for the shock
profiles with greater eigenvalues and down-weighting the shock profiles with the lower eigen-
values. This implies that fewer eigenvalues are needed to represent the welfare impact of
the shocks in a dynamic economy. In other words, the dynamic economy may have a factor
structure where the small set of factors can capture the importance of temporary shocks. In
contrast, the Domar weights may be significantly higher dimensional: because the Domar
weights do not discount the direct and initial rounds of network effects, even eigenvectors
with small eigenvalues may have a sizable contribution in explaining TFP shocks in the
static model. In summary, sectoral shocks may not have a low-dimensional representation
in the static model but may have one in our dynamic model. The concise representation of
complex high dimensional systems via a few reduced coordinates is also the primary goal of
the well developed literature on nonlinear dimensionality reduction using spectral methods
(e.g., Coifman, Kevrekidis, Lafon, Maggioni, and Nadler (2008)).
    Our third set of results is an empirical analysis of the eigendecomposition of the U.S.
input-output structure. We first show that 95 percent of the welfare effect of temporary
sectoral shocks can be represented by only four eigenvectors. That is, the U.S. input-output
network has a very low- dimensional (4-factor) structure. In contrast, for the Domar weight
almost all of the 171 eigenvectors are important, and, hence, the Domar weight is a high-


                                              3
dimensional object. Because input-output tables are not symmetric, the eigenvectors are
not orthogonal to each other. In fact, many eigenvectors are correlated, thereby picking
shocks to the same groups of sectors. We identify the groups of sectors that form the four
factors. The first eigenvector represents shocks to the heavy manufacturing sectors. The
second eigenvector strongly and negatively correlates with the first and represents three
groups of industries: (1) most notably, the two sectors relating to agencies, brokerages, and
insurance; (2) manufacturing of consumer goods; (3) it has negative entries on the heavy
manufacturing industries, partly neutralizing the shock profile from the first eigenvector. The
third eigenvector correlates positively with the second eigenvector and has positive entries
on the manufacturing of consumer goods and chemicals. The fourth eigenvector has close-
to-zero correlations with the previous three eigenvectors. The main sector picked is radio
and television broadcasting; in addition, it also has negative entries on the manufacturing
of chemicals, plastic, and rubber products, partly neutralizing the shock profiles represented
by the third eigenvector. Summarizing, we find that the welfare impact of any negative
temporary shocks can be represented by only four (out of 171) eigenvectors.
   Our fourth set of results is based on revisiting one of the earliest historical applications
of the input-output analysis. During the World War II, Wassily Leontief was part of the
small groups of economist that used input-output analysis for target selection for strategic
bombing (Guglielmo (2008), Harrison (2020)). We use the input-output table of pre-war Nazi
Germany and Imperial Japan to parallel that analysis. First, we provide the list of sectors
to which temporary shocks generate the largest impact. Second, we show, for the purpose
of finding vulnerability to temporary shocks, both of these input-output tables also exhibit
low-dimensional representations: the first three eigenvectors explain 92% of the variation in
welfare losses for Japan and 85% for Germany. Third, we demonstrate the over-time impact
of shocks to each sector on every other sector of the economy, and we show shocks to the
metal sectors tend to have lasting damage across both pre-WWII Germany and Japan.
   We now briefly summarize the literature. There is a modern revival of the literature on
production networks (see, e.g., reviews in macroeconomics of Carvalho (2014), Carvalho and
Tahbaz-Salehi (2019), and Grassi and Sauvagnat (2019); and, more broadly, Bloch, Jackson,
and Tebaldi (2020) and Jackson, Rogers, and Zenou (forthcoming)). Acemoglu, Carvalho,
Ozdaglar, and Tahbaz-Salehi (2012) show idiosyncratic sectoral productivity shocks may
have aggregate impact. Jones (2011, 2013) develops a model of production networks with
distortions. A number of recent papers develop various important aspects of the macroe-
conomic implications of the input-output and production structure of the economy: for
example, Acemoglu, Akcigit, and Kerr (2015), Oberfield (2018), Baqaee (2018), Liu (2019),
Baqaee and Farhi (2019, 2020), Bigio and La'O (2020), and Golub, Elliot, and Leduc (2020).


                                              4
Unlike these papers, which all feature static models, our main contribution is to study the dy-
namic adjustment of the economy with the adjustment costs through the lens of the spectral
graph theory and dynamical system theory.2 We find that temporary shocks to sectors that
generate significant sales through distant linkages to the consumer are disproportionately
damaging to the economy. We also find that shocks to upstream sectors are especially dam-
aging relative to the size of these sectors, precisely because higher order linkages take a long
time to recover. Our theory also derives a precise notion of upstreamness that relates to but
differs from the upstreamness measure of Antràs, Chor, Fally, and Hillberry (2012) and the
distortion centrality measure of Liu (2019). Our analysis of disrupting the Axis economies
is inspired by an important paper of Davis and Weinstein (2002). The closest in this aspect
to our work is the study of the effects of the 2011 Japanese earthquake on the supply chains
by Carvalho, Nirei, Saito, and Tahbaz-Salehi (forthcoming) set in the static framework and
an exceptionally detailed study of the effects of bombing Germany on resistance to Nazis
(Adena, Enikolopov, Petrova, and Voth (2020)).


2        Model
Our model is a dynamic Cobb-Douglas production network. We extend the standard, static
production network model of Acemoglu et al. (2012) and Jones (2011, 2013) by introducing
dynamic adjustment costs in input-output linkages. As we show below, allocations in the
equilibrium of the static model coincide with our dynamic economy's steady-state but differ
from our transitional path.
        There is a representative consumer with exogenous labor supply ¯ and N production
sectors that produce from labor and intermediate inputs. The consumer has utility
                                                        
                                        V                  e-t ln c (t) dt
                                                    0


where c (t) is a Cobb-Douglas aggregator over sectoral goods j = 1, . . . , N :

                                            N                          N
                                                             j
                                c (t) = c          (cj (t)) ,                j = 1,
                                            j =1                      j =1


                 N      -j
where c          j =1   j    is a normalizing constant. We refer to c (t) as aggregate consumption
and GDP interchangeably.
    2
   In a different setting, Steinerberger and Tsyvinski (2019) associate a dynamical system with the static
model of optimal taxation.



                                                            5
   At each time t, the output of production sector i satisfies

                                                 N                         N
                   qi (t) = i zi (t) ( i (t))i          (mij (t))ij ,             ij + i = 1,
                                                 j =1                      j =1


                       -i                    N          -ij
where 0  i , ij  1, i  i                     j =1    ij        is a normalizing constant, zi (t) is sectoral
total factor productivity, li (t) is the amount of labor used, and mij (t) is the amount of the
intermediate good of the sector j used in the production of the good i.
    From now on, wherever it does not cause confusion, we suppress dependence on time t
in the notation.
   Our departure from the standard model lies in how intermediate inputs mij are delivered
from seller j to buyer i. In the standard model, as the economy's fundamentals change at
time t, the prices and quantities in all connected sectors adjust immediately and fully to
their new equilibrium levels all at the same time t.
   We introduce the concept of time through the transportation of intermediate inputs across
producers. Our formulation captures the notion that, following temporary negative shocks,
the recovery of input-output linkages must be gradual, and temporary shocks therefore may
have lasting impact on the economy. Specifically, to use input quantity mij at time t, sector
i needs to buy
                                  mij × exp ( m
                                               ij /mij × 1 (m
                                                             ij > 0))

units of input j . The term m   ij  dmij (t) /dt is the rate of change in the quantity of
intermediate input j used by sector i and the term 1 (m
                                                       ij > 0) states that only the increases
in the goods use matter. The term exp ( m              ij > 0)) captures sluggish upward
                                         ij /mij × 1 (m
adjustment of inputs and can be interpreted as an iceberg cost that producer i has to incur
when it raises the quantity of input j . The parameter  captures the ease of adjustment;
when   0, adjustment costs vanish.
   The market clearing conditions are

                     q j = cj +                                ij > 0)) for all j,
                                                 ij /mij × 1 (m
                                      mij exp ( m
                                  i


                                                  ¯=            i.
                                                           i

For simplicity, we assume goods delivered to the consumer are not subject to adjustment
costs, and neither is the use of labor across production sectors. These choices are made
for expositional simplicity and are without loss of generality. We can always accommodate
adjustment costs in the purchase of labor or the consumption good by creating a fictitious

                                                          6
production sector that buys the consumption bundle and sells to the consumer or buys labor
and sells to other producers.

Equilibrium and Steady State All producers are price-takers. Let

                         (t)  {mij (t) , cj (t) , qj (t) ,   j   (t) , c (t)}N
                                                                             i,j =1


be the input-output quantity allocation at time t, let P (t)  {pj (t) , w (t)}N
                                                                              j =1 be the set of
sectoral prices and of wages at time t, and let z (t)  {zj (t)}N
                                                               j =1 denote the set of time-t pro-
ductivities. Given the initial condition  (0) and the sequence of sectoral productivity Z (·),
an equilibrium is the sequence of allocation and prices  (t), P (t) such that all producers
choose input bundles to minimize costs, with

                             1 i                                                 ij
                      pi =                 ij mij × 1 (m
                                w pj exp  m             ij > 0)                       ,
                             zi

                                     ij mij × 1 (m
                        pj mij exp  m             ij > 0) = ij pi qi ,

                                w i =  i pi qi ,       pj cj = j c.
                                                                 N       
We normalize the consumer price index to one: 1 =                j =1   pj j . A steady-state equilibrium is
one in which z (t),  (t), P (t) are all time invariant.
   In what follows, we use boldface to denote vectors (lower case) and matrices (upper case).
Let   [ij ] denote the matrix of input-output expenditure shares, and let  denote the
N × 1 vector of consumption expenditure shares. Let  be the vector of sectoral value-added
shares. Let    (I - )-1 be the vector of Domar weights, i.e., sectoral sales relative to
GDP.

Discussion When  = 0, the economy does not feature adjustment costs, and the model
becomes a repeated version of the static economy in Acemoglu et al. (2012): given the vector
of sectoral TFP z (t) at each time t, the log-GDP is ln c (t) = const +  ln z (t), where  is
the vector of Domar weights.
   When  > 0, the economy features adjustment costs. However, allocations and prices in
the steady state of this dynamic model coincide with those the static equilibrium in Acemoglu
et al. (2012). The Hulten's theorem holds across steady-states: the sales share i of sector
i characterizes the steady-state importance of each sector's TFP. Specifically, let css denote
the steady-state consumption per period; then

                                    ln css = const +  ln z .

                                                   7
    In our formulation, input usage is slow to expand but may shrink instantaneously. This
is for expositional simplicity; the model can be easily generalized to accommodated sluggish
downward adjustment of inputs as well.


3     Slow recovery from a temporary TFP shock
Consider a production network affected by temporary negative TFP shocks to some sectors.
These shocks reduce sectoral production and may propagate through input-output linkages
and affect output in other sectors. After these negative shocks revert, how quickly does the
economy recover? We show, when production linkages take time to recover, the topology of
a production network is a key determinant of its resilience to negative shocks.

                           Figure 1: Two stylized example networks




   To illustrate the intuition, consider two example networks. In Figure 1, panel (a) shows
the network structure of a horizontal production economy. Here, labor is the only factor
of production in each sector i  {1, . . . , N }, and sectors i does not use any of the goods
j  {1, . . . , N } in production. All of the goods are part of the consumption bundle c. Since
there are no input-output linkages, the adjustment costs in this setting are irrelevant, and
a negative TFP shock to zi has zero impact on the economy once the TFP reverts back,
measured by either sectoral output or GDP.
    Now consider panel (b), which shows the network structure of a vertical production chain.
Here, labor is the only factor of production of sector 1, and each subsequent sector i uses
inputs only of the sector i - 1. Only good N is used in final consumption c. Consider a
temporary decline in sector 1's productivity z1 . Sector 1's output declines for the duration of
the negative shock; moreover, because sector 2 requires good 1 as inputs, the output of sector
2 declines as well, and in fact output declines in all sectors i  {1, . . . , N }. After the initial
TFP shock disappears and as z1 reverts, output in sector 1 recovers immediately. However,
because of adjustment costs in the recovery of input-output linkages, sectoral output for
all i  2 may stay extendedly depressed, and the economy as a whole--measured by the

                                                 8
consumption aggregator c (t), i.e., the GDP--may take a long time to recover. By contrast,
a temporary reduction in sector N 's TFP zN has no lasting impact on the economy, which
recovers immediately after the shock dissipates. More generally, in the vertical network
of panel (b), the economy recovers more slowly from negative shocks that affect relatively
upstream sectors.
   We now formalize the analysis, and we analyze sectoral susceptibility in a production
network from our dynamic perspective.


3.1    Negative shocks and transitional dynamics
We analyze an economy initially in a steady-state with sectoral log-productivities {ln zi }N
                                                                                           i=1 ,
and we consider temporary, negative TFP shocks that reduce sectoral productivities at
                      ~i }N
time zero to {ln zi - z   i=1 . We use z
                                       ~i > 0 to denote the absolute value in logs of the
negative shocks for sector i. For expositional simplicity, we assume sectoral TFP reverts
back instantaneously to the pre-shock steady-state levels {zi }N
                                                               i=1 . We use t = 0 and t = 0
                                                                                 -

to respectively index the time at and after the negative TFP shocks. When the negative
shocks are present at t = 0- , log-GDP declines by  z  ~ relative to its steady-state level,
where  is the Domar weights, consistent with Hulten (1978) and Acemoglu et al. (2012).
We now analyze the dynamic path of sectoral output and GDP during the recovery, from
t = 0 onwards.
   Even as sectoral TFP recovers at t = 0, the use of intermediate inputs can only grow
gradually over time and cannot jump instantaneously. Hence, sectoral output increases
exactly in proportion to the TFP recovery, and the total output in sector j exceeds the
total quantity of good j used as production inputs. The excess output is dispensed as the
adjustment costs required to expand input j for the future. With passage of time, sectors
continue to expand the use of inputs, sectoral output continues to expand even though TFP
is constant. Eventually the economy converges back to the initial steady-state as t  .
   To solve for the transition path, let

                                                qj (t) - cj (t)
                                   xj (t)  ln
                                                     i mij (t)


be the log-ratio between the total quantity of good j supplied to and used by other producers.
           q (t)-c (t)
The ratio j mijj(t) is equal to one in a steady-state, and xj = 0 for all j . Away from a steady-
            i
state, the ratio captures the proportional adjustment costs incurred for expanding input j
in production. Because all producers i spend a constant share of input expenditure on good
j along the transition path, xj (t) =  m
                                        ij mij for all i, and  -1 xj (t) captures the rate at


                                                9
which all sectors expand their use of input j .

Proposition 1. Laws of Motion. Consider a TFP shock vector z       ~ that affects the steady-
state economy at time zero and reverts back instantaneously. The law of motion for sectoral
output vector q is

    d ln q
           =  -1 x (t) ,    with the initial condition ln q (0) = ln q ss -  (I - )-1 z
                                                                                      ~,           (1)
      dt

where I is the identity matrix and   [ij ] is the matrix of input-output coefficients.
    The law of motion for GDP is

    d ln c
           =  -1  x (t) ,     with the initial condition ln c (0) = ln css -   (I - )-1 z
                                                                                        ~.
     dt

    The dynamic path of x satisfies the ODE system

              dx (t)
                     = - (I - ) x (t) ,                                             ~.
                                                 with the initial condition x (0) = z
               dt

  To understand this Proposition, first suppose the negative TFP shocks were permanent.
Output declines in sectors directly affected by the shocks. Moreover, because of production
linkages, output also declines in sectors that purchase inputs--directly or indirectly--from
the shocked sectors. The total impact of negative shocks on sectoral output is captured by
- (I - )-1 z~, where the Leontief inverse (I - )-1  I +  + 2 + · · · captures the infinite
rounds of higher order effects through input-output linkages. This is indeed the finding of
Acemoglu et al. (2012) and Acemoglu et al. (2015) in the standard, static production network
model.
    This Proposition 1 instead pertains to temporary shocks. As sectoral TFP recovers
instantaneously, log-output directly recovers by z
                                                 ~; hence, at time t = 0, sectoral output
satisfies

                 ln q (0) =          ln q ss          - (I - )-1 z
                                                                 ~ +               ~
                                                                                   z           .
                               initial steady state    effect of permanent   recovery of TFP
                                                          negative shocks


The input-output linkages destroyed by the negative shocks take time to recover. Because
              ij /mij captures the rate at which all producers expand their use of input j , the
 -1 xj (t) = m
output of sector i grows at rate

                                                        N
                                                  -1
                                     q
                                     i /qi =                  ij xj (t) ,
                                                       j =1


                                                       10
and in the vector form
                                  d ln q
                                         =  -1 x (t) .
                                    dt
The law of motion for GDP follows from the fact that ln c (t) - ln css =  (ln q (t) - ln q ss )
for all t.
    Finally, to derive the law of motion for x (t), note

                             dxj (t)   d ln qj   d ln ( i mij (t))
                                     =         -
                               dt        dt             dt

captures the difference between the rate at which sectoral output expands (the first term)
and the rate at which sectoral goods are used as intermediate inputs (the second term); the
latter is equal to  -1 xj (t). In the vector form,

                                     dx
                                        =  -1 x -  -1 x.
                                     dt

    The ODE system for x (t) has an explicit solution in terms of the matrix exponential:

                                                   -1 (I -)t
                                    x (t) = e-                 ~,
                                                               z                           (2)

where matrix exponential for any generic matrix M is defined as
                                               
                                                    Mk
                                        eM             .
                                              k=0
                                                    k!

    Intuitively, immediately after the negative TFP shock recedes, x (0) = z
                                                                           ~. As production
linkages recover over time and as the economy converges back to the steady-state, x (t)
converges to the zero vector. The term  modulates the rate of convergence; the system
converges at a faster rate if adjustment cost  is small. The next proposition describes the
time paths or the flow of the sectoral outputs and consumption.

Proposition 2. Flow of Output and Consumption. The flow of sectoral output satisfies

                                                                    -1 (I -)t
                         ln q (t) = ln q ss -  (I - )-1 e-                      ~
                                                                                z

and the flow of aggregate consumption satisfies

                                                                    -1 (I -)t
                       ln c (t) = ln css -   (I - )-1 e-                        ~.
                                                                                z

Proof. We have


                                              11
                                              t
          ln q (t) = q (0) +  -1                  x (s) ds
                                          0
                                                  t
                                                           -1 (I -)s
                   = q (0) +  -1                      e-                  ~
                                                                       ds z
                                              0
                                                                                               -1 (I -)t
                   = ln q ss - (I - )-1 z ~ +  (I - )-1 I - e-
                                        ~+z                                                                ~
                                                                                                           z
                                  q (0)
                                                               -1 (I -)t
                   = ln q ss -  (I - )-1 e-                                ~.
                                                                           z

   The expression for c (t) is derived analogously.

   When productivity in sector j recovers, the sector's output expands immediately, which
gradually translates into the expansion of input j used in other sectors i, thereby causing i's
output to expand gradually over time. The vector - (I - )-1 z      ~+z  ~ = - (I - )-1 z      ~
captures the extent to which log-sectoral outputs at t = 0 are below their steady-state levels;
it can be re-written as
                                                                        
                                                      -1
                              - (I - )                     ~=-
                                                           z                    s    ~
                                                                                     z
                                                                        s=1

where each successive term in the summation captures a higher round of input-output link-
ages to be recovered from the initial shock. The expression - (I - )-1 e- (I -)t is
                                                                                                           -1



the log-deviation in output relative to steady-state levels at time t; it is the continuous time
                                                       
analogue of the discrete partial sum -                 s= t   s . By varying t, the expression captures the
fact that general equilibrium linkages recover gradually, and higher rounds of linkages take
longer to recover.
   The rate of recovery is inversely related to  . As   0, the convergence towards the
steady-state becomes instantaneous:

                                                      -1 (I -)t
                   lim - (I - )-1 e-                                =0              for any t > 0.
                    0


   More broadly, this proposition shows that the properties of the dynamical system de-
scribed by the gradual adjustment of the economy are tightly related to the properties of
the input-output matrix via the sequence of its powers s . The parameter  modulates the
speed of adjustment and thus makes the dynamical system that we study somewhat broader
than the classical dynamical systems that are associated with a given matrix A. There, a
                                      = Ab (Colonius and Kliemann (2014)).
typical dynamical system is given by b




                                                            12
3.2    Sectoral shocks and welfare
We now characterize the impact of sectoral TFP shocks on consumer welfare. Let V ss denote
consumer welfare in the initial steady state absent the TFP shock.

Proposition 3. Welfare Impact of Temporary TFP Shocks. Let

                                                                                -1
                                1                                      
                         v         (I - )-1 -                I-                      .
                                                                     1 + 

                                             ~ on welfare is
The impact of temporary, negative TFP shocks z
                                              
                       ~) - V
                    V (z         ss
                                      =          e-s (ln c (s) - ln css ) ds = -v z
                                                                                  ~.
                                          0


Proof. We have
                                          
                  ~) - V0ss =
               V (z                           e-s (ln c (s) - ln css
                                                                  0 ) ds
                                      0
                                                                 
                                                                         -1 ((1+ )I -)t
                                = -  (I - )-1                       e-                      ~
                                                                                          dtz
                                                             0
                                = -   (I - )-1 ((1 +  ) I - )-1 z
                                                                ~
                                   1
                                = -   (I - )-1 - ((1 +  ) I - )-1 z
                                                                  ~
                                   
                                                                                          -1
                                   1                                          
                                = -  (I - )-1 -                          I-                     ~.
                                                                                                z
                                                                            1 + 



   The vector v captures the elasticity of welfare to temporary, negative TFP shocks. When
 = 0, recovery is instantaneous, and temporary shocks have no impact on consumer welfare.
The first term, 1
                   (I - )-1 , is proportional to the sectoral Domar weight and captures the
                                                                                                               -1
impact on welfare of permanent negative TFP shocks. The second term 1
                                                                                                     I-    
                                                                                                          1+
captures the impact of slow recovery of input-output linkages. One can also think about this
term as solving for  in the following expression:

                                                   1
                                           +           =  ,
                                                 1 + 

which is identical to the expression for the sectoral Domar weights ( solves  +  =  )
adjusted by the factor    1
                         1+
                            .



                                                      13
   It is informative to rewrite v as
                                         
                                1
                             v =               1 - (1 +  )-s s                           (3)
                                         s=0


and compare the expression with sectoral Domar weights:
                                                 
                                         =             s .                               (4)
                                                 s=0


In a static model, the Domar weight captures the impact of sectoral TFP on aggregate
consumption, and each term  s in the power series captures the s-th round of network
effect:  captures the first round, direct effect of TFP on consumption,   captures the
indirect effect of sectoral TFP on other producers who supply to the consumer, and so on.
The Domar weight is also equal to a sector's sale relative to GDP, and each term  s in
the power series captures the revenue from the s-th round indirect sales to the consumer.
   In our dynamic model, temporary shocks may have lasting effect on output and welfare
precisely because of higher-order linkages s , s > 0. When  > 0, input-output linkages are
slow to recover, and 1 - (1 +  )-s s captures the present discounted value of consump-
tion affected by the slow recovery of the s-th order linkages. Effectively, the power series
in (3) disproportionately removes the initial entries in (4) while keeping the tail entries
unchanged:

             1
          v =  (1 - 1) 0 + 1 - (1 +  )-1 1 + 1 - (1 +  )-2 2 + ... .
             

Note the weight on 0 is 0 and the weight on s converges to 1 as s  .
   We now summarize this proposition as our first main result of the paper: in the presence
of adjustment frictions, shocks to sectors that generate significant sales through distant
linkages to the consumer are disproportionately damaging to the economy. These shocks
have large and lasting impact on GDP even as sectoral TFP recovers.

Alpha centrality and global versus local influence We next show that the welfare
impact measure v also can be connected to a measure of centrality, alpha centrality, in
a network represented by the input-output matrix. The alpha centrality for   (0, 1] is
defined as:
                                          (I - )-1 .




                                               14
Intuitively, this is a centrality measure where a parameter  is used to weigh the higher
order input-output linkages, represented by the powers of the matrix :

                                 0 + 1 + 2 2 + ... .

The i-th entry in  s captures the sales (relative to GDP) that sector i generates through
s rounds of linkages before reaching the final consumer.
   A related way to think about centrality is in terms of a random walk on the network,
where ij is the probability of reaching j from i in one walk. The ij -th entry in s then
measures the probability of reaching j from i in the walks of length s. As parameter (  1)
decreases, shorter walks become more important, and local influences carry higher signifi-
cance. When  increases, longer walks become more important, and global influences carry
higher significance. In the limit case as   1, the walks of any length carry identical
weights, and the alpha centrality measure becomes the Domar weight. In this sense, alpha
centrality tunes between rankings based on short walks (local influence) and those based on
long walks (global influence) (Benzi and Klymko (2015)).
   The welfare v is thus proportional to the difference in the alpha centralities 1 - 1 ,
where 1 = 1 and 2 = (1 +  )-1 . Now, let us slightly modify the notion of alpha centrality
by defining it as
                                a0 0 + a1 1 + a2 2 + ... ,
                             ~

for some sequence {a0 , a1 . . . }. Assuming that such weighted power series converge, this
measure weights the walks of length k with the parameter ak . In the case of alpha centrality
with  < 1, ak = k and is geometrically decreasing from a0 = 1 and a = 0. The
welfare measure v is also a (modified version of) alpha centrality with ak = 1 - 2
                                                                                 k
                                                                                   and thus
increasing between a0 = 0 and a = 1. One can thus think of it as being conceptually similar
to the usual alpha centrality, where the welfare measure, however, relatively prioritizes the
longer walks or higher order input output linkages and thus the global over local influences.
   The term (1 +  )-1 also defines a one-parameter family of the economies that can be
thought of as a multi-scale representation of the static input output matrix. Specifically, the
speed of adjustment and the discount factor of the agent determine the scale--the relative
importance of the higher-order links and thus the importance of the global versus local
structures.

Vertical Economy Revisited. It is now instructive to revisit the examples in Figure 1.
In the horizontal economy of panel (a), there are no input-output linkages; consequently, v is
the zero vector, and temporary shocks that recover instantaneously have zero impact on this


                                              15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  along with input-output table of this economy. Sector 1 is the most upstream and sector N is the
                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  most downstream.

                                 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       L
                                 .
                                 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1

economy. By contrast, .temporary shocks may have lasting impact
                                                            2
                                                                in the vertical economy




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ..
                                 <latexit sha1_base64="HUkboAm8lZMrZs9X2LO9j8dP3kw=">AAAB7XicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69BIvgqSRS0WPRi8cKthbaUDabTbt2sxt2J4VS+h+8eFDEq//Hm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8MBXcoOd9O4W19Y3NreJ2aWd3b/+gfHjUMirTlDWpEkq3Q2KY4JI1kaNg7VQzkoSCPYbD25n/OGLacCUfcJyyICF9yWNOCVqp1R1FCk2vXPGq3hzuKvFzUoEcjV75qxspmiVMIhXEmI7vpRhMiEZOBZuWuplhKaFD0mcdSyVJmAkm82un7plVIjdW2pZEd67+npiQxJhxEtrOhODALHsz8T+vk2F8HUy4TDNkki4WxZlwUbmz192Ia0ZRjC0hVHN7q0sHRBOKNqCSDcFffnmVtC6qfq16eV+r1G/yOIpwAqdwDj5cQR3uoAFNoPAEz/AKb45yXpx352PRWnDymWP4A+fzB84Hj0o=</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       <latexit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  sha1_base64="HUkboAm8lZMrZs9X2LO9j8dP3kw=">AAAB7XicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69BIvgqSRS0WPRi8cKthbaUDabTbt2sxt2J4VS+h+8eFDEq//Hm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8MBXcoOd9O4W19Y3NreJ2aWd3b/+gfHjUMirTlDWpEkq3Q2KY4JI1kaNg7VQzkoSCPYbD25n/OGLacCUfcJyyICF9yWNOCVqp1R1FCk2vXPGq3hzuKvFzUoEcjV75qxspmiVMIhXEmI7vpRhMiEZOBZuWuplhKaFD0mcdSyVJmAkm82un7plVIjdW2pZEd67+npiQxJhxEtrOhODALHsz8T+vk2F8HUy4TDNkki4WxZlwUbmz192Ia0ZRjC0hVHN7q0sHRBOKNqCSDcFffnmVtC6qfq16eV+r1G/yOIpwAqdwDj5cQR3uoAFNoPAEz/AKb45yXpx352PRWnDymWP4A+fzB84Hj0o=</latexit>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          N
of panel (b), with the network
                       N       diagram reproduced below, along with input-output
                                                                          C      table of
this economy. Sector 1 is the most upstream and sector N is the most downstream.
                                 C                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0 0 ··· 0 0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1 0 ··· 0 0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0 1 ··· 0 0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         . 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   =                     ,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    =          . .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .   .     .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .     ..  .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0 0 ··· 1 0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     By construction, the Domar weight is identically one for all sectors,    (I - )-1 = 1 .
    In this vertical economy,
                        TFP shocks   every sector power
                              eachinsuccessive            of the
                                                  has identical        on GDP in a matrix
                                                                   input-output
                                                                impact                      contains
                                                                                                 In our a
                                                                                   static model.        dynamic economy,
         In this vertical economy, each successive power of the input-outpout matrix contains a
                       however, the welfare impact and
                                                   of sectoral
smaller identity sub-matrix in the  bottom-left          zerosshocks         andconstant;
                                                                     is no longer
                                                               otherwise,                 in fact, the impact of temporary
                                                                                  the Leontief-inverse
     smaller identity submatrix
                            shocksin the bottom-left and zeros otherwise, and the Leontief-inverse
                                   follow
is a is
      lower-triangular    matrix  of ones:
        a lower-triangular matrix of ones:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                    +  )-s , · · · , 1            1
                                                                                                          -  1+ + 1+
                                                                                                                         1            1
                                                                                                                               , 1 - 1+ ,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         v =        1-    N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   s=1 (1     +  )-s , 1 -        N -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  s=1  (1
                                                                                       1   0
                                                                                     1 0 ··· 0 0 · · ·  0  0
                                                                                                           
                              Hence, temporary shocks to sector i are more             1 1 1· · ·· · than
                                                                                     1damaging       0 0 to
                                                                                                     ·         j > i, despite all sectors
                                                                                                           0 sector
                       0                  0                                         
                                                                                            .
                                                                                                              
            s
              s -1
                   =
                      0 s (
                          ×N( having
                              -
                              N s
                                - )×s s
                                      ) the same
                                            s×0(N
                                                s ×-sDomar
                                                     s )
                                                               , weight.
                                                                      ( I - )
                                                                              -1
                                                                               - 1= 
                                                                                     1   1    . .. . . 0 0  .
                                                                                                     0  0 
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                            . 
             =                                               ,        (I - ) =       1 1
                                                                                    
                            I           0                                                                  
                    I(N -s)×              0-                                        .. .
                                                                                            .           .
                                                                                                        . .
                              s×(s
                                 N -s) (N     s)-×s(N -   s)
                                            (N      )×   s
                                                                                     . .
                                                                                       . 1 1 . .. . .1 1.  .  
                                                                                                           . more
                              Connection to Measures of Upstreamness                 An economy is             susceptible to temporary
                              shocks that hit sectors with signifcant sales 1            1 ···
                                                                                     through         1 1 linkages to the consumer. Under
                                                                                                 distant
                                                                                       1 1 ··· 1 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  a general network structure--including the real-world input-output tables we investigate in later
    [I think we can delete the math expressions above if we keep the example] For example, when
    For
    N =example,
          4,       when N     = 4,
                           sections--the welfare elasticity to sectoral shocks tends to be higher if the sector is large and is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  more upstream.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
            0   0   0   0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            In fact,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0 0 the0 welfare
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0                                                    0 0 0 sector i's Domar weight
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0 between
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          can0be0written as the product
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           elasticity 0vi 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2 a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        notion of upstreamness.                                                 
    =
            1   0   0   0   ,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0   0  0  0     ,   3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                =   Recall from 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0   0  0  0 (4) that the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -1sectoral
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (I - )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Domar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0 0 0weight
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     can be written as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              =                    .
            0   1   0   0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1  0 0s 0             0 0 0 0                   1 1 0 0 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       s=0  , where the i-th component of   captures the sales of sector i (relative to GDP)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   =                                       s                        
            0   0   1   0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0 1 the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  that reaches 0 final
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0    consumer 1through
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0 0 0                            1 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1 1 linkages.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         s-rounds of input-output           Antras et al. (2012)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  defines an "upstreamness" measure Up that satisfies:
    By construction, the Domar weight is identically one for all    i
                                                                        sectors,    (I - )-1 = 1 .
                                                                                                             -1
    By
    TFPconstruction,  the
         shocks in every   Domar
                         sector hasweight
                                     identical   identically
                                             is impact  onGDP   onein for static
                                                                      [a
                                                                           all
                                                                             ]i
                                                                                sectors,
                                                                                   model.
                                                                                      2 In
                                                                                                      -
                                                                                                dynamic
                                                                                                  ( I
                                                                                              our      3 )       =
                                                             i
                                            Upi = 1 ·           +2·             +3·        i
                                                                                             +4·         i
                                                                                                           + ···
1 . economy,
     TFP shocks    in every
              however,       sector
                       the welfare    has identical
                                    impact  of sectoralimpact
                                                          shocks
                                                           i        on
                                                                     is no
                                                                          GDP
                                                                          i longerin constant;
                                                                                      a static
                                                                                        i       model.
                                                                                               in fact,
                                                                                                     i the In our
                                                        
dynamic
    impacteconomy,   however,
           of temporary  shocksthe   welfare impact
                                 follow             =
                                                               s · [  ]i shocks is no longer constant; in
                                                         of asectoral   s
                                                                           ,     with a = s + 1.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              i
fact, the impact of temporary shocks follow                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        s=0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2
            v =             1-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   s=1   (1 +  )-s , · · · , 1 -          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              +     1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    , 1-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,       0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -N                           1                       1
                    v =                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1 - (1 +  )         , ··· , 1 -            1+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           , 19-      1+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0
   Hence, temporary shocks to sector i are more damaging than to sector j > i, despite all
   sectors
Hence,     having the
       temporary      same Domar
                    shocks        weight.
                           to sector i are more damaging than to sector j > i, despite all
sectors having the same Domar weight.
    Connection to Katz Centrality and Upstreamness Temporary shocks are damaging
    Figure 2 shows the path of GDP over time when each sector in the vertical economy (with
    if they hit sectors with significant sales through distant linkages to the consumer. We now
N = 4) is affected by a temporary, negative TFP shock. As the figure demonstrates, shocks
    show vi is the product between sector i's Domar weight and its Katz (1953) centrality of the
to relatively  upstream sectors have long-lasting effects: the economy takes the longest time
    input-output supply network. In our context, Katz centrality is a measure of upstreamness:
    it captures the network-adjusted distance of sectoral supply to the final consumer. Hence,
                                                    16
    temporary shocks are more damaging to the economy if they hit large sectors that are also
    upstream and supply disproportionate fractions of outputs to other upstream producers.
        Let i  vi i be the welfare impact of a temporary shock to sector i relative to the
     Figure 2: Time path of GDP losses from sectoral shocks in the vertical economy



                           0

             output loss


                                                                        sector 4
                                                                        sector 3
                                                                        sector 2
                                                                        sector 1




                               0
                                                                     time

to recover from shocks to sector 1--the most upstream--and recovers instantaneously from
shocks to sector 4. Consequently, v1 > v2 > v3 > v4 as the measure v integrates the entire
path of output losses, discounting the future at rate .

Connection to Katz Centrality and Upstreamness Temporary shocks are damaging
if they affect the sectors with significant sales through distant linkages to the consumer. We
now show vi is the product between sector i's Domar weight and its Katz (1953) centrality
of the input-output revenue share matrix. In our context, Katz centrality is a measure
of upstreamness: it captures the network-adjusted distance of sectoral supply to the final
consumer. Hence, temporary shocks are more damaging to the economy if they affect large
sectors that are also upstream and supply disproportionate fractions of outputs to other
upstream producers.
   Let i  vi i be the welfare impact of a temporary shock to sector i relative to
the sectoral size. Let  be the input-output revenue share matrix, whose in-th entry is
in  ni n /i , i.e. the fraction of revenue that sector i derives from selling to sector n. In-
tuitively, the entries of the expenditure share matrix  are obtained by dividing the value of
intermediate inputs by the sales of the buyer, whereas entries of  are obtained by dividing
the value of inputs by the sales of the supplier.

Proposition 4. Welfare impact is the Domar weight times the Katz centrality.

                                                          s
                                                 1
                                   =                          1.
                                         s=1
                                               1 + 

                                               17
Proof. Let r        1
                   1+
                        and x   (I - r)-1 . We have

            j = 1 - xj /j = 1 - j /j - r                 ij xi /j =              ji - r        ji (1 - i )
                                                    i                        i             i

                                                                                                      s
                                                             -1                             1
              =  = r1 + r =  (I - r)                              r1 =                                    1.
                                                                                  s=1
                                                                                          1 + 



       Katz centrality can be re-written implicitly as  =             1+
                                                                              1
                                                                         1 + 1+
                                                                                 ,                or, in scalar form,

                                              N                          N
                                                               1
                               i =                 in +                          in n .
                                     1 +     n=1
                                                             1 +         n=1


The first term on the right-hand-side is a constant ( 1+
                                                        
                                                         ) times the total fraction of sector
i's output supplied to intermediate producers (rather than the consumer). The second term
is the average Katz centrality of the producers that use good i as inputs, weighted by the
fraction of i's output sold to each buyer, and scaled down by a factor                          1
                                                                                               1+
                                                                                                  .   Hence, a sector
is Katz-central if it supplies a disproportionate fraction of output to other Katz-central
producers.
   Katz centrality is a natural notion of upstreamness.3 Recall from (4) that the sectoral
                                                   
Domar weight can be written as  =                  s=0   s , where the i-th component of  s captures
the sales of sector i (relative to GDP) that reaches the final consumer through s-rounds of
input-output linkages. Antràs et al. (2012) defines an upstreamness measure that captures
the average number of rounds it takes for sectoral output to reach the final consumer:
                                                                   
                i    [ ]i     [  2 ]i                                    as · [ s ]i
   Upi      = 1· +2·      +3·         + ··· =                                        ,          with as = s + 1.
                i     i         i                                  s=0
                                                                               i

                     as ·[ s ]i
More generally,     s=0     i
                                 is a measure of sector i's upstreamness for                     any increasing and
                            
convergent    sequence {as }s=0 because such a sequence up-weights sectoral                      sales that are more
distant to the consumer. Katz centrality can also be written in this form using the sequence
as = -1 1 - (1 +  )-s .
   3
    The Katz centrality is also isomorphic to the distortion centrality of Liu (2019) in a production network
with constant market imperfection wedges.




                                                        18
4    Eigendecomposition of the Input-Output Matrix and
     the Dynamical System
Temporary shocks to large and upstream sectors are disproportionately damaging because
input-output linkages are slow to recover from these shocks. We now examine determinants
of the welfare measure v from the spectral point of view.
    Consider the diagonalization of the input-output table,  = U W , where  is a diagonal
matrix of eigenvalues {k }N
                          k=1 , and W = U
                                          -1
                                             . The columns of U are the right-eigenvectors,
and the rows of W are the corresponding left-eigenvectors. Assuming  is full-rank, U and
W both span the N -dimensional complex coordinate space CN and are therefore are both
bases of the space. Without loss of generality, we arrange the eigenvalues and eigenvectors
in decreasing absolute value, with |1 |  |2 |  · · ·  |N |. Note that since  is row-sub-
stochastic (i.e., the sum of intermediate expenditure shares must be  1 in all sectors, with
strict inequality for at least some sectors), the dominant eigenvalue must have absolute value
below one, i.e., |1 | < 1.

Right Eigenvectors. Let uk denote the k -th right-eigenvector, i.e., the k -th column of
the matrix U . This is the vector that, when being multiplied by  on the left, becomes a
scaled version of itself:
                                s uk = s
                                       k uk       for all s  Z0 .

Now consider a negative TFP shock vector that equals to (-uk ), and suppose uk  RN . The
first round effect lowers sectoral output by (-uk ); the second round effect lowers sectoral
output by (-uk = -k uk ); the third round effect lowers sectoral output by (-2 k uk ), and
so on. That is, at each round of propagation, the productivity shock vector (-uk ) always
reduces sectoral output in proportion to -uk , with effects scaled-down by a factor equal to
the eigenvalue k relative to the previous round. In other words, uk is the profile of TFP
shocks with every round of general equilibrium effect always in proportion to the first round
but decays at rate k after each round of propagation. We construct the right-eigenvectors
so that 2-norm of uk is equal to 1 for all k .

Complex Eigenvalues. In general, the eigenvalues and eigenvectors can be complex-
valued. Complex eigenvalues exist in conjugate pairs: when an eigenvalue k is complex--in
which case uk must be complex too--the conjugate transpose k is also an eigenvalue, and
the corresponding eigenvector is uk . Now consider a shock profile z
                                                                   ~  Re (uk ). Note




                                                 19
Re (uk ) =   uk +uk
                2
                    ,   and following equation must be satisfied:

                                       s Re (uk ) = Re (s
                                                        k uk ) ,


where the operator Re (·) selects the real part of a complex vector. Note that, when k is
complex, Re (s
             k uk ) = Re (k ) · Re k uk ; hence, the shock vector Re (uk ) is not a scaled-
                                   s-1

down version of itself when left-multiplied by the input-output table . The higher rounds
of network effects from the shock vector Re (uk ) no longer decay to zero at a constant rate
Re (k ); instead, complex eigenvalues introduce oscillatory motion in the impact of negative
shocks as the network effects converge to zero under higher and higher rounds. In other
words, if we project the network effects s z
                                           ~ onto an N -dimensional vector space, the higher
rounds of network effects (higher s) associated with a real eigenvector shock profile converge
to zero following a straight line connecting uk and the origin. In contrast, the network
effects of a shock profile Re (uk ) with a complex eigenvalue would converge to zero following
an elliptical spiral.
   For expositional purposes, we focus on real-valued eigenvalue and eigenvectors. As we
show below, the largest (hence, as we show below, more important) eigenvalues of the real-
world input-output tables are all real. Moreover, the imaginary components of any complex
eigenvalues are overall significantly smaller than the real components, implying that oscilla-
tory higher-order network effects are small relative to the effects that decays exponentially.

Left Eigenvectors. Let wk denote the k -th left-eigenvector, i.e., the k -th row of the matrix
W . W is the matrix that projects sectoral shocks onto the right-eigenspace. Specifically, any
                 ~ can be written as a linear combination {ak }N
TFP shock vector z                                               k=1 of the right-eigenvectors

                                                  N
                                             ~=
                                             z          ak uk ,
                                                  k=1


or, in matrix notation,
                                               ~ = Ua .
                                               z

The vector a can be obtained by

                                     ~ = W U a = U -1 U a = a .
                                    Wz

That is, ak = wk z
                 ~, or in vector form, a = W z
                                             ~.
   To summarize, the right-eigenvectors capture the shock profiles whose general equilib-
rium impact decays at rate governed by the corresponding eigenvalues; the left-eigenvectors

                                                   20
convert shock profiles into coordinates in the right-eigenspace. We sometimes refer to the
right-eigenvectors simply as eigenvectors.

Eigen-Decomposition of Domar Weights and Welfare Impact We now use the bases
U and W to further decompose the aggregate impact of sectoral shocks.

Proposition 5. Eigen-Decomposition of Domar Weights and Welfare Impact. The
Domar weight can be written as

                                                 N
                                                         1
                                       =                    uk wk .                    (5)
                                               k=1
                                                      1 - k

The vector v can be written as

                                      N
                                                      k
                            v =                                  uk wk .               (6)
                                      k=1
                                            (1 - k ) (1 +  - k )

Proof. Consider the Domar weight

                                                           
                        =              s      =U                s     W
                                 s=0                      s=0
                                N                                N
                                                                         1
                        =                    s
                                             k       uk wk =                uk wk .
                                k=1    s=0                      k=1
                                                                      1 - k

The welfare impact
                                       
                              1
                        v   =                1 - (1 +  )-s s
                                      s=0
                                       N
                                1                1       1
                            =                      -      1               u k wk
                                      k=1
                                              1 - k 1 - 1+  
                                                            k
                                      N
                                                      k
                            =                                    u k wk .
                                      k=1
                                            (1 - k ) (1 +  - k )



   The proposition turns the infinite-sum-of-power-series representation of  and v in (4)
and (3) into finite sums over eigen components.




                                                     21
   To understand the implication of Proposition 5, first consider a TFP shock profile cap-
tured by z
         ~ = uk . Note that             
                                        1 if = k
                                w uk =
                                        0 otherwise.

The shock profile uk 's impact in a static model is therefore captured by

                                              N
                                                      1
                                 uk =                   u w uk
                                              =1
                                                     1-
                                             1
                                      =          uk .
                                          1 - k

That is, the shock uk affects static consumption only through the k -th eigen component,
with the direct effect being  uk , the s-th round indirect network effect being s
                                                                                k  uk , and
                         
a cumulative effect of   s=0   s
                               k  uk =
                                           1
                                         1-k
                                                uk .
   We now analyze (v uk ), i.e., the welfare impact of the temporary shock vector uk in our
dynamic economy. Since the shock vector uk affects consumption at all times only through
the k -th eigen component, the impact can be re-written as

                                           
                               1
                         v uk =  uk               1 - (1 +  )-s s
                                                                k   .
                                          s=0


The additional term 1 - (1 +  )-s assigns zero weight to the direct effect of the shock (s =
0)--because TFP recovers at t = 0--and an increasing sequence of weights to higher-order
network effects. The cumulative effect is then scaled by 1/ to reflect the fact that we have a
                                                                          
dynamic economy with consumer discount rate . The expression -1           s=0   1 - (1 +  )-s s
                                                                                              k
further simplifies to  (1-k )(1+
                              k
                                 -k )
                                       as the proposition shows.
    Any generic TFP shock vector z     ~ can be projected onto the right-eigenspace with z ~=
   N
   k=1 uk ak , and ak  wk z
                          ~ is its k -th coordinate after the projection. The overall effect on
                          N
welfare is -v z  ~ = -v k=1 uk ak .
   As we show below, quantitatively v has a low-dimensional factor representation, where
 ~ can be approximated closely by its projection onto the first K (K = 4) eigenvectors:
vz

                                                   K
                                       ~v
                                      vz                u k ak .
                                                  k=1


Proposition 5 shows why this is the case and also why the Domar weight does not have a
good approximation in a low-dimensional sub-eigenspace. To see this, consider two distinct


                                                22
                                                                                          | uk |
shock profiles captured by real right-eigenvectors uk and u with |k | < | |. Let          | u |
denote the relative loadings of the consumption share vector on these two eigenvectors. The
relative impact between the eigenvector shock profiles on aggregate consumption in the static
model is
                                    | uk |    1-
                                           =          ×
                                    | u |     1 - k
On the other hand, their relative impact in our dynamic model is

                                 |v uk |   |k | (1 +  -  ) 1 - 
                                         =                ×      × .
                                 |v u |    | | (1 +  - k ) 1 - k
                                                   <1


That is, relative to the static model, our dynamic model up-weights the relative importance of
right-eigenvectors shock profiles with greater eigenvalues and, conversely, down-weights right-
eigenvector shock profiles with lower eigenvalues. These difference could be very significant:
as we show below, for the U.S. economy, the dominant eigenvalue is |1 |  0.54, and the
100-th is |100 |  0.03. The relative importance between the 100-th and the first eigenvector
u100 and u1 in our economy is bounded above by

                  |100 | (1 +  - 1 )   1 - 1  |100 |    1 - 1
                                     ×               ×         = 0.0263 × ,
                  |1 | (1 +  - 100 ) 1 - 100   |1 |    1 - 100

whereas their relative importance in the static model is

                                              1 - 1
                                                     = 0.47 × .
                                             1 - 100

Despite the small eigenvalue |100 |, the 100-th eigenvector is still 47 % as important as
the dominant eigenvector in the static model; by contrast, u100 is at most 2.6 % as im-
portant as u1 in our dynamic model. The upper-bound 2.6 % is achieved under the limit
  , corresponding to the case with infinite discounting or infinite adjustment costs.
When  is finite, the 100-th eigenvector becomes even less important relative to the dom-
inant eigenvector; for instance, when  =  = 10%, their relative importance is given by
|100 |(1.01-1 )
 |1 |(1.01-1 )
                  ×    1-1
                      1-100
                              = 0.0126 × .
   Intuitively, eigenvectors with large eigenvalues represent shock profiles that decay slowly;
these shock profiles generate disproportionately high impact via higher rounds of network
effects. The fact that Domar weights do not discount the direct and initial rounds of network
effects imply that even eigenvectors with small eigenvalues may have a sizable contribution
in explaining TFP shocks in the static model. Sectoral shocks in the static model therefore
do not have a low-dimensional representation. By contrast, because dynamic adjustment

                                                    23
costs significantly down-weight the direct and initial rounds of network effects, v may have
a factor
costs    representation
      significantly      as longthe
                    down-weight  as |k | declines
                                    direct and initial  roundsfast
                                                   relatively       in k . effects, v may have
                                                                of network
a factor representation as long as |k | declines relatively fast in k .

5      Factor Structure of the U.S. Input-Output Table
5      Factor Structure of the U.S. Input-Output Table
We now turn to the 2012 U.S. input-output table published by the U.S. Bureau of La-
 We Statistics.
bor   now turn to    the
                    We    2012
                        show    U.S.
                              that    input-output
                                    the                 table published
                                         high-dimensional                 by the
                                                               input-output       U.S. Bureau
                                                                               table--171   by 171of La-
                                                                                                      sectors
 bor  Statistics.  We  show  that  the high-dimensional      input-output   table--171
under broad categories of agriculture, mining, manufacturing, and services4 --has a low- by 171  sectors
 under broad categories of agriculture, mining, manufacturing, and services4 --has a low-
dimensional, 4-factor structure in terms of its susceptibility to temporary shocks: the v vec-
 dimensional, 4-factor structure in terms of its susceptibility to temporary shocks: the v vec-
tor essentially loads on only four eigenvectors of the  matrix. These correlated eigenvectors
 tor essentially loads on only four eigenvectors of the  matrix. These correlated eigenvectors
explain 95% of the variations in v and they jointly capture three clusters of sectors in the
 explain 95% of the variations in v and they jointly capture three clusters of sectors in the
economy: 1) the heavy manufacturing sectors including iron, steel, and machineries; 2) light
 economy: 1) the heavy manufacturing sectors including iron, steel, and machineries; 2) light
manufacturing sectors of consumer products including food and textiles; and 3) the chemical
 manufacturing sectors of consumer products including food and textiles; and 3) the chemical
manufacturing sectors. We show such a factor structure emerges only when assessing the
 manufacturing sectors. We show such a factor structure emerges only when assessing the
impact       temporary shocks.
         of temporary
 impact of                 shocks. InIncontrast,
                                         contrast,the the  economy
                                                         economy   does notnot
                                                                      does       have
                                                                              have     a low-dimensional,
                                                                                   a low-dimensional,
factor
 factor representation
        representation forforpermanent
                              permanent     shocks,
                                          shocks,  asas   the
                                                        the    Domar
                                                            Domar      weights
                                                                    weights      have
                                                                              have     significant
                                                                                   significant      loadings
                                                                                               loadings
on
 on over  150 eigenvectors.
    over 150    eigenvectors. For
                               Forsimplicity,
                                    simplicity,wewe    present
                                                    present     our
                                                              our    results
                                                                  results     assuming
                                                                          assuming    = =   =   = 10%
                                                                                               10%   but but
                                                       5
 this choice
this          is immaterial
      choice is   immaterialfor
                              forthe
                                  the  results
                                     results   here.
                                              here. 5


                Table 1:
                Table     Welfareelasticity
                       1: Welfare elasticitytoto temporary
                                               temporary   sectoral
                                                         sectoral    shocks
                                                                  shocks     in the
                                                                         in the     U.S.
                                                                                 U.S.

 10 sectors with the highest vi                                       10 sectors with the smallest vi

 Real estate                                                          Community and vocational rehabilitation services

 Wholesale trade                                                      Gambling industries (except casino hotels)

 Agencies, brokerages, and other insurance related activities         Other furniture related product manufacturing

 Oil and gas extraction                                               Personal care services

 Basic chemical manufacturing                                         Amusement parks and arcades

 Management of companies and enterprises                              Grantmaking, giving services, social advocacy organizations

 Petroleum and coal products manufacturing                            Food and beverage stores

 Advertising, public relations, and related services                  Tobacco manufacturing

 Nonferrous metal (except aluminum) production & processing           Motor vehicle manufacturing

 Motor vehicle parts manufacturing                                    Other transportation equipment manufacturing


     4
       13 sectors from the original 184-by-184 BLS input-output table do not use or supply any intermediate
 inputs
     4
       13 and
          sectors  from do
              therefore   thenot interact
                              original    with the rest
                                       184-by-184   BLS    the network. These
                                                        ofinput-output         sectors
                                                                        table do   not use  or in
                                                                                        are all         anyincluding
                                                                                                  services,
                                                                                                supply       intermediate
inputs and therefore do not interact with the rest of the network. These sectors are all in services,when
 offices  of dentists, individual  family services, home   health care services, etc.  We  drop  these  sectors  including
 performing
offices   of   the eigendecomposition.
             dentists,  individual  family  services, home   health  care services,  etc.  We   drop these   sectors when
     5
       In Online
performing     theAppendix    A, we show the 4-factor representation is robust under alternative values of  and
                    eigendecomposition.
  . In
     5 fact, the first 4 eigenvectors explain over 90% of the variation in v even in the limit as   .
     In Appendix A, we show the 4-factor representation is robust under alternative values of  and  . In
fact, the first 4 eigenvectors explain over 90% of the variation in v even in the limit as   .

                                                                25
                                                                 24
   Table 1 lists the top-10 most important and least important sectors for the U.S. in
terms of v , the welfare elasticity to temporary sectoral shocks. As intuitions suggest, the
most important ones are large sectors that supply to many other producers. The top-10
list includes very large sectors such as real estate and wholesale trade, whose sales-to-GDP
ratios add to 24%. The list also includes much smaller but very upstream manufacturing
sectors such as chemical and metal sectors. On the right side of the table, sectors with low
welfare impact are those that are small and downstream, including many service sectors.

                                Figure 3: Decay of eigen components



           0.6                          2.2                               3


                                         2
           0.5                                                           2.5

                                        1.8
           0.4                                                            2

                                        1.6
           0.3                                                           1.5
                                        1.4

           0.2                                                            1
                                        1.2

           0.1                                                           0.5
                                         1


            0                           0.8                               0
                 0   50   100   150           0   50        100   150          0     50    100   150




          0.08                         0.08                             0.09

          0.07                         0.07                             0.08

                                                                        0.07
          0.06                         0.06
                                                                        0.06
          0.05                         0.05
                                                                        0.05
          0.04                         0.04
                                                                        0.04
          0.03                         0.03
                                                                        0.03
          0.02                         0.02
                                                                        0.02

          0.01                         0.01                             0.01

            0                            0                                0
                 0   50   100   150           0   50        100   150          0     50    100   150




   We now describe the first empirical results of the paper: the welfare elasticity to tempo-
rary shocks in the U.S. can be well-approximated in a low-dimensional sub-eigenspace.
   In Figure 3, building on Proposition 5, the top panels (a)­(c) respectively show the
eigenvalues |k |, their geometric sum |1/ (1 - k )|, and the term                         k
                                                                                   (1-k )(1+ -k )
                                                                                                       for the U.S.
input-output table. The bottom panels (d)­(f) respectively show | uk |, | uk / (1 - k )|,
and  uk (1-k )(1+
               k
                   -k )
                        . In all panels, indices k are arranged in decreasing order of the
absolute eigenvalues.


                                                       25
      Panel (a) shows the decay of the eigenvalues of the input-output matrix. The term
|1/ (1 - k )| shown in panel (b) captures the contribution of the k -th eigenvector to the geo-
metric series in the matrix (I - )-1 . The fact that |1/ (1 - k )| does not converge to zero--
it converges to 1 as |k |  0--implies that the matrix does not have a low-dimensional repre-
sentation, as even eigenvectors after the 100th may be important.6 The term                        k
                                                                                            (1-k )(1+ -k )
shown in panel (c), on the other hand, exhibit very rapid decay towards zero; this implies
                                                 -1
that the matrix (I - )-1 - I -             
                                          1+
                                                      potentially has a low-dimensional representation.
      Whether the Domar weight  =  (I - )-1 or the welfare elasticity to temporary
                                                  -1
shocks v = 1
              (I - )-1 - I -                 
                                            1+
                                                        can be well-approximated in a low-dimensional
sub-eigenspace depends also on the loading of the consumption vector  on each eigenvector.
The loadings | uk | are shown in panel (d), and the contribution of each k -th eigenvector
to the Domar weight is shown in panel (e). As the figures shows, the consumption vector
has significant loadings on many eigenvectors, and so does the Domar weight. For instance,
both panels (d) and (e) show spikes around the group of eigenvectors indexed around 75 to
80--capturing sectors related to healthcare--and around 81 to 85--capturing sectors related
to automobiles. These eigenvectors have low eigenvalues, evidenced from panel (a), but they
are nevertheless very important for the Domar weight because the consumer expenditure
share  loads significantly on these eigenvectors, meaning the consumption expenditure
shares on healthcare and automobiles are high. Jointly, the two "private hospitals" and
"motor vehicle manufacturing" sectors account for over 10% of the final consumption share.
This is even before accounting for other related but smaller sectors such as "medical equip-
ment and supplies manufacturing", "medical and diagnostic laboratories", "other ambulatory
health care services", "motor vehicle body and trailer manufacturing", "motor vehicle parts
manufacturing", and "motor vehicle and parts dealers".
      We now turn to the analysis of the welfare elasticity to temporary shocks, v . Panel (f)
stands in sharp contrast with panel (e) and shows that only the initial few eigenvectors are
important in explaining variations in v ; that is, the impact of any temporary TFP shock
vector z
       ~ can be well-approximated by the projection of the shock onto a low-dimensional
sub-eigenspace spanned by the first few eigenvectors. As the discussion following Proposition
5 shows this is precisely due to the rapid decay of (1-k )(1+
                                                           k
                                                              -k )
                                                                   towards zero as shown in
panel (c). Even though  loads significantly onto some of the high-indexed eigenvectors, the
sectors underlying these eigenvectors (e.g. hospitals and automobiles) are very downstream,
meaning they mostly supply directly to the final consumer and do not supply strongly to other
intermediate sectors. Consequently, these eigenvectors become unimportant in explaining the
  6
      Certain entries in panel (b) are below one because some of the eigenvalues are negative.



                                                       26
variation in v .
       Figure 4 reproduces panels (d)­(f) of figure 3 by re-ordering the objects shown in each
panel according to declining absolute values (e.g., objects in panel (d) is sorted in declining
order of | uk | rather than declining |k |). Figure 4 confirms the message in figure 3 even
after sorting: the importance of eigen component exhibits very rapid decay in panel (f) are
close to zero after the few initial components; by contrast, a large number of components
remain important in panels (d) and (e).

                                    Figure 4: Decay of eigen components


              0.08                         0.08                             0.09

              0.07                         0.07                             0.08

                                                                            0.07
              0.06                         0.06
                                                                            0.06
              0.05                         0.05
                                                                            0.05
              0.04                         0.04
                                                                            0.04
              0.03                         0.03
                                                                            0.03
              0.02                         0.02
                                                                            0.02

              0.01                         0.01                             0.01

                0                            0                                0
                     0   50   100   150           0   50        100   150          0   50   100   150




How many eigenvectors are needed to approximate v ? Let gk  (1-k )(1+     k
                                                                              -k )
                                                                                    u k wk
                                                   h
be the k -th eigen component of v , and let v(h)   k=1 gk denote the partial sum of the
first h eigen components. Note that v = v(N ) .
       Figure 5 scatter plots v(h) against v for h  6; the red line in each panel is the 45-degree
line which indicates that v(h) is close to v . As the figure shows, v(4) approximates v very
well, and additional 5th and 6th eigen components do not seem to significantly improve the
fit.




                                                           27
      Figure 5: Welfare impact from the initial eigenvectors (v(h) ) plotted against v

                                    1                                   2                                   3



                .0015
                .001
                .0005
                0




                                    4                                   5                                   6
                .0015
                .001
                .0005
                0




                        0   .0005       .001    .0015   0       .0005       .001     .0015    0     .0005       .001   .0015




   Table 2 shows the regression of v(h) on v for h  {1, . . . , 6} and reports the slope
coefficients and adjusted R2 . The results show that the first 3 eigenvectors capture 76% of
the variation in v ; the first 4 eigenvectors capture 95% of the variation. That is, most of
the welfare impact of any sectoral shock z ~ can by explained by the loading of the shock on
the first four eigenvectors.

                                          Table 2: Regression of v(h) on v

                                    h           1           2           3           4         5        6
                               slope           0.53     0.82       1.01            0.97      0.97    0.96
                                R2             0.39     0.58       0.76            0.95      0.96    0.94


Which sectors do the first four eigenvectors represent? Recall that each eigenvector
uk represents a TFP shock profile, under which the network effects decay at exponentially
at rate k and that the cumulative welfare impact is -v uk = - (1-k )(1+
                                                                     k
                                                                        -k )
                                                                              uk .




                                                                   28
                                Figure 6: The first four eigenvectors of 


                                  1                                                        2
                                                                                                               Agencies,
                                                    Metal products,                                           brokerages,
    .5




                                                   foundries, forging                                          insurance
    0




              Manufacturing of consumer goods           boiler tanks, machinery,
                                                             electrical and
    -.5




               including food products, textile,
                 paper products, and furniture         transportation equipment
                                  3                                                        4
    .5




                                             Manufacturing of
                                            chemical products,
                                              rubber, plastic                                        Radio and television
                                                                                                        broadcasting
    0
    -.5




          0            50             100              150           0              50         100            150




   Figure 6 visualizes the first four eigenvectors. The X-axis represent the sectoral order-
ing according to the BLS input-output table, which roughly arranges broad sector groups
by agriculture, food manufacturing, chemical products, metals, heavy manufacturing, and
services. In the figure, we indicate the broad groups of sectors that these eigenvectors repre-
sent; Tables 4 and 5 provide more detailed lists of sector names. Table 3 lists the first four
eigenvalues and the loading of the consumption vector on the corresponding eigenvectors.
Because input-output tables are not symmetric, the eigenvectors are not orthogonal to each
other. In fact, many eigenvectors are correlated, thereby picking up shocks to the same
groups of sectors.

      Table 3: Eigenvalues and the consumption loadings of the first four eigenvector

                                        k          1           2          3         4
                                       k       0.544         0.505       0.454     0.331
                                       uk      0.035         0.034       0.043     0.027



                                                              29
     The first eigenvector u1 represents shocks to the heavy manufacturing sectors, including
metal products, foundries, forging and stamping, and as well as the production of boiler
tanks, machinery, electrical and transportation equipment. This eigenvector captures the
vector of TFP shocks under which the economic damage to GDP lasts the longest time after
TFP recovers.
     The second eigenvector u2 very strongly and negatively correlates with the first, with
Pearson correlation coefficient of -0.59 between u1 and u2 . The eigenvector u2 activates
three groups of industries. First and most notably, u2 has large positive entries for the two
sectors relating to agencies, brokerages, and insurance. Second, u2 has positive entries for
the manufacturing of consumer goods including food, textile, paper products, and furniture.
Third, u2 has negative entries on the heavy manufacturing industries, partly neutralizing
the shock profile from the first eigenvector.
     The third eigenvector u3 correlates positively with u2 --correlation coefficient 0.36--by
having positive entries on the manufacturing of consumer goods. In addition, u3 also includes
sectors that manufacture chemicals, plastic, and rubber products.
    The fourth eigenvector has close-to-zero correlations with the previous three eigenvectors.
The new sector picked up by u4 is radio and television broadcasting; in addition, u4 also
has negative entries on the manufacturing of chemicals, plastic, and rubber products, partly
neutralizing the shock profiles represented by u3 .

   Table 4: The 1st & 2nd eigenvector shock profiles: 10 largest entries by absolute value

 [u1 ]i                                                           [u 2 ]i

 Nonferrous metal (except aluminum) production       0.439        Agencies, brokerages, and other insurance related   0.574
 and processing                                                   activities

 Alumina and aluminum production and                 0.221        Insurance carriers                                  0.334
 processing

 Other electrical equipment and component            0.213        Animal slaughtering and processing                  0.128
 manufacturing

 Railroad rolling stock manufacturing                0.187        Dairy product manufacturing                         0.114

 Motor vehicle manufacturing                         0.178        Electrical equipment manufacturing                  -0.097

 Steel product manufacturing from purchased steel    0.178        Steel product manufacturing from purchased steel    -0.103

 Forging and stamping                                0.175        Forging and stamping                                -0.110

 Boiler, tank, and shipping container                0.163        Alumina and aluminum production and                 -0.140
 manufacturing                                                    processing

 Iron and steel mills and ferroalloy manufacturing   0.159        Other electrical equipment and component            -0.176
                                                                  manufacturing

 Motor vehicle parts manufacturing                   0.153        Nonferrous metal (except aluminum) production       -0.416
                                                                  and processing




                                                             30
   Table 5: The 3rd & 4th eigenvector shock profiles: 10 largest entries by absolute value
 [u3 ]i                                                           [u 4 ]i

 Animal slaughtering and processing                  0.314        Radio and television broadcasting                   0.628

 Dairy product manufacturing                         0.286        Animal slaughtering and processing                  0.362

 Animal food manufacturing                           0.211        Dairy product manufacturing                         0.263

 Resin, synthetic rubber, and artificial synthetic   0.211        Alumina and aluminum production and                 0.180
 fibers and filaments manufacturing                               processing

 Plastics product manufacturing                      0.194        Railroad rolling stock manufacturing                0.148

 Textile mills and textile product mills             0.190        Paint, coating, and adhesive manufacturing          -0.129

 Grain and oilseed milling                           0.187        Rubber product manufacturing                        -0.137

 Sugar and confectionery product manufacturing       0.183        Textile mills and textile product mills             -0.186

 Fruit and vegetable preserving and specialty food   0.179        Resin, synthetic rubber, and artificial synthetic   -0.189
 manufacturing                                                    fibers and filaments manufacturing

 Animal production and aquaculture                   0.168        Plastics product manufacturing                      -0.196




   Altogether, the eigenvectors u1 through u4 form a 4-dimensional subspace of the 171-
dimensional vector space in which the U.S. input-output table lies. It may appear puzzling at
first that the sectors represented by these four eigenvectors do not seem to coincide with the
sectors with high welfare impacts as listed in Table 1. There is no inconsistency: the welfare
impact of any temporary TFP shock vector z   ~ can be well-approximated by projecting z ~ onto
                         4
                 ~  k=1 v uk ak , i.e., approximating z
this subspace, v z                                        ~ with a linear combinations of u1
through u4 , with coordinates ak = wk z
                                      ~ obtained using the corresponding left-eigenvectors.
Table 6 shows the 4-dimensional coordinates for shocking each of the 10 sectors with the
highest welfare impact individually and no other sectors. As an example, the sector "Agen-
cies, brokerages, and other insurance related activities" has a positive coordinate on u2 ,
which picks up shocks to this sector very strongly but also shocks to heavy manufacturing
products (negatively) and consumer goods (positively); see Figure 6. To isolate the shock to
agencies, brokerages and insurance, the sector loads positively on u1 and negatively on u3
to neutralize the other sectors picked up by u2 .




                                                             31
 Table 6: Low dimensional representation of TFP shocks to vulnerable sectors in the U.S.

                                                                   Loadings on the first 4 eigenvectors
    10 sectors with the highest vi
                                                                   1st      2nd      3rd       4th

    Real estate                                                    0.29     0.10     0.62      1.05

    Wholesale trade                                                0.44     0.02     0.70      0.39

    Agencies, brokerages, and other insurance related activities   0.89     1.54     -1.50     -0.38

    Oil and gas extraction                                         0.29     0.03     0.86      -0.64

    Basic chemical manufacturing                                   0.46     0.06     1.75      -4.57

    Management of companies and enterprises                        0.17     0.03     0.37      0.20

    Petroleum and coal products manufacturing                      0.23     0.02     0.51      -0.15

    Advertising, public relations, and related services            0.12     0.04     0.26      0.39

    Nonferrous metal (except aluminum) production & processing     1.60     -0.20    -1.19     -0.43

    Motor vehicle parts manufacturing                              0.08     0.01     0.15      0.15




6       Leontief Targeting of Nazi Germany and Imperial Japan
Until now we have interpreted the vector v as the welfare impact of slow recovery in sectoral
output from temporary shocks to TFP that recovers instantaneously. An equivalent inter-
pretation of v is the welfare impact if a sector's production were to be halted temporarily
and output were to be destroyed.
    One of the first applications of input-output analysis developed by Leontief was to estab-
lish the priorities in targeting for strategic bombing of the Axis powers, in particular Nazi
Germany and Imperial Japan. Guglielmo (2008) describes that Leontief was a part of the
Enemy Objectives Unit (EOU), a group of economists tasked with the analysis of targeting:

            "The economists ... had a comparative advantage in answering the ... question
        [of How great is the impairment to the enemy's war efforts per unit of destruc-
        tion], which required familiarity with the enemy's industrial sector and the inputs
        required types of output. This question could be quite complicated as a result of
        the interconnectedness of the component sectors ... This insight, which became
        known as input-output analysis would result in a Nobel Prize in economics."

One important concept was that of depth, a measure of how long it took for damage to have
an impact on enemy capacity on the battlefield. The final products such as tanks had less

                                                          32
depth compared to the intermediate products.
   The EOU memoranda compiled by Rostow (1981) discuss the criteria for target selection
by the EOU economists. For instance, Salant (1942) wrote in one memorandum:

          " it is better to attack a factory the loss of whose output will have widespread
      effect in causing stoppages elsewhere than one which is a relatively isolated unit
      in the industrial system."

The E.O.U. Special Report No.9 (1943) also stated

          " the most attractive target groups, for general attack on war production are...
      in the range of components: bearings, the Bosch line, tires, and the other familiar
      items. It is clear that a time interval will elapse...."

Harrison (2020) summarizes the strategy of economic warfare by the Allies as indirectly
attacking the enemy through its supply chain. Bollard (2020) further argued that

          "Leontief 's input-output provided an economic mapping that the generals could
      readily understand."

There are also several criticisms of this input-output strategy. First, the United States
Strategic Bombing Survey conducted after the war to assess the effectiveness of strategic
bombing concluded that bombing had a limited impact on the Nazi economy (Guglielmo
(2008)). Similarly, the input-output models assumed the fixed coefficients while in reality the
Nazi economy was able to substitute to, perhaps less efficient, but still workable alternatives
(Olson (1962), Harrison (2020)).
   While, of course, there were many other reasons for target selection such as political
and military aims, our model is a modern version of the analysis of the EOU economists
fighting against the Axis. In our setup, the welfare impact vi can be seen as the aggregate
economic impact of damaging sector i in Nazi Germany and Imperial Japan. In what follows,
we estimate the economic impact of shocking each sector for these two countries before the
World War II. More broadly, we use this section to also illustrate a variety of other features
of our model such as the cross-sectoral impact of shocks over several time horizons.
   Specifically, we digitize the 40-by-40 industries input-output table of Germany in 1936
from Fremdling and Staeglin (01 Nov. 2014), and we translate and digitize the 23-by-
23 industries input-output table of pre-war Japan in 1935 from Nishikawa and Koshihara
(1981).7 Of course, these data sources were not available to EOU economists at the time and
   7
     Because the input-output table of Japan in 1935 is not available from digital sources, we provide our
digitized version in Appendix B Table 11.


                                                   33
they almost surely did not fully represent the mobilized war time economy, but it is useful
to analyze them as they are the best available current sources of information.
   First, we provide the list of sectors to which temporary shocks generate the largest impact.
Second, we show, for the purpose of finding vulnerability to temporary shocks, both of these
input-output tables also exhibit low-dimensional representations: the first three eigenvectors
explain 92% of the variation in v for Imperial Japan and 85% for Nazi Germany. Third,
we provide an interpretation of the first three eigenvectors for both economies. Fourth,
we demonstrate the over-time impact of shocks to each sector on every other sector of the
economy, and we show shocks to the metal sectors tend to have lasting damage across both
for the pre-WWII Germany and Japan.
   Table 7 shows the top-5 most important sectors in terms of v , the welfare elasticity to
temporary shocks, for Germany in 1936 (left panel) and Japan in 1935 (right panel). Iron
and steel products, or metals in general, are important for both economies because they are
upstream and because shocks to these sectors destroy many network linkages that could take
a long time to recover; we provide further evidence below. Textiles and agriculture are also
important for both economies because these sectors represent a significant fraction of GDP.

Table 7: Welfare elasticity to temporary sectoral shocks in pre-WWII Germany and Japan

  5 sectors with the highest vi for Germany in 1936    5 sectors with the highest vi for Japan in 1935

  Basic iron and steel products                        Agriculture, forestry

  Transport and communication                          Metals

  Other services                                       Chemicals

  Textiles                                             Textile/personal goods

  Agriculture                                          Commerce



   Recall that v(h) is the h-dimensional approximation of v based on the first h eigen com-
ponents. Table 8 shows the regression of v(h) on v for h  4 and reports the slope coefficients
and adjusted R2 . The results show that the first 3 eigenvectors capture 85% and 92% of the
variation respectively for the pre-WWII Germany and Japan, implying that, similar to the
modern U.S. economy, most of the welfare impact of any sectoral shock z
                                                                      ~ in these pre-WWII
economies can by explained by the loading of the shock on the first three eigenvectors in these
economies. As we have explained, such low-dimensional representation does not exist for the
Domar weight, as the representation is possible only because v significantly up-weights the
importance of eigen components with large eigenvalues.



                                                  34
            Table 8: Regression of v(h) on v for pre-WWII Germany and Japan

                                 Germany                         Japan
                   h       1      2      3      4        1      2      3      4
                  slope   0.87 0.95 1.02 10.4           0.64 0.65 0.91 0.92
                   R2     0.67 0.66 0.85 0.87           0.49 0.65 0.92 0.92


   Table 9 describes the first three eigenvectors for these economies by listing the 5 largest
sectoral entries by absolute value for each eigenvector. For Germany, the first two eigen-
vectors are highly correlated and represent the iron, steel, vehicles and aerospace industries.
The first eigenvector also loads strongly on the spirits industry but the loading is negated
by the second eigenvector. The third eigenvector loads on textile, clothing, fuel, and non-
ferrous metals. For Japan, because the input-output table only contains 23 sectors, we have
to examine the industry structures with limited resolution. Nevertheless, the first eigenvec-
tor loads strongly on metals, machinery, and construction; the first three eigenvectors also
jointly loads on textiles, office supplies, printing and publishing, and leather and rubber
products.
   Proposition 2 characterizes the entire path of the sectoral output vector ln q (t) as a
function of the initial shock vector z
                                     ~ and time. One can also apply the proposition to
compute the half-lives of shocks, as summarized in the proposition below.
Proposition 6. The half-life ti
                              1/2 of temporary TFP shock vector -z
                                                                 ~ on sector i's output is
the solution to
                                             1       -1     c
                          ei  (I - )-1         I - e- (I -)t1/2 z
                                                                ~ = 0.
                                             2
The half-life tc
               1/2 of temporary TFP shock vector -z
                                                  ~ on aggregate consumption is the solution
to
                                         1        -1     c
                            (I - )-1       I - e- (I -)t1/2 z ~ = 0.
                                         2
where ei is the elementary vector with i-th entry being 1 and all other entries zero.
   Intuitively, a shock to sector j has a long half-life on sector i's output if a significant
fraction of j 's direct-and-indirect sales to i are generated through higher rounds of linkages.
    We now separately shock the productivity of each sector i = 1, . . . , N , and we visualize
the output response (relative to the initial steady-state) in every other sector j = 1, . . . , N ,
for the short run (t = 0) and the medium run (0 < t < ). We do not make precise how long
does the "medium run" correspond to; the point we try to convey here is not quantitative
but is instead the qualitative feature that shocks to certain sectors, such as metals, tend to
having lasting impact in the economy.

                                                35
     Table 9: Sectors in the first 3 eigenvector shock profiles for Germany and Japan: 5 largest entries by absolute value

                                                                    Germany

              [u1 ]i                                       [u2 ]i                                          [u3 ]i

     Spirits industry                     0.584   Spirits industry                     -0.956   Textile                         0.406

     Basic iron and steel products        0.396   Basic iron and steel products        0.171    Clothing                        0.399

     Fabricated iron and steel products   0.286   Fabricated iron and steel products   0.123    Fuel industries                 0.352

     Constructional steel                 0.250   Constructional steel                 0.108    Basic iron and steel products   -0.264

     Vehicles and aerospace               0.208   Vehicles and aerospace               0.079    Non-ferrous metals              0.256




36
                                                                     Japan
              [u1 ]i                                       [u2 ]i                                          [u3 ]i

     Metals                               0.532   Textile, personal goods              0.653    Textile, personal goods         0.763

     Printing and publishing              0.398   Office supplies                      0.461    Printing and publishing         -0.470

     Office supplies                      0.397   Printing and publishing              0.370    Leather and rubber products     0.295

     Machinery                            0.258   Leather and rubber products          0.304    Office supplies                 -0.204

     Construction                         0.258   Metals                               -0.219   Pulp and paper products         -0.183
   In Figure 7, we use chord diagrams to show cross-sector exposure to productivity shocks
at different time scales for pre-WWII Germany. Sectors are arranged around a circle, where
the size of the inner segment for each country shows its overall outward exposure (the ef-
fect of its productivity shocks on other sectors), and the gap between the inner and outer
segments shows its overall inward exposure (the effect of other productivity shocks upon it).
Arrows emerging from the inner segment for each sector show the cross-industry impact of
its productivity shocks on output in other sectors. Arrows pointing towards the gap between
the inner and outer segments show the impact of other sector's productivity growth on its
output. For ease of visualization, only the largest 10% of cross exposures are shown at each
time scale.
   Panel (a) of Figure 7 shows the short run cross-industry exposures. Shocks to basic iron
and steel products, transportation and communication, utilities such as electricity, gas and
water, and other services tend to reduce the output in many other sectors. Panel (b) of
Figure 7 shows the medium run cross-industry exposures. Note that the size of arrows are
comparable within each panel but not across panels (a) and (b). Relative to panel (a), the
most salient feature in panel (b) is the persistence and relative importance of shocks to basic
iron and steel products: it's medium run impact overshadows shocks to any other sector of
the economy.

                 Figure 7: Sectoral cross-exposure in pre-WWII Germany
                 (a) Short run                                 (b) Medium run




                                              37
                  Figure 8: Sectoral cross-exposure in pre-WWII Japan
                (a) Short run                                (b) Medium run




   Figure 8 illustrates the short- and medium-run cross-sector exposures for pre-WWII
Japan. Once again, comparing panels (a) and (b), the most salient feature is that shocks to
metals tend to have long lasting impact on many other sectors of the economy. In addition,
shocks to petroleum and chemicals, as well as to the electricity, gas, and water sector also
gain relative importance over time.
   In Figures 9 and 10, we use heat-maps to show each sector's output exposure to temporary
TFP shocks to every other sector at different time scales for the pre-WWII Germany and
Japan, respectively. The columns represent sectors being shocked, and the rows represent
exposed sectors. Darker shades of red indicate more negative output impact at a given time.
Similar to the chord diagrams in Figure 7, the heat-map of Figure 9 indicates that shocks to
iron and steel products, non-ferrous metals, transportation, and communication sectors have
long lasting impact to outputs of many other sectors in the pre-war Germany, as evident
from the darker reds for the corresponding columns. Likewise, Figure 10 shows that shocks
to metals, petroleum, chemicals, and electricity, gas, and water sectors have long lasting
impact to many other sectors.




                                            38
                                         Figure 9: Sectoral cross-exposure over time in pre-WWII Germany


                                        (a) Initial impact, t = 0                                                                     (b) After some time...
                                                                              0                                                                                        0
                   Agriculture                                                                             Agriculture

             Forestry, fishery                                                                       Forestry, fishery

                       Mining                                                                                  Mining

               Fuel industries                                                                         Fuel industries
                                                                              -0.005                                                                                   -0.005
         Basic iron and steel                                                                     Basic iron and steel

          Non-ferrous metals                                                                      Non-ferrous metals

                    Foundries                                                                               Foundries

    Fabricated iron and steel                                                                Fabricated iron and steel
                                                                              -0.01                                                                                    -0.01
                   Machinery                                                                               Machinery

         Constructional steel                                                                     Constructional steel

     Vehicles and aerospace                                                                   Vehicles and aerospace

        Electrical engineering                                                                  Electrical engineering
                                                                              -0.015                                                                                   -0.015
Optics, precision engineering                                                           Optics, precision engineering

              Metal products                                                                          Metal products

         Stone and quarrying                                                                     Stone and quarrying

                    Ceramics                                                                                Ceramics
                                                                              -0.02                                                                                    -0.02
                         Glass                                                                                   Glass

Saw mills, timber processing                                                            Saw mills, timber processing

              Wood products                                                                           Wood products

             Basic chemicals                                                                         Basic chemicals
                                                                              -0.025                                                                                   -0.025
               Chemical tech                                                                           Chemical tech

           Rubber, asbestos                                                                         Rubber, asbestos

              Paper products                                                                          Paper products

            Printing, copying                                                                        Printing, copying
                                                                              -0.03                                                                                    -0.03
                      Leather                                                                                 Leather

                      Textiles                                                                                Textiles

                      Clothing                                                                                Clothing

           Edible oil and fats                                                                      Edible oil and fats
                                                                              -0.035                                                                                   -0.035
              Spirits industry                                                                         Spirits industry

   Food, beverages, tobacco                                                                 Food, beverages, tobacco

                 Construction                                                                            Construction

        Electricity, gas, water                                                                 Electricity, gas, water
                                                                              -0.04                                                                                    -0.04
                    Wholesale                                                                               Wholesale

                         Retail                                                                                  Retail

   Transport, communication                                                                 Transport, communication

          Banking, insurance                                                                      Banking, insurance
                                                                              -0.045                                                                                   -0.045
                     Dwelling                                                                                Dwelling

                 Government                                                                              Government

               Other services                                                                          Other services

           Domestic services                                                                       Domestic services
                                                                              -0.05                                                                                    -0.05
                                                                         le




                                                                                                                                                                 le
                                                W roce ss




                                                  in nic il




                                                                                                                                                                ss




                                                                                                                                          in nic il
                                                           gin ng




                                                                                                                                                   gin ng
                                                 -fe nd s




                                                                                                                                         -fe and s
                                                               lo s




                                                                                                                                                       lo s
                                                           gin ce




                                                                                                                                                   gin ce
                                                           an ries




                                                    es erv t
                                                             se es




                                                                                                                                            es erv t
                                                                                                                                                     se es
                                                                        ry




                                                              Te er




                                                                                                                                                   an ries
                                                                       es




                                                                                                                                                      Te er
                                                                          s




                                                                                                                                                                ry
                                               era s in ts




                                                                                                                                                                  s




                                                                                                                                                               es
                                                                                                                                       era s in ts
                                              sic l in ing




                                                               m l




                                                                                                                                      sic l in ing




                                                                                                                                                                   l
                                                          Fo tals




                                                                        ry




                                                                         g




                                                             ho r




                                                               w e

                                                  O ern g




                                                                                                                                                  Fo tals




                                                                                                                                                                ry




                                                                                                                                                                 g




                                                                                                                                                     ho r




                                                                                                                                                    D ce

                                                                                                                                          O ern g
                                      hic tru ch l




                                                           C ing




                                                                                                                              hic tru ch l




                                                                                                                                                   C ing
                                                                          l




                                              Pri r p tos

                                                           , c cts




                                                                                                                                                                  l




                                                                                                                                      Pri r p tos
                                                                        re




                                                           as on




                                                                                                                                                               re




                                                                                                                                                   , c cts
                                                                         y




                                                                                                                                                                 y



                                                                                                                                                   as on
                                                 Pa asb ch




                                                              Le g




                                                                                                                                         Pa asb ch




                                                                                                                                                      Le g
                                            R em icals




                                                                                                                                       ub mic als
                                                                         o




                                                          in tion




                                                                                                                                                    str o




                                                                                                                                                  in tion
                                              ne l p ring




                                                                                                                                      ne l p ring
                                               Ba pro ing




                                                                                                                                       Ba pro g
                                                           qu cts




                                                                                                                                                   qu cts
                                                           us tee




                                                          ch cts




                                                                                                                                                   us tee




                                                                                                                                                  ch cts
                                              om er s en




                                                                                                                                      om er s en
                                Ve ons Ma tee




                                                                                                                        Ve ons Ma tee
                                                          ae tee




                                                                                                                                                  ae tee
                                                                       ta




                                                                                                                                                              ta
                                                          W ate




                                                                                                                                                  W ate
                                                                      ie




                                                                                                                                                              ie
                                                                      le




                                                                                                                                                              le
                                                                      ic




                                                                                                                                                              ic
                                                         oil thin



                                                                    str




                                                                     nc

                                                         ov llin




                                                                                                                                                 oil thin



                                                                                                                                                            str




                                                                                                                                                 ov llin
                                                                   yin




                                                                    sa




                                                                                                                                                           yin




                                                                                                                                                            sa
                                           ctr on acc




                                                                                                                                   ctr on acc
                                                                                                                                                           sin
                                                                     fa




                                                                                                                                                             fa
                                                                   he




                                                                                                                                                           he
                                           le ctio ine




                                                                                                                                   le ctio ine
                                                                     la




                                                                  ath




                                                                                                                                                             la




                                                                                                                                                          ath
                                                        str ltu




                                                                                                                                                str ltu
                                          cis en pa




                                                                                                                                  cis en pa
                                                       en eeri




                                                                                                                                               en eeri
                                                                    ic




                                                                                                                                                            ic
                                                                    ic




                                                                                                                                                            ic
                                                                                                                                                             n
                                                                   te




                                                                                                                                                           te
                                         Ba mm Re




                                                                                                                                 Ba mm Re
                                                                    ti




                                                                                                                                               , g cti
                                         N iron str




                                                                                                                                 N iron str
                                                                  xti




                                                                                                                                                          xti
                                                                   m




                                                                                                                                                           m
                                        Ba ue Min




                                                                   u




                                                                                                                                Ba ue Min




                                                                                                                                                           u
                                                                  m




                                                                                                                                                          m
                                                                   y




                                                                                                                                                           y




                                                                                                                                              he mic
                                                      pe es




                                                                                                                                              pe es
                                                                   u




                                                                                                                                                           u
                                                                 ss

                                                                du




                                                                                                                                                        du
                                                                  e




                                                                                                                                                          e
                                                    iro und




                                                                                                                                            iro und
                                                                  s




                                                                                                                                                          s
                                                                 ra




                                                                                                                                                         ra
                                                                  s




                                                      rp G




                                                                                                                                                          s




                                                                                                                                              rp G
                            pti Ele and al s




                                                                                                                    pti Ele and al s
                                                     ge du



                                                                  c




                                                                                                                                             ge du
                                                                 le




                                                                                                                                                         le
                                                                  a




                                                                                                                                                          a
                                                               ,w




                                                                                                                                                       ,w
                                                                rv




                                                                                                                                                        rv
                                                                  e




                                                                                                                                                          e
                                       Sto eta ee




                                                                                                                               Sto eta ee
                                                               arr




                                                                                                                                                       arr
                                                  nti rod




                                      , b Sp and




                                                                                                                                          nti rod




                                                                                                                              , b Sp and
                                                               op




                                                                                                                                                       op
                                                               fis




                                                                                                                                                       fis




                                                                                                                                            oo es
                                                    re cu




                                                   an rod




                                                                                                                                            re cu




                                                                                                                                           an rod
                                                             era




                                                                                                                                                     era
                                                             em
                                                                s




                                                                                                                                                        s
                                                                                                                                                       m
                                                   ity tru




                                                                                                                                                        u
                                                                b




                                                                                                                                                        b
                                                    be al




                                                                                                                                            be al
                                                              du




                                                                                                                                                      du




                                                                                                                                                       w
                                                               d




                                                                                                                                                       d
                                                             su




                                                                                                                                                     su
                                                             ro




                                                                                                                                                     ro
                                                             to




                                                                                                                                                     to
                                                                                                                                                     e
                                                             C




                                                                                                                                                     C
                                                            ic




                                                                                                                                                     c
                                               Fo gri




                                                            D




                                                                                                                                       Fo gri
                                                            y,




                                                                                                                                                    y,
                                                            n




                                                                                                                                                    n
                                                            s
                                                           a




                                                                                                                                                  ro
                                                           u




                                                                                                                                                   u
                                                         s,




                                                                                                                                                 s,
                                                        tic




                                                                                                                                                tic
                                                       ng




                                                       ,g




                                                                                                                                               ng
                                                         A




                                                                                                                                                 A
                                                      rro




                                                                                                                                              rro
                                                        d




                                                        r,




                                                                                                                                                d




                                                                                                                                                r,
                                          ev irit




                                                                                                                                  ev irit
                                                        n




                                                                                                                                                n
                                                        d




                                                                                                                                                d
                                                       g,




                                                                                                                                               g,
                                                       G




                                                                                                                                               G
                                                      th




                                                                                                                                              th
                                                    sic




                                                                                                                                            sic
                                                    oo




                                                      C




                                                                                                                                              C
                                                     le




                                                                                                                                             le
                                                      h




                                                                                                                                           ity
                                       re al




                                                                                                                               re al
                                                 be




                                                                                                                                         be
                                                   n




                                                                                                                                           n
                                                  C




                                                                                                                                          C
                                                 co




                                                                                                                                         co
                                                  F




                                                                                                                                          F
                                                 ib




                                                                                                                                         ib
                                                 M




                                                                                                                                         M




                                                                                                                                        W
                                               ub
                                  , p tric




                                                ic




                                                                                                                          , p tric




                                                                                                                                        ic
                                                io




                                                                                                                                        io
                                              nk




                                                                                                                                      nk
                                                d




                                                                                                                                        d
                                            Ed




                                                                                                                                    Ed
                                             on




                                                                                                                                     on
                                              m




                                                                                                                                      m
                                              s




                                                                                                                                      s
                                             te




                                                                                                                                     te
                                            rt,




                                                                                                                                    rt,
                                                                                                                                    R
                                           D




                                                                                                                                   D
                                           c




                                                                                                                                   c
                                         , ti




                                                                                                                                 , ti
                                        ca




                                                                                                                                ca
                                       po




                                                                                                                               po
                                     Ele




                                                                                                                             Ele
                                        C




                                                                                                                                C
                                    ills




                                                                                                                            ills
                                   bri




                                                                                                                           bri
                                  ns




                                                                                                                          ns
                                od




                                                                                                                        od
                                m




                                                                                                                        m
                               Fa




                                                                                                                       Fa
                             Tra




                                                                                                                     Tra
                               cs




                                                                                                                       cs
                             Fo




                                                                                                                     Fo
                             w




                                                                                                                     w
                          Sa




                                                                                                                  Sa
                          O




                                                                                                                  O
                                       (c) After some more time...                                                                    (d) After a long time...
                                                                              0                                                                                        0
                   Agriculture                                                                             Agriculture

             Forestry, fishery                                                                       Forestry, fishery

                       Mining                                                                                  Mining

               Fuel industries                                                                         Fuel industries
                                                                              -0.005                                                                                   -0.005
         Basic iron and steel                                                                     Basic iron and steel

          Non-ferrous metals                                                                      Non-ferrous metals

                    Foundries                                                                               Foundries

    Fabricated iron and steel                                                                Fabricated iron and steel
                                                                              -0.01                                                                                    -0.01
                   Machinery                                                                               Machinery

         Constructional steel                                                                     Constructional steel

     Vehicles and aerospace                                                                   Vehicles and aerospace

        Electrical engineering                                                                  Electrical engineering
                                                                              -0.015                                                                                   -0.015
Optics, precision engineering                                                           Optics, precision engineering

              Metal products                                                                          Metal products

         Stone and quarrying                                                                     Stone and quarrying

                    Ceramics                                                                                Ceramics
                                                                              -0.02                                                                                    -0.02
                         Glass                                                                                   Glass

Saw mills, timber processing                                                            Saw mills, timber processing

              Wood products                                                                           Wood products

             Basic chemicals                                                                         Basic chemicals
                                                                              -0.025                                                                                   -0.025
               Chemical tech                                                                           Chemical tech

           Rubber, asbestos                                                                         Rubber, asbestos

              Paper products                                                                          Paper products

            Printing, copying                                                                        Printing, copying
                                                                              -0.03                                                                                    -0.03
                      Leather                                                                                 Leather

                      Textiles                                                                                Textiles

                      Clothing                                                                                Clothing

           Edible oil and fats                                                                      Edible oil and fats
                                                                              -0.035                                                                                   -0.035
              Spirits industry                                                                         Spirits industry

   Food, beverages, tobacco                                                                 Food, beverages, tobacco

                 Construction                                                                            Construction

        Electricity, gas, water                                                                 Electricity, gas, water
                                                                              -0.04                                                                                    -0.04
                    Wholesale                                                                               Wholesale

                         Retail                                                                                  Retail

   Transport, communication                                                                 Transport, communication

          Banking, insurance                                                                      Banking, insurance
                                                                              -0.045                                                                                   -0.045
                     Dwelling                                                                                Dwelling

                 Government                                                                              Government

               Other services                                                                          Other services

           Domestic services                                                                       Domestic services
                                                                              -0.05                                                                                    -0.05
                                                                       le




                                                                                                                                                                 le
                                              W roce ss




                                                in nic il




                                                                                                                                                                ss




                                                                                                                                          in nic il
                                                         gin ng




                                                                                                                                                   gin ng
                                               -fe nd s




                                                                                                                                         -fe and s
                                                             lo s




                                                                                                                                                       lo s
                                                         gin ce




                                                                                                                                                   gin ce
                                                         an ries




                                                  es erv t
                                                           se es




                                                                                                                                            es erv t
                                                                                                                                                     se es
                                                                      ry




                                                            Te er




                                                                                                                                                   an ries
                                                                     es




                                                                                                                                                                ry




                                                                                                                                                      Te er
                                                                        s




                                                                                                                                                                  s




                                                                                                                                                                es
                                             era s in ts




                                                                                                                                       era s in ts
                                            sic l in ing




                                                             m l




                                                                                                                                      sic in ing




                                                                                                                                                                   l
                                                        Fo tals




                                                                      ry




                                                                       g




                                                           ho r




                                                             w e

                                                O ern g




                                                                                                                                                  Fo tals




                                                                                                                                                                ry




                                                                                                                                                                 g




                                                                                                                                                     ho r




                                                                                                                                                    D ce

                                                                                                                                          O ern g
                                     hic tru ch l




                                                         C ing




                                                                                                                               hic tru ch l




                                                                                                                                                   C ing
                                                                        l




                                            Pri r p tos

                                                         , c cts




                                                                                                                                                                  l




                                                                                                                                      Pri r p tos
                                                                      re




                                                                                                                                                   , c cts
                                                                       y



                                                         as on




                                                                                                                                                              ure




                                                                                                                                                   as on
                                               Pa asb ch




                                                            Le g




                                                                                                                                         Pa asb ch




                                                                                                                                                      Le g




                                                                                                                                                                 y
                                          R em icals




                                                                                                                                       ub mic als
                                                                       o




                                                        in tion




                                                                                                                                                    str o




                                                                                                                                                  in tion
                                            ne l p ring




                                                                                                                                      ne l p ring
                                             Ba pro ing




                                                                                                                                       Ba pro g
                                                         qu cts




                                                                                                                                                   qu cts
                                                         us tee




                                                        ch cts




                                                                                                                                                   us tee




                                                                                                                                                  ch cts
                                            om er s en




                                                                                                                                      om er s en
                                Ve ons Ma tee




                                                                                                                          Ve ons Ma tee
                                                        ae tee




                                                                                                                                                  ae tee
                                                                     ta




                                                                                                                                                               ta
                                                        W ate




                                                                                                                                                  W ate
                                                                    ie




                                                                                                                                                               ie
                                                                    le




                                                                                                                                                               le
                                                                    ic




                                                                                                                                                               ic
                                                       oil thin



                                                                  str




                                                                   nc

                                                       ov llin




                                                                                                                                                oil thin



                                                                                                                                                            str




                                                                                                                                                 ov llin
                                                                 yin




                                                                  sa




                                                                                                                                                           yin




                                                                                                                                                            sa
                                         ctr on acc




                                                                                                                                   ctr on acc
                                                                                                                                                           sin
                                                                   fa




                                                                                                                                                             fa
                                                                 he




                                                                                                                                                           he
                                         le ctio ine




                                                                                                                                   le ctio ine
                                                                   la




                                                                ath




                                                                                                                                                             la




                                                                                                                                                          ath
                                                      str ltu




                                        cis en pa




                                                                                                                                  cis en pa
                                                     en eeri




                                                                                                                                               en eeri
                                                                  ic




                                                                                                                                                            ic
                                                                  ic




                                                                                                                                                            ic
                                                                                                                                                             n
                                                                 te




                                                                                                                                                           te
                                        Ba mm Re




                                                                                                                                  Ba mm Re
                                                                  ti




                                                                                                                                               , g cti
                                        N iron str




                                                                                                                                  N iron str
                                                                xti




                                                                                                                                                          xti
                                                                 m




                                                                                                                                                           m
                                                                in




                                                                 u




                                                                                                                                                          in




                                                                                                                                                           u
                                                                m




                                                                                                                                                          m
                                                                 y




                                                                                                                                                           y




                                                                                                                                              he mic
                                                    pe es




                                                                                                                                              pe es
                                                                 u




                                                                                                                                                           u
                                                               ss

                                                              du




                                                                                                                                                        du
                                                                                                                                                         ult
                                                                e




                                                                                                                                                          e
                                                  iro und




                                                                                                                                            iro und
                                                                s




                                                                                                                                                          s
                                                               ra




                                                                                                                                                         ra
                                                                s




                                                    rp G




                                                                                                                                                          s




                                                                                                                                              rp G
                            pti Ele and al s




                                                                                                                      pti Ele and al s
                                                   ge du



                                                                c




                                                                                                                                             ge du
                                                               le




                                                                                                                                                         le
                                                                a




                                                                                                                                                          a
                                                             ,w




                                                                                                                                                       ,w
                                                              rv




                                                                                                                                                        rv
                                                                e




                                                                                                                                                          e
                                      Sto eta ee




                                                                                                                                Sto eta ee
                                                             arr




                                                                                                                                                       arr
                                                nti rod




                                     , b Sp and




                                                                                                                                          nti rod




                                                                                                                               , b Sp and
                                                             op




                                                                                                                                                       op
                                                             fis




                                                                                                                                                       fis




                                                                                                                                            oo es
                                                  re cu




                                                 an rod




                                                                                                                                           an rod
                                                           era




                                                                                                                                                     era
                                                           em
                                                             M




                                                              s




                                                                                                                                                       M




                                                                                                                                                        s
                                                                                                                                                       m
                                                 ity tru




                                                                                                                                                        u
                                                              b




                                                                                                                                                        b
                                                  be al




                                                                                                                                            be al
                                                            du




                                                                                                                                                      du




                                                                                                                                                       w
                                                             d




                                                                                                                                                       d
                                                           su




                                                                                                                                                     su
                                                                                                                                                     ric
                                                           ro




                                                                                                                                                     ro
                                                           to




                                                                                                                                                     to
                                                                                                                                                     e
                                                           C




                                                                                                                                                     C
                                                          ic




                                                                                                                                                     c
                                             Fo gri




                                                          D
                                                          y,




                                                                                                                                                    y,
                                                          n




                                                                                                                                                    n
                                                          s
                                                         a




                                                                                                                                                  ro
                                                         u




                                                                                                                                                   u
                                                                                                                  Ag
                                                       s,




                                                                                                                                                 s,
                                                      tic




                                                                                                                                                tic
                                                                                                                          str
                                                     ng




                                                     ,g




                                                                                                                                               ng
                                                       A




                                                    rro




                                                                                                                                              rro
                                                      d




                                                      r,




                                                                                                                                                d




                                                                                                                                                r,
                                        ev irit




                                                                                                                                  ev irit
                                                      n




                                                                                                                                                n
                                                                                                                                 el
                                                      d




                                                                                                                                                d
                                                     g,




                                                                                                                                               g,
                                                     e




                                                     G




                                                                                                                                               G
                                                    th




                                                                                                                                              th
                                                  sic




                                                                                                                                            sic
                                                  oo




                                                    C




                                                                                                                                              C
                                                                                                                       re
                                                   le




                                                                                                                                             le
                                                    h




                                                                                                                                           ity
                                                Fu




                                                                                                                                Fu
                                      re al




                                                                                                                                re al
                                               be




                                                                                                                                         be
                                                 n




                                                                                                                                           n
                                                C




                                                                                                                                          C
                                               co




                                                                                                                                         co
                                               ib




                                                                                                                                         ib
                                               M




                                                                                                                                         M
                                                                                                                    Fo




                                                                                                                                        W
                                             ub
                                 , p tric




                                              ic




                                                                                                                           , p tric




                                                                                                                                        ic
                                              io




                                                                                                                                        io
                                            nk




                                                                                                                                      nk
                                              d




                                                                                                                                        d
                                          Ed




                                                                                                                                    Ed
                                           on




                                                                                                                                     on
                                            m




                                                                                                                                      m
                                            s




                                                                                                                                      s
                                           te




                                                                                                                                     te
                                          rt,




                                                                                                                                    rt,
                                                                                                                                    R
                                         D




                                                                                                                                   D
                                  Ba




                                                                                                                                Ba
                                         c




                                                                                                                                   c
                                       , ti




                                                                                                                                 , ti
                                       ca




                                                                                                                                 ca
                                      po




                                                                                                                                po
                                    Ele




                                                                                                                              Ele
                                       C




                                                                                                                                 C
                                   ills




                                                                                                                             ills
                                   bri




                                                                                                                             bri
                                  ns




                                                                                                                            ns
                                od




                                                                                                                          od
                                m




                                                                                                                          m
                               Fa




                                                                                                                         Fa
                             Tra




                                                                                                                       Tra
                               cs




                                                                                                                         cs
                             Fo




                                                                                                                       Fo
                             w




                                                                                                                       w
                          Sa




                                                                                                                    Sa
                          O




                                                                                                                    O




                                                                                       39
                                                                                                   Figure 10: Sectoral cross-exposure over time in pre-WWII Japan


                                                                                   (a) Initial impact, t = 0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (b) After some time...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0

          agriculture, forestry                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   agriculture, forestry


                            fishery                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              fishery


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.005                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.005
                            mining                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mining


                              food                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   food


       textile, personal goods                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -0.01            textile, personal goods                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -0.01


               wood products                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           wood products


                   pulp, paper                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             pulp, paper
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.015

           printing, publishing                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    printing, publishing


               leather, rubber                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         leather, rubber

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.02                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -0.02
        petroleum, chemicals                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    petroleum, chemicals


            ceramic products                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ceramic products


                            metals                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -0.025                             metals                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -0.025



                    machinery                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               machinery


     other manufac. products                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 other manufac. products
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.03                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -0.03


construction, civil engineering                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         construction, civil engineering


        electricity, gas, water                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 electricity, gas, water

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.035                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.035
                    commerce                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                commerce


            finance, insurance                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      finance, insurance


                    real estate                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -0.04                         real estate                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -0.04



      transportation, telecom                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 transportation, telecom


               public services                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         public services
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.045                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.045


                other services                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          other services


                office supplies                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         office supplies
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.05                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -0.05
                                          ry       ery      ing                d
                                                                                           od
                                                                                               s          cts            pe
                                                                                                                                r            g                  er                ls           s     tals             ry         cts             ng          ter            e            ce            te           m           es           es        lies                                                     stry         ry      ing                d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   od
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       s          cts            pe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        r            g                er                ls           s     tals               ry           cts                   g           ter                 e         ce             te           m           es           es         lies
                                      rest     fish      min              foo            go            du             pa                hin                bb                  ica          uct    me              ine        du             eri          wa            erc          ran          sta            co        rvic         rvic         pp                                                                fish
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  min              foo           go            du             pa                hin                bb                ica          uct    me             ine             du             ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           rin             wa              erc          ran           sta           co        rvic         rvic         pp
                                    fo                                              al              pro         lp,                 blis              r, ru            em                rod                 ch           pro            ine          as,          mm             su           le           tele                     se                                                                     fore                                            al              pro         lp,                 blis              r, ru          em                rod                 ch              pro            gin                as,           mm                su          le            tele                     se
                                re,                                             on             od           pu                  pu            the                  , ch              ic p                 ma                          ng           ,g           co           , in          rea           n,        blic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        se
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  er          ice
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  su
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      re,                                                n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       od           pu                  pu            the                  ch              ic p                 ma                              en             ,g               co               , in         rea           n,        blic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           se
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     er          ice
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     su
                             ltu                                           ers            wo                               g,              lea                um            ram                                    ufa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       c.          le         city                        ce                        atio        pu            oth         off                                                     ltu                                                rso          wo                               g,              lea                m,          ram                                      fac.           vil             city                              ce                         atio        pu            oth         off
                         cu                                            ,p                                             ntin                               ole                                                     an           civi                                     an                       ort                                                                                           ricu                                                 pe                                         ntin                              leu                                                    nu           , ci                                                an                          ort
                    ag
                       ri
                                                                                                                pri                                                       ce                               m               n,            ctri                      fin                                                                                                                      ag                                              ile,                                        pri                                tro                  ce                                 ma                                 ctri                           fin
                                                               text
                                                                    ile
                                                                                                                                                 pe
                                                                                                                                                    tr
                                                                                                                                                                                                        er            ctio           ele                                                    nsp                                                                                                                                         text                                                                             pe                                                   er               ion              ele                                                           nsp
                                                                                                                                                                                                    oth                                                                                 tra                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               oth           ruct                                                                              tra
                                                                                                                                                                                                               n stru                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                nst
                                                                                                                                                                                                            co                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    co




                                                                  (c) After some more time...                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (d) After a long time...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0

          agriculture, forestry                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   agriculture, forestry


                            fishery                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              fishery


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.005                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.005
                            mining                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mining


                              food                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   food


       textile, personal goods                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -0.01            textile, personal goods                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -0.01


               wood products                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           wood products


                   pulp, paper                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             pulp, paper
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.015

           printing, publishing                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    printing, publishing


               leather, rubber                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         leather, rubber

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.02                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -0.02
        petroleum, chemicals                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    petroleum, chemicals


            ceramic products                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ceramic products


                            metals                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -0.025                             metals                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -0.025



                    machinery                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               machinery


     other manufac. products                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 other manufac. products
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.03                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -0.03


construction, civil engineering                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         construction, civil engineering


        electricity, gas, water                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 electricity, gas, water

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.035                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.035
                    commerce                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                commerce


            finance, insurance                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      finance, insurance


                    real estate                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -0.04                         real estate                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -0.04



      transportation, telecom                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 transportation, telecom


               public services                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         public services
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.045                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.045


                other services                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          other services


                office supplies                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         office supplies
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.05                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -0.05
                                          ry       ery      ing                d              ds          cts            pe
                                                                                                                                r            g                  er                ls           s     tals              ry        cts             ng          ter            e            ce            te           m           es           es        lies                                                     stry         ry      ing                d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   od
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       s          cts            pe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        r            g                er                ls           s     tals               ry           cts              ng               ter                 e         ce             te           m           es           es         lies
                                      rest     fish      min              foo             oo           du             pa                hin                bb                  ica          uct    me              ine        du             eri          wa            erc          ran          sta            co        rvic         rvic         pp                                                                fish
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  min              foo           go            du             pa                hin                bb                ica          uct    me             ine             du               eri               wa              erc          ran           sta           co        rvic         rvic         pp
                                    fo                                               lg             pro         lp,                 blis              r, ru            em                rod                 ch           pro            ine          as,          mm             su           le           tele                     se                                                                     fore                                            al              pro         lp,                 blis              r, ru          em                rod                 ch              pro               ine             as,           mm                su          le            tele                     se
                                re,                                                na
                                                                                               od           pu                  pu            the                   ch               ic p                 ma                          ng           ,g           co           , in          rea           n,        blic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        se
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  er          ice
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  su
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      re,                                                n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       od           pu                  pu            the                  ch              ic p                 ma                               ng            ,g               co               , in         rea           n,        blic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           se
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     er          ice
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     su
                             ltu                                            rso           wo                               g,              lea                 m,           ram                                      fac.          le         city                        ce                        atio        pu            oth         off                                                     ltu                                                rso          wo                               g,              lea                m,          ram                                      fac.              le           city                              ce                         atio        pu            oth         off
                         cu                                               pe                                          ntin                                leu                                                      nu         civi                                     an                       ort                                                                                           ricu                                                 pe                                         ntin                              leu                                                    nu               civi                                            an                          ort
                    ag
                       ri                                          ile,                                         pri                                 tro                   ce                                 ma            n,            ctri                      fin                                                                                                                      ag                                              ile,                                        pri                                tro                  ce                                 ma              n,                 ctri                           fin
                                                               text                                                                              pe                                                     er            ctio           ele                                                    nsp                                                                                                                                         text                                                                             pe                                                   er            ctio                ele                                                           nsp
                                                                                                                                                                                                    oth            ru                                                                   tra                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               oth            ru                                                                               tra
                                                                                                                                                                                                               nst                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   nst
                                                                                                                                                                                                            co                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    co




7                              Conclusion
The dynamical view of the input-output matrix that is inherent in spectral graph theory and
dynamical system theory can reveal important determinants of the structure of production
networks. We have built one such dynamical system--a microfounded general equilibrium
model with adjustment frictions in which economy gradually transition to the steady state.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       40
This analysis is useful to reveal the structure of the input-output matrix--varying the de-
gree of the frictions and thus the speed of the adjustment allows us to have a multi-scale
representation of the economy. These scales represent the varying importance of the higher
order links and the associated eigenvalues and eigenvectors. We apply our analysis to the
production networks of the modern day US, and those of the WWII era Nazi Germany and
Imperial Japan.


References
Acemoglu, D., U. Akcigit, and W. Kerr (2015): "Networks and the Macroeconomy:
 An Empirical Exploration," 273­335.

Acemoglu, D., V. M. Carvalho, A. Ozdaglar, and A. Tahbaz-Salehi (2012): "The
 Network Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations," Econometrica, 80, 1977­2016.

Adena, M., R. Enikolopov, M. Petrova, and H. J. Voth (2020): "Bombs, Broadcasts
 and Resistance: Allied Intervention and Domestic Opposition to the Nazi Regime During
 World War II," .

Antràs, P., D. Chor, T. Fally, and R. Hillberry (2012): "Measuring the Upstream-
 ness of Production and Trade Flows," American Economic Review, 102, 412­16.

Baqaee, D. R. (2018): "Cascading Failures in Production Networks," Econometrica, 86.

Baqaee, D. R. and E. Farhi (2019): "The Macroeconomic Impact of Microeconomic
 Shocks: Beyond Hulten's Theorem," Econometrica, 87.

------ (2020): "Productivity and Misallocation in General Equilibrium," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 135, 105­163.

Benzi, M. and C. Klymko (2015): "On the Limiting Behavior of Parameter-Dependent
 Network Centrality Measures," SIAM Journal on Matrix Analysis and Applications, 36,
 686­706.

Berman, A. and R. J. Plemmons (1994): Nonnegative Matrices in the Mathematical
 Sciences, Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics.

Bigio, S. and J. La'O (2020): "Distortions in Production Networks," The Quarterly Jour-
  nal of Economics, 135, 2187­2253.

Bloch, F., M. O. Jackson, and P. Tebaldi (2020): "Centrality Measures in Networks,"
 Working paper.

                                            41
Bollard, A. (2020): Economists at War: How a Handful of Economists Helped Win and
 Lose the World Wars, Oxford University Press.

Carvalho, V. M. (2014): "From Micro to Macro via Production Networks," Journal of
 Economic Perspectives, 28, 23­48.

Carvalho, V. M., M. Nirei, Y. U. Saito, and A. Tahbaz-Salehi (forthcoming):
 "Supply Chain Disruptions: Evidence from the Great East Japan Earthquake," Quarterly
 Journal of Economics.

Carvalho, V. M. and A. Tahbaz-Salehi (2019): "Production Networks: A Primer,"
 Annual Review of Economics, 11, 635­663.

Chung, F. R. K. (1997): Spectral Graph Theory, vol. 92 of CBMS Regional Conference
 Series in Mathematics, American Mathematical Society.

Coifman, R. R., I. G. Kevrekidis, S. Lafon, M. Maggioni, and B. Nadler (2008):
 "Diffusion maps, reduction coordinates, and low dimensional representation of stochastic
 systems," Multiscale Modeling & Simulation, 7, 842­864.

Colonius, F. and W. Kliemann (2014): Dynamical Systems and Linear Algebra, Amer-
 ican Mathematical Society.

Davis, D. R. and D. E. Weinstein (2002): "Bones, Bombs, and Break Points: The
 Geography of Economic Activity," American Economic Review, 92, 1269­1289.

Fremdling, R. and R. Staeglin (01 Nov. 2014): "An Input-Output Table for Germany
 in 1936: A Documentation of Results, Sources and Research Strategy," Jahrbuch fÃOEr
 Wirtschaftsgeschichte / Economic History Yearbook, 55, 187 ­ 298.

Golub, B., M. Elliot, and M. V. Leduc (2020): "Supply Network Formation and
 Fragility," Working paper.

Grassi, B. and J. Sauvagnat (2019): "Production networks and economic policy," Oxford
 Review of Economic Policy, 35, 638­677.

Grigor'yan, A. (2018): Introduction to analysis on graphs, vol. 71, American Mathematical
 Society.

Guglielmo, M. (2008): "The Contribution of Economists to Military Intelligence during
 World War II," The Journal of Economic History, 68, 109­150.

Harrison, M. (2020): "Economic warfare: Insights from Mançur Olson," The Economics
 of the Second World War: Eighty Years On (VoxEU).

                                           42
Hulten, C. R. (1978): "Growth Accounting with Intermediate Inputs," The Review of
 Economic Studies, 45, 511­518.

Jackson, M. O., B. Rogers, and Y. Zenou (forthcoming): "Networks: An Economic
  Perspective," Oxford Handbook of Social Network Analysis.

Jones, C. I. (2011): "Intermediate Goods and Weak Links in the Theory of Economic
  Development," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 3, 1­28.

------ (2013): "Misallocation, Economic Growth, and Input-Output Economics," Advances
  in Economics and Econometrics, 2.

Katz, L. (1953): "A New Status Index Derived from Sociometric Analysis," Psychometrika.

Kemeny, J. G. and J. L. Snell (1960): Finite Markov Chains, Van Nostrand, Princeton.

Liu, E. (2019): "Industrial Policies in Production Networks*," The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 134, 1883­1948.

Nishikawa, S. and H. Koshihara (1981): "Input-Output Table of 1935," Interwar
  Japanese Economy (ed. by Takafusa Nakamura).

Oberfield, E. (2018): "A Theory of Input-Output Architecture," Econometrica, 86.

Olson, M. (1962): "The Economics of Target Selection for the Combined Bomber Offen-
 sive," Royal United Services Institution. Journal, 107, 308­314.

Rostow, W. W. (1981): Pre-Invasion Bombing Strategy, University of Texas Press.

Salant, W. (1942): "The Selection of Industrial Bombing Targets: Some Analytical Notes,"
  Memorandum to EOU, in Rostow (1981), "Pre-Invasion Bombing Strategy".

Spielman, D. (2019): Spectral and Algebraic Graph Theory.

Steinerberger, S. and A. Tsyvinski (2019): "Tax Mechanisms and Gradient Flows," .

The E.O.U. Special Report No.9 (1943): "Timing of Consequences of A Bombing Pro-
 gram," in Rostow (1981), "Pre-Invasion Bombing Strategy".




                                          43
Appendix

A        Factor Structure of the U.S. Input-Output Table: Al-
         ternative Values of  and 
In Section 5, we demonstrate the factor structure of the U.S. input-output table under
the assumption that  =  = 10%. This is because the importance of the k -th eigen
component in explaining v is  uk (1-k )(1+
                                        k
                                           -k )
                                                , which decays rapidly as k decreases. In
this Appendix, we replicate Figure 3 panel (f), Table 2, and Figure 5 to demonstrate that
the factor structure is robust to alternative values of  and  . In fact, the factor structure
is robust even if   , where the relative importance of the k -th eigenvector decays the
slowest in |k |.8

Figure 11: Replication of Figure 3 panel (f) under alternative values of  and  : decay of
eigen components


                           0.1                              0.1


                          0.08                             0.08


                          0.06                             0.06


                          0.04                             0.04


                          0.02                             0.02


                            0                                0
                                 0   50   100   150               0   50   100   150




                           0.1                             0.05


                          0.08                             0.04


                          0.06                             0.03


                          0.04                             0.02


                          0.02                             0.01


                            0                                0
                                 0   50   100   150               0   50   100   150




  8
      That is, for k  1, |k |  |1 |, and  uk (1-k )(1+
                                                    k
                                                        -k )
                                                                                 1
                                                                       u1 (1-1 )(1+ -1 ) is increasing in  and

converges to  uk 1-
                  k
                   k
                                  1
                              u1 1-1 as   .




                                                      44
          Table 10: Replication of Table 2 as   : regression of v(h) on v

                                h          1         2          3      4           5        6
                          slope           0.37   0.50          0.87   0.90    0.91         0.90
                              R2          0.24   0.24          0.59   0.90    0.89         0.85


Figure 12: Replication of Figure 5 as   : welfare impact from the initial eigenvectors
(v(h) ) plotted against v


                          1                                      2                                3
          .08
          .06
          .04
          .02
          0




                          4                                      5                                6
          .08
          .06
          .04
          .02
          0




                0   .02   .04       .06    .08   0       .02    .04   .06    .08       0   .02    .04   .06   .08




                                                               45
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B




                                                                                              Table 11: The Input-Output of Japan in 1935
                            Input-supplier
     Input-user                                  1     2     3      4        5       6       7       8     9     10      11     12      13    14     15      16     17     18    19     20      21     22    23 consumption government fixed capital inventory export   total output
       1   agriculture, forestry              376.7   0.0 20.5 2748.4    1241.5    85.7     6.8     0.5 47.4 157.8       3.8    5.9     3.0 41.1 143.2       0.0    0.0    0.0   0.0    0.0     0.0   14.3   0.0     546.3          5.1         0.4    -187.9 -1140.4       3954.2
       2   fishery                              0.9   4.7   0.0 113.3       0.0     0.0     0.0     0.0   0.7   65.2     0.0    0.0     0.0   6.5    0.0     0.0    0.0    0.0   0.0    0.0     0.0    4.7   0.0     176.5          1.7         0.0       1.3    11.4        386.9
       3   mining                               0.0   0.0 24.3    18.9     26.2     0.0     6.7     0.0   1.8 149.0     52.2 156.9      6.9   4.6   23.1    34.2    0.0    0.0   0.0   62.6     0.0   11.2   0.0      11.5          7.0         0.0       5.1 -196.2         408.7
       4   food                                40.9 12.7    0.0 398.1     110.8     2.3     0.0     0.0 21.6    14.4     0.0    0.0     0.0 20.0     0.0     0.0    0.0    0.0   0.0    0.0     0.0 100.5    0.0    3782.1         50.4         0.0      26.5 -223.9        4356.5
       5   textile, personal goods             17.6   9.6   6.1    5.4   2088.1     2.8     1.5     0.0 25.7     6.1     4.6    0.0    13.5 34.4    15.6     0.0    0.6    0.0   0.0    3.1     0.0    0.3 25.4     1720.2          6.3         5.0      31.0   897.6       4920.4
       6   wood products                        8.1   0.0   0.5    4.8     31.7    34.1     0.0     0.0   0.0    5.7     0.5    2.4    11.3 21.2 149.5       0.0    1.6    0.0   0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0 66.5      154.7          9.9        80.2       2.8    -6.2        579.5
       7   pulp, paper                          0.0   0.0   0.0    7.7      0.0     1.1    90.5   126.6   0.0   42.7     0.0    0.0     1.0 15.7     1.2     0.0    8.5    0.0   0.0    0.0     0.0    1.9 60.4       41.8          0.0         0.0       3.5   -60.8        341.7
       8   printing, publishing                 0.0   0.0   0.0    0.0      0.0     0.0    24.4   146.6   0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0     0.0   0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0    0.0   0.0   10.1     0.0   42.5 73.3       99.1         56.4         0.0       0.0     2.0        454.5
       9   leather, rubber                      0.0   2.4   2.4    0.0     24.7     2.4     0.0     0.0 13.9     2.4     0.0    0.0    67.5   9.6    2.4     0.0    0.0    0.0   0.0    0.4     0.0    2.4   2.4      61.0          1.7         0.0      -1.4     3.9        197.8
      10   petroleum, chemicals               383.8   8.9 34.7    36.0    199.4    10.8    10.4    34.4 19.5 437.1      13.6   88.0    36.1 18.3    42.8     8.1    6.3    0.0   0.0 102.3      0.0   97.7   0.4     124.1         49.2         0.0      26.2 -125.6        1670.1
      11   ceramic products                     3.4   0.0   0.0   11.0      1.5     4.0     1.5     0.0   0.0   13.0     3.0    4.6    37.8   1.6 232.6      1.4    0.0    0.0   0.0    0.0     0.0    2.3   0.0      53.8          2.8         4.6       6.8    54.4        440.2
      12   metals                              10.6   1.4 20.1    26.5      2.8    19.0    13.6     2.1   0.1   35.2     3.6 1020.7 386.6 22.7 355.6         0.8    0.0    0.0   7.5    0.0     0.0    1.6   0.0      45.6         86.9        15.8      14.5 -148.6        2006.5
      13   machinery                            2.9   8.1   9.8    2.7      6.6     2.7     3.1     4.8   2.5    5.1     2.6    2.6 514.8     6.1   73.0    14.6    4.2    0.5   1.5 107.0      0.0   31.8   2.8      50.9       1033.2       840.4      24.7 -103.1        2655.8




46
      14   other manufac. products              0.0   1.0   0.0    0.0     13.1     0.0     0.4     0.4   0.9    0.0     0.0    0.0     0.0   8.1    0.0     0.0    0.0    0.0   0.0    0.0     0.0   22.7   7.8     135.7        190.7         4.4       0.4    19.3        404.0
      15   construction, civil engineering     21.7   0.9   1.9    0.6      1.8     0.2     0.0     0.1   0.0    0.2     1.0    0.2     0.6   0.0    1.0     1.5   25.0    1.0   0.1    5.3     0.0   11.2   0.0     107.9          2.8      1664.6       0.0     0.0       1849.5
      16   electricity, gas, water              0.8   2.3 54.3    14.0     99.8     4.8    26.8    56.8   3.2 175.1     41.8 136.1     67.1   9.6    4.0     0.5   16.9    1.0   0.1   38.7     0.0   12.3   0.0      92.8         59.3         0.0       0.0     0.0      918.3
      17   commerce                           141.3   6.9 10.6 281.6      390.1    22.0     8.7    34.7 14.2    84.3     9.7   88.4 104.3 28.9 114.8         6.2    3.7    0.1   0.9   24.3     0.0   57.0 25.2     1317.0         49.6        92.8       0.0   225.4       3152.1
      18   finance, insurance                  51.7   0.9 20.0    12.7     21.3     1.5     4.1     2.3   1.1   16.0     5.7   14.1    15.7   1.1    4.9    46.6   39.1    0.7   5.7 110.4      0.0   36.9   0.0    1112.7         26.0         0.0       0.0     0.0       1551.1
      19   real estate                          3.7   0.2   0.3    0.1      0.3     0.0     0.0     0.0   0.0    0.0     0.2    0.0     0.1   0.0    0.2     0.3    4.3    0.2   0.0    0.9     0.0    1.9   0.0     390.3         21.8         0.0       0.0     0.0        424.8
      20   transportation, telecom              9.1   2.0   2.6   32.6     51.9     3.7     1.5     4.6   2.0   11.2     2.4   12.1    16.4   3.5   16.6     1.2 259.2    14.8   1.7 224.2      0.0 142.9    3.3     320.3         98.6        12.9       0.0   443.3       1705.0
      21   public services                      0.0   0.0   0.0    0.0      0.0     0.0     0.0     0.0   0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0     0.0   0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0    0.0   0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0   0.0       0.0        633.1         0.0       0.0     0.0        633.1
      22   other services                       0.0   0.4   0.3    0.4      1.2     0.4     0.1     0.1   0.1    0.2     0.4    0.3     0.9   0.2    0.7     0.1   73.0    4.2   0.4   16.4     0.0   47.7   0.0    2206.5         12.1         0.0       0.0     0.0       2368.8
      23   office supplies                     18.9   2.7   3.0   25.6     33.5     4.4     1.7     3.2   1.4   11.0     3.4   11.0    18.4   3.0    0.6     0.1   58.7    3.4   0.4   13.2     0.0   38.4   0.0       0.0          9.7         0.0       0.0     0.0        267.5
      31   total intermediates               1092.2 65.0 211.4 3740.2    4346.1   201.9   201.8   417.0 155.2 1232.0   148.4 1543.3 1302.1 256.3 1181.6    115.4 501.2    25.7 18.4 718.9       0.0 682.1 267.5    12550.6       2414.4      2721.1     -46.5 -530.1       35646.8
      92   labor                             2827.1 317.2 179.6 312.0     515.4   374.5   135.2    36.8 41.4 424.5     283.0 445.1 1343.7 146.2 666.9      558.0 2503.7 1397.4 34.3 668.9     498.3 1544.9   0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       The Input-Output of Japan in 1935




      61   capital                             14.1   4.2   7.9    5.2     16.0     2.9     4.5     0.6   1.2   12.8     8.0   16.2     9.1   1.3    0.3   241.8    7.8    0.3 371.8 309.9    134.9 134.9    0.0
      62   tax                                 20.8   0.5   9.8 299.1      42.8     0.2     0.2     0.1   0.1    0.9     0.8    1.9     0.9   0.1    0.7     3.0 139.4 127.7     0.3    7.3     0.0    6.9   0.0
      60   value-added                       2862.0 321.9 197.3 616.3     574.3   377.6   139.9    37.5 42.6 438.2     291.8 463.2 1353.7 147.6 667.9      802.8 2650.9 1525.4 406.5 986.1    633.1 1686.7   0.0
      91   total output                      3954.2 386.9 408.7 4356.5   4920.4   579.5   341.7   454.5 197.8 1670.1   440.2 2006.5 2.655.8 404.0 1849.5   918.3 3152.1 1551.1 424.8 1705.0   633.1 2368.8 267.5
