                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   THE EFFECT OF COMPUTER-ASSISTED LEARNING ON STUDENTS' LONG-TERM
                            DEVELOPMENT

                                        Nicola Bianchi
                                            Yi Lu
                                         Hong Song

                                      Working Paper 28180
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28180


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2020




We thank Scott Carrell, David Figlio, Jon Guryan, Kirabo Jackson, Seema Jayachandran,
Bingjing Li, Hongbin Li, Ofer Malamud, Karthik Muralidharan, Philip Oreopoulos, and Jessica
Pan for helpful comments. Xian Wu and Yanhong Lin provided excellent research assistance. We
gratefully acknowledge financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(Grant No: 71803027). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Nicola Bianchi, Yi Lu, and Hong Song. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of Computer-Assisted Learning on Students' Long-Term Development
Nicola Bianchi, Yi Lu, and Hong Song
NBER Working Paper No. 28180
December 2020
JEL No. I24,I26,I28,O15,O38

                                          ABSTRACT

In this paper, we examine the effect of computer-assisted learning on students' long-term
development. We explore the implementation of the "largest ed-tech intervention in the world to
date," which connected China's best teachers to more than 100 million rural students through
satellite internet. We find evidence that exposure to the program improved students' academic
achievement, labor performance, and computer usage. We observe these effects up to ten years
after program implementation. These findings indicate that education technology can have long-
lasting positive effects on a variety of outcomes and can be effective in reducing the rural­urban
education gap.

Nicola Bianchi                                  Hong Song
Kellogg School of Management                    School of Economics
Northwestern University                         Fudan University
2211 Campus Drive                               220 Handan Road
Evanston, IL 60208                              Shanghai, China 200433
and NBER                                        songhongnus@gmail.com
nicola.bianchi@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Yi Lu
School of Economics and Management
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China, 100084
luyi@sem.tsinghua.edu.cn
1      Introduction

The increasing penetration of computers and the internet has profoundly changed how firms
and markets operate, and the education industry has been no exception. The U.S. Depart-
ment of Education states that "technology ushers in fundamental structural changes that
can be integral to achieving significant improvements in productivity. [. . . ] Technology also
has the power to transform teaching by ushering in a new model of connected teaching. This
model links teachers to their students and to professional content, resources, and systems
to help them improve their own instruction and personalize learning."1 It is not surprising,
then, that the use of technology in the classroom has been the subject of growing interest
among both academic researchers and policy makers.
    In addition to increasing productivity inside the classroom and updating the pedagogical
paradigm, technology can improve the delivery of high-quality education to underserved
areas. Specifically, computer-aided learning (CAL) can narrow the education gap between
urban and rural areas, reducing inequalities in education achievement. In China, the setting of
our study, rural schools are facing a variety of challenges, including poorly qualified teachers,
insufficient resources, and large classes (Hannum, 1999). In 2000, only 14.3% of teachers in
rural secondary schools had a bachelor's degree, compared with 32% of teachers in urban
secondary schools. Rural schools also had an average student­teacher ratio of 17.13, much
higher than the 12.43 student­teacher ratio in urban schools.2 Lower levels of school inputs
are associated with worse outcomes. Only 7.1% of students in rural middle schools enroll in
high school, while high-school enrollment is 9.4 times higher in urban schools (2000 Census).
The existence of a large and persisting rural­urban educational gap is not specific to China.
In fact, it is a common occurrence in most developing economies, such as India (Sonalde
Desai and Veena Kulkarni, 2008; Banerjee et al., 2007), Pakistan (Beg et al., 2019), and sub-
Saharan African countries (Zhang, 2006).3 Reducing the inequality in education outcomes
between rural and urban schools is not a simple task. Standard methods, such as subsidies to
high-quality teachers for relocation to rural areas, are often ineffective. Experienced teachers
have attractive outside options in urban areas that they prefer over subsidies to move to
isolated locations with few amenities. CAL, however, could connect highly effective teachers
in urban areas to students in rural schools without forcing the teachers to relocate.
    In this paper, we provide the first empirical analysis of a large-scale use of technology

1
    https://web.archive.org/web/20201029162846/https://www.ed.gov/oii-news/
    use-technology-teaching-and-learning
2
    These statistics are obtained from the Educational Statistics Yearbook of China, 2000. Link to
    the data: https://web.archive.org/web/20161024074031/http://data.cnki.net/Yearbook/Single/
    N2006010309
3
    For more information, visit https://www.education-inequalities.org/. The data show that the rural­urban
    education gap is present in some developed countries as well, such as the United States (Marr´
                                                                                                 e, 2017).


                                                     1
to reduce the rural­urban education gap. Specifically, we study a 2004 reform in China
that connected high-quality teachers in urban areas with more than 100 million students
in rural primary and middle schools through the use of satellite internet. Over four years,
the program installed satellite dishes, computer rooms, and other multimedia equipment in
rural schools. At the same time, the Ministry of Education selected the most accomplished
teachers in the country to record special lectures in Beijing. The lectures, as well as other
study materials, were then deployed to rural schools via the internet and physical CDs.
Due to its great number of targeted students, this program is often considered the largest
education-technology intervention in the world to date (Yu and Wang, 2006; McQuaide,
2009).
    Our data come from the China Family Panel Survey (CFPS, 2010 and 2014), which
contains rich information about individual outcomes between seven and ten years after the
CAL implementation. This dataset allows us to study the effect of CAL on a wide variety of
outcomes, including education attainments, labor-market performance, internet usage, and
noncognitive skills. Moreover, the CFPS data allow us to precisely identify the county of
residence of respondents at age 12, when they were plausibly enrolled in middle school and
exposed to education technology.
    Our empirical strategy compares individual outcomes across two dimensions: birth co-
horts and geographical locations. First, we compare outcomes of individuals who were at
most 14 years old when the program was first implemented to outcomes of individuals who
were at least 15 years old. Students who were at most 14 were, in fact, exposed to CAL
during middle school, while older individuals were either already enrolled in a higher grade
or already active in the labor market. Second, we compare outcomes across counties that
received CAL in different years. The program had a staggered implementation between 2004
and 2007. This difference-in-differences strategy allows us to control for cohort-specific and
county-specific fixed effects. Because we also control for county-specific linear trends, our
specifications identify the causal effect of CAL through discontinuities around the imple-
mentation of the reform, which affected different cohorts in different counties.
    We report four key findings. First, exposure to CAL in middle school significantly in-
creased students' academic achievement in the long run. Completed education increased by
0.85 years (+9%), math skills measured at the time of the survey (seven to ten years after
exposure to CAL) increased by 0.18 standard deviations ( ), and Chinese skills increased by
0.23 . Second, CAL significantly improved students' labor-market outcomes. Students who
were exposed to CAL were more likely to be employed in occupations that focused more
on cognitive skills, instead of manual skills. They also earned, on average, 59% more than
individuals living in the same county but not exposed to the new education technology. This
effect on earnings can be decomposed into a cross-occupation effect and a cross-migration


                                              2
status effect, which account for one-third of the total, and a within-occupation-and-migration
effect, which accounts for the remaining two-thirds. In sum, improvements in labor market
outcomes after exposure to CAL did not require a career or location change. Third, CAL
increased internet and computer usage by 15% several years after middle school. Fourth, we
find evidence suggesting that the program had a mild negative impact on noncognitive traits,
but these effects are not precisely estimated. Overall, exposure to the policy can explain a
21% reduction in the preexisting urban­rural education gap and a 78% reduction in the
preexisting earning gap.
    Out of several pedagogical changes introduced by the reform, access to high-quality teach-
ers through remote learning seems to have played the main role in increasing human capital.
Other mechanisms, such as access to new technology for local teachers and the inclusion of
computer science in the curriculum, are not corroborated by data and anecdotal evidence.
Prior research on remote learning highlighted how online education requires a level of self-
discipline that most students might not have (McPherson and Bacow, 2015). Moreover, it
might induce students to postpone studying until just before the exam, leading to suboptimal
learning (Figlio, Rush, and Yin, 2013). In our context, however, remote learning happened
in the classroom under the direct supervision of local teachers, therefore limiting distractions
and procrastination.
    This study contributes to three main strands of the literature. First, this paper is related
to the literature that examines the effects of computer-aided learning on student achievement
(see Bulman and Fairlie (2016) and Escueta et al. (2017) for a review).4 Papers in this strand
of the literature have reported mixed results. While some studies find insignificant or even
negative effects of CAL on test scores (Angrist and Lavy, 2002; Goolsbee and Guryan, 2006),
other papers show positive and statistically significant effects (Banerjee et al., 2007; Barrow,
Markman, and Rouse, 2009; Muralidharan, Singh, and Ganimian, 2019). In the Chinese
context, there are several papers that study smaller-scale CAL experiments (Lai et al., 2013;
Mo et al., 2014; Lai et al., 2015; Mo et al., 2015; Lai et al., 2016). Most of them find a positive
effect of CAL on test scores and noncognitive outcomes in the short term. In light of these
conflicting results, there are several unanswered questions. How do the effects of CAL change
over time? While most of the available evidence is collected shortly after student exposure to
education technology, little is known about the consequences of CAL several years after its
implementation. In this paper, we study the impact of CAL on outcomes that are observed
between seven and ten years after the use of technology in the classroom. Furthermore, what
are the outcomes that might improve due to exposure to CAL? While most of the existing
evidence focuses on short-term math skills, little is known about the effect of CAL in other
4
    Several papers address a related question: the effect of computer use at home on student outcomes (Mala-
    mud and Pop-Eleches, 2011; Fairlie and London, 2012; Fairlie and Robinson, 2013; Beuermann et al., 2015).
    Most of them document a zero or negative effect.


                                                      3
areas. In this paper, we analyze the effect of CAL on a wide array of outcomes, including
completed education, cognitive skills in math and Chinese, performance in the labor market,
skill content of occupations, internet use, and noncognitive skills.
    Second, this study is related to the literature that examines the effect of educational
quality on student achievement. Previous studies have documented positive effects of teacher
quality on students' performance (Carrell and West, 2010; Chetty, Friedman, and Rockoff,
2014; Figlio, Schapiro, and Soter, 2015). Academics and policy makers have investigated
several ways to increase teacher quality and, as a result, student performance, including
teacher salary or performance pay (Lavy, 2009; Muralidharan and Sundararaman, 2011);
training (Jacob and Lefgren, 2004; Harris and Sass, 2011); evaluation (Taylor and Tyler,
2012); and credentials (Clotfelter, Ladd, and Vigdor, 2009). Our paper contributes to this
literature by showing how technology can be used to increase teacher quality in underserved
locations. By letting the best teachers in the country connect remotely with students in rural
schools, technology allowed the Chinese government to increase the quality of education in
rural schools without relocating teachers. The results of our study suggest that CAL can be
an effective and relatively cheap solution to decrease the education gap between urban and
rural schools, which is common to both developed and developing counties.
    Third, this study is related to the strand of the literature that focuses on poverty and
inequality in China. Income inequality has been steadily rising in China (Zhu, 2012; Xie and
Zhou, 2014). In particular, Fan, Yi, and Zhang (2019) documented an increasing pattern in
intergenerational income persistence during the economic transition. To address this issue,
they argued that the Chinese government should continue removing rural­urban migration
barriers and implementing programs to subsidize the education of disadvantaged children.
Our paper complements this branch of the literature by suggesting that technology might
be a fundamental tool to reduce income inequality in China by closing the education gap
between urban and rural areas.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the institutional back-
ground. Section 3 discusses the data. Section 4 describes the empirical strategy. Section
5 presents the main results, while Section 6 tests their robustness. Section 7 includes an
analysis on the mechanisms behind the main results. Section 8 concludes.


2   Institutional Background

2.1 Low­Quality Education in Rural China
In China, urban and rural schools provide significantly different educational quality. Rural
schools have higher student­teacher ratios and poorer educational infrastructure. In 2000,
the average per-student spending was CNY 884 in rural secondary schools and CNY 1,700

                                              4
in urban secondary schools (Educational Statistics Yearbook of China). In addition, the
student­teacher ratio was 17.13 in rural schools and 12.43 in urban schools. Compared with
teachers in urban schools, teachers in rural schools tend to be older and less likely to hold a
college degree. Stricter budget constraints further limit opportunities for professional devel-
opment and continued training (Hannum, 1999; Brown and Park, 2002). In 2000, for example,
only 14.3% of teachers in rural secondary schools had a bachelor's degree, compared with
31.8% of teachers in urban schools (Educational Statistics Yearbook of China, 2000). Differ-
ences in school inputs translate into significant inequality of education attainment. According
to the 2000 census, in urban areas the average number of years of completed education was
9.8, compared to only 6.85 in rural locations. The percentage of individuals in urban areas
with a high school diploma and a college degree was, respectively, 3.5 times and 55.5 times
higher than the share of individuals in rural areas with the same level of education.
    Improving teacher quality in rural areas entails significant challenges.5 First, most teach-
ers have been reluctant to relocate to the poorly connected and economically depressed
areas of midwestern China, even if the government is willing to pay high subsidies and
special allowances.6 Second, many teachers who participated in these relocation programs
and stayed in a rural area for several semesters failed to teach at a satisfactory level.7 The
high incentives offered for relocation, in fact, might have attracted teachers who just wanted
to obtain extra credit for future promotion elsewhere instead of being motivated to help
students in rural schools.8 As a consequence, rural schools kept lagging behind urban schools
even as the Chinese government spent substantial resources and adopted different policies
to reduce the gap.


2.2 The Modern Distance Education Program
Rollout plan. Starting in September 2004, the Chinese Ministry of Education decided
to exploit modern technology to improve teacher quality and education outcomes in rural
schools. The resulting education policy, known as the "Modern Distance Education Program
in Rural China," gave primary and middle schools in rural areas access to broadband internet
and promoted the use of computers in their curricula. It is the "largest ICT project in the
world" to date (Yu and Wang, 2006; McQuaide, 2009), serving more than 100 million students
5
    https://web.archive.org/web/20201029155754/https://baijiahao.baidu.com/s?id=
    1653430257241026007&wfr=spider&for=pc
6
    Rural schools often have poor management and high teaching loads (Ai and Liu, 2008). Moreover, the
    living conditions in rural areas can be harsh, especially for teachers relocating from urban locations (Zhou
    and Wang, 2010).
7
    Xiao (2018); https://web.archive.org/web/20201117233825/http://news.sohu.com/2004/02/01/
    54/news218845459.shtml.
8
    A number of empirical studies have shown that monetary incentives have negative effects on an individual's
    prosocial behavior (for example, Frey and Oberholzer-Gee, 1997; Mellstr¨    om and Johannesson, 2008).


                                                        5
in 346,206 rural primary and middle schools and costing CNY 11.1 billion.9 Providing internet
access to rural schools required time to install satellite dishes and set up computer and
multimedia rooms. As a consequence, the full implementation took several years (Figure
1).10 Among 2,861 counties, 2,445 were covered by the program. Specifically, the program
reached 678 counties (G1, 23.7% ) in 2004, 893 counties (G2, 31.2% ) in 2005, 493 counties
(G3, 17.2% ) in 2006, and 380 counties (G4, 13.3% ) in 2007.11 In the remaining 416 counties
(G5), the government did not implement computer-assisted learning.12 We will explore this
gradual rollout in the empirical analysis.

The treatment bundle. The CAL program was based on three separate pedagogical
"modes" (Office of Modern Distance Education Project for China's Rural Primary and Mid-
dle Schools (2009) and Figure A1). First, it delivered 440,142 DVD-player sets, comprising
TVs and DVD players. These sets were used to play teaching CDs that contained lectures and
learning materials prepared by some of the best teachers in the country, as further explained
in Section 2.3. Second, the program installed 264,905 satellite receiving sets, comprising satel-
lite antennas, satellite TV equipment, computers, and other related devices. These satellite
sets allowed the Chinese government to deliver new lectures and learning materials through
the internet, instead of relying on the transfer of physical CDs. Moreover, it allowed local
teachers to use computers and the internet in preparation of their own lectures. Third, the
program built 40,858 computer classrooms, which included a network of computers and a
projector. In these computer rooms, students could follow from their own device the new
teaching materials prepared by the central government. Moreover, the computer rooms could
be used to introduce computer science in the curriculum of receiving schools.
    As planned, rural primary teaching points (small-scale rural schools) received only DVD-
player sets, rural primary schools received only DVD-player sets and satellite sets, while
rural middle schools received all three interventions (Wang, Zeng, and Wang, 2015).



9
   Most of the information regarding the policy comes from the official implementation plan and
   the 2007 final report of the Ministry of Education. They are available online at https://web.
   archive.org/web/20201109212237/http://old.moe.gov.cn//publicfiles/business/htmlfiles/
   moe/s3333/201001/xxgk_82052.html and https://web.archive.org/web/20201029160144/http:
   //www.moe.gov.cn/jyb_xwfb/xw_fbh/moe_2069/moe_2095/moe_2100/moe_1851/tnull_29185.html.
   Other valuable sources are Office of Modern Distance Education Project for China's Rural Primary and
   Middle Schools (2009) and Wang, Zeng, and Wang (2015).
10
   Appendix A.1 provides links to official sources with the full list of counties by implementation year.
11
   The implementation years refer to the school years. Therefore, 2004 refers to the school year starting in
   September 2004, and so forth. Moreover, the distribution of counties includes districts, which are geograph-
   ical subdivisions at the same administrative level.
12
   G5 counties are mostly located in coastal regions, where teachers from urban schools are willing to teach.
   Therefore, G5 counties were not supposed to receive the treatment.


                                                      6
Effect on pedagogy. In rural middle schools, the focus of this paper, the implementa-
tion of DVD-player sets, satellite sets, and computer rooms may have changed pedagogy in
multiple ways (Figure A3).
    First, it allowed rural students to watch lectures by high-quality teachers. The central
government, in fact, hired highly qualified teachers to record lectures and to prepare sup-
porting material, such as additional readings and interactive quizzes. Once deployed to rural
schools via satellite internet or physical CDs, these new lectures could be consumed by local
students in computer rooms, multimedia rooms, and regular classrooms. In these instances,
local teachers were in the room to solve technical issues and to ensure that students focused
on class-related activities. It is also worth noting that the CAL lectures were designed to
seamlessly be integrated in the standard curriculum of rural schools and not to be used as a
separate teaching aid.
    Second, the new technology may have helped improve the quality of lectures delivered by
local teachers. While preparing their lectures, rural-school teachers with internet access could
better research the topics covered by the syllabus. In addition, the introduction of multimedia
equipment could have allowed local teachers to enhance their lectures with visual aids.
    Third, the introduction of computer rooms allowed rural schools to add computer science
to the curriculum. This change may have helped students succeed in high school and in the
labor market.
    In Section 7, we will perform several analyses to assess the impact of these separate
channels on student achievements. The data indicate that access to lectures by high-quality
teachers was the main reason for the positive results of the CAL program.

Time allocated to CAL. The policy did not impose strict regulations regarding the
time allocated to computer-aided learning. Instead, it only required schools to make full use
of the new equipment and to evaluate the program annually. According to statistics from
the program administrators, most schools complied with this requirement (Office of Modern
Distance Education Project for China's Rural Primary and Middle Schools, 2009). The share
of schools using CAL equipment for less than five hours a week was equal to 1% for computer
rooms, 3% for satellite receiving stations, and 2% for DVD-player stations. Moreover, the
share of schools using CAL equipment for more than twenty hours a week was equal to 58%
for computer rooms, 22% for satellite receiving stations, and 33% for DVD-player stations
(Table A1).
    We can use these statistics on utilization to compute a lower bound of the number of
courses per week in which the average student was exposed to the equipment provided by
the CAL program. In the average rural middle school, a conservative estimate of the total




                                               7
number of weekly hours using CAL equipment is 49.7.13 Assuming that the mean number
of classes per school is ten and that each school had only one computer room, one satellite
set, and one DVD-player set, we can conclude that the average student was exposed to CAL
equipment for at least 4.97 hours, or 6.6 45-minute lectures per week.
    There are at least two reasons suggesting that this estimate is a lower bound of actual
exposure. First, the available statistics on school-wide utilization are censored at twenty hours
per week. It is plausible to assume that many schools utilized CAL equipment for longer.
Second, many schools might have had more than one computer room and DVD-player set.
In these cases, more than one class could have used CAL equipment contemporaneously.

Compliance. Anecdotal evidence from interviews in participating schools suggests that
students and teachers enjoyed these technological innovations. Students appreciated the op-
portunity to follow lectures by highly effective teachers, who would not normally work in
rural areas. Teachers and school principals liked the fact that technology contributed to
eliminating outdated teaching practices and improved the delivery of lectures.14
    Although there are not precise statistics on the number of schools reached by the program,
several pieces of evidence suggest that the compliance rate was high. First, the Chinese
central government greatly emphasized the importance of the CAL program (McQuaide,
2009). This fact alone should have been sufficient to induce most local governments and
schools to embrace the program. Second, the central government and Ministry of Education
organized annual evaluations and inspections to ensure compliance (Yu and Wang, 2006). The
inspectors went to each participating school to check the installation of satellite dishes and
computer rooms, to measure the use of new equipment, and to collect teachers' and students'
feedback (Figure A4). Third, to ensure compliance, at least one teacher in each rural school
was required to participate in a training program either in Beijing, in the provincial capital, or
directly in the participating schools. In total, more than 800,000 rural teachers were trained.15
Fourth, in 2007, the government indicated that the CAL program reached its goals.16 Ms.
Xiaoya Chen, the Vice Minister of Education, stated that the central and local governments
"completed the project construction tasks on time." Moreover, "the implementation of the
project has enabled more than 100 million rural primary and middle school students to
access high-quality educational resources." The large number of students reached by the
CAL program suggests that most schools complied with the original plan of the central

13
   Appendix A.2 provides further details on the calculation of this estimate.
14
   Appendix A.3 provides more information about these reports, including direct quotations.
15
   https://web.archive.org/web/20201029160144/http://www.moe.gov.cn/jyb_xwfb/xw_fbh/moe_
   2069/moe_2095/moe_2100/moe_1851/tnull_29185.html
16
   https://web.archive.org/web/20201029160144/http://www.moe.gov.cn/jyb_xwfb/xw_fbh/moe_
   2069/moe_2095/moe_2100/moe_1851/tnull_29185.html


                                                8
government. Fifth, the total costs of the program (CNY 11.1 billion) were close to the planned
expenses (CNY 10 billion), suggesting that the actual implementation closely followed the
original plan.


2.3 Selection of High-Quality Teachers for the Program
As part of the "Modern Distance Education Program in Rural China," the Ministry of
Education selected excellent teachers to deliver lectures and record them on CDs, which
were then distributed to rural schools in treated cities. Successful candidates for the program
had to satisfy several criteria. First, they needed an excellent educational background: all
selected teachers held a bachelor's degree and most held a master's degree. Second, they had
extensive teaching experience, usually more than 10 years. Third, they held either the senior
or super senior title in the teaching profession.17
    The chosen candidates were usually the most qualified teachers from the most selective
primary and secondary schools in urban China. These experienced and successful teachers
were asked to produce high-quality content tailored for the skill level of students in rural
schools. For example, teachers delivered their lectures at a slow pace and repeated difficult
content several times to ensure that rural students--who typically have weaker academic
backgrounds--could fully understand and keep up with the content.18 Moreover, the Ministry
of Education routinely consulted with expert senior teachers, usually employed by high-
quality urban schools or by the Ministry of Education itself, to select the best lectures and
distribute them to rural schools. To further ensure the high quality of recorded lectures,
the Ministry of Education regularly reviewed and updated the lectures and elicited rural
students' and teachers' feedback.
    As a result of this strict selection process, there are substantial differences between teach-
ers in traditional classrooms and teachers hired to produce the lectures for the CAL program.
Among traditional teachers in rural secondary schools, only 14.3% obtained a bachelor's de-
gree, and 2.3% reached the title of senior professional (Educational Statistics Yearbook of
China, 2000). In contrast, all teachers in the CAL program obtained a bachelor's degree and
earned at least the senior title. The difference in teacher quality is substantial and should
reflect a large divergence in value added. For example, Harris and Sass (2011) find that
middle-school teachers with an advanced degree increase student grades by 0.778 additional
score points, compared with other teachers. Similarly, Jacob and Lefgren (2008) find that
17
   In China, there are several professional titles for teachers: super senior title, senior title, medium-grade
   title, junior title, and nonprofessional title.
18
   The lectures covered all the disciplines in the middle-school curriculum and were conducted in Mandarin,
   the official language in most Chinese schools (with the exception of minority schools) since 1986. We found
   no evidence in local news and media reports that teachers or students in rural schools complained about
   the online lectures being recorded in Mandarin.


                                                      9
teachers with a master's degree have students who score roughly 0.11 higher than students
taught by other teachers.19


3       Data

3.1 2014 China Family Panel Studies
Our analysis relies primarily on the 2014 China Family Panel Studies (CFPS), a nationally
representative sample of Chinese communities, families, and individuals. CFPS was launched
in 2010 by the Institute of Social Science Survey of Peking University. This large-scale survey
covers 645 communities in 25 designated provinces (out of 34 total provincial units), 14,798
households, 33,600 adults, and 8,990 children.
    Due to its large sample size and advanced sampling design, the CFPS survey is represen-
tative of Chinese individuals, families, and communities. Xu and Xie (2015) show that the
numerous socioeconomic and demographic variables in the CFPS dataset--for example, age,
gender, educational attainment, earnings, and health--line up well with the census data.
We can therefore generalize the results obtained using the CFPS survey data to all Chinese
rural students. Compared with the sample of the national census that the government made
available to researchers, the CFPS has fewer observations but more depth of information. In
addition to employing common measures of academic and labor-market achievements, our
analysis can focus on cognitive ability, noncognitive skills, and internet usage. We can use
these variables to test the impact of the CAL program on student outcomes outside of the
classroom. Another advantage is that CFPS allows us to precisely reconstruct when each
individual in the sample was first reached by computer-aided learning. Specifically, CFPS
asks the location of each individual at birth, at age 3, and at age 12. This last piece of
information, location during middle school, is fundamental to assigning each individual to
the correct treatment group. Any other available dataset, including the national census,
would include only the birthplace or the current location and would generate significant
measurement error in the presence of migration before or after the age of 12.
    In the analysis, we restrict the CFPS dataset in two ways. First, we select only individuals
who lived in rural areas at age 12, because the program targeted exclusively rural schools.
Second, we select cohorts born between 1977 and 1994. We elected to start in 1977 because the
Cultural Revolution, which negatively affected the Chinese education system and society at
large, ended in October 1976. We also show that the results are robust to alternative choices
19
     Most of the literature on value added and teachers' education focuses on whether teachers hold a master's
     degree (compared to those with a bachelor's degree). In our setting, however, the potential difference in
     value added between CAL and rural teachers is likely larger. Most rural teachers completed at most high
     school or vocational school (12­13 years of education), while all CAL teachers obtained at least a college
     degree (16 years or more of education).


                                                       10
for the age groups included in the sample. The resulting sample includes 4,996 individuals.


3.2 Outcome Variables
In the analysis, we focus on four main types of outcomes: education achievement, labor-
market performance, internet usage, and noncognitive skills.
    For the first category of outcome variables, our main academic output is the years of
completed education. While the CAL literature mostly focuses on short-term test scores,
years of education allow us to objectively measure the effect of technology beyond the first
months after the provision of the treatment. We also know whether respondents received
a middle-school diploma, a high-school diploma, or a college degree. In addition, we know
whether individuals in the sample have invested in other forms of education and training that
did not lead to a formal degree.20 Besides measuring past formal and informal education,
we can evaluate the respondents' cognitive abilities at the time of the survey (2014). The
CFPS, in fact, includes a math and a Chinese test, both designed by the CFPS data center
and administered in person at the time of the survey (Appendix B.1). On the math test,
the respondents were required to solve a set of math questions, including basic arithmetic
operations, exponents, logarithms, permutations, and combination questions. The math score
depends on the number of questions that were answered correctly. On the Chinese test, the
respondents were required to read a set of Chinese characters. The final score depends on
the number and accuracy of the characters that each individual could read. For ease of
interpretation, we standardize the scores to have mean equal to 0 and standard deviation
equal to 1.
    The second category measures labor-market performance. From the CFPS, we know
the respondents' workforce participation, their annual earnings, and their occupations. In
addition, we match occupations to information on their skill content from U.S. O*NET
data.21 We can then categorize different jobs based on their reliance on cognitive and manual
skills.
    A third category measures how often and for what reasons respondents access the in-
ternet. Specifically, we know (1) whether respondents use the internet, and (2) how often
respondents use the internet for work or socializing. We can therefore test whether computer-
aided learning increased the probability of regularly using the internet several years after the
policy implementation.

20
   Informal education in China includes any form of postsecondary training that does not lead to a degree or
   certificate, as well as secondary vocational training. It is a popular education choice. In 2017, 54.6 million
   Chinese were enrolled in informal education. https://web.archive.org/web/20201029162658/http://
   www.moe.gov.cn/s78/A03/moe_560/jytjsj_2017/qg/201808/t20180808_344697.html
21
   http://www.onetonline.org/


                                                       11
     A fourth category includes noncognitive outcomes. There is growing evidence showing
that noncognitive skills are important traits for long-term life success (Heckman and Ru-
binstein, 2001; Bertrand and Pan, 2013). In our analysis, we leverage several questions in
the CFPS on self-reported levels of mental stress, social interactions, and satisfaction about
life.22 Specifically, three questions ask respondents about their level of life satisfaction. In-
dividuals evaluated (1) the quantity of relationships with others, (2) the quality of their
relationships, and (3) their happiness. Higher values identify higher levels of life satisfaction.
Three additional questions ask individuals about their degree of mental stress. Respondents
reported how often they felt (1) depressed, (2) nervous, and (3) incapable of completing
tasks. Higher values in these variables identify lower levels of mental stress. Previous studies
in economics have used similar measurements of noncognitive outcomes (for example, Lavy
and Schlosser, 2011; Gong, Lu, and Song, 2018).23
     Although our data rely primarily on the 2014 wave of CFPS, we use observations from
the 2010 wave to fill in missing values in the education and labor-market outcomes.24 Table
1 lists the summary statistics of all available variables for the whole sample (columns 1
and 2), for cohorts who did not experience computer-assisted learning (too old or in areas
without CAL; columns 3 and 4), and for cohorts exposed to the program (columns 5 and
6).25 These statistics provide two main insights. First, most demographic characteristics are
balanced between CAL and non-CAL cohorts.26 In the rest of the analysis, we will provide
further evidence showing that cohorts included in the program were not different at baseline
from cohorts who were not exposed to computer-assisted learning. Second, most outcomes
show substantial improvements for CAL cohorts. Average completed education, for example,
is 9.07 years among non-CAL individuals and 10.34 years among CAL individuals. In the
rest of the analysis, we will show that these initial results are robust to the utilization of
more-sophisticated techniques.




22
   We list all relevant questions in Appendix B.2.
23
   We standardized the variables measuring noncognitive skills and frequency of internet use to have mean
   equal to 0 and standard deviation equal to 1.
24
   In the case of variables on internet usage and noncognitive skills, we rely on the 2014 wave only because
   the questionnaire is not consistent across years (Table E1).
25
   For simplicity, we will refer to untreated cohorts as "non-CAL cohorts" and to treated cohorts as "CAL
   cohorts."
26
   The only clear exception is age, which is lower among treated cohorts by construction. Treated cohorts, in
   fact, were at most 14 years old when computer-assisted learning was implemented in their county.


                                                     12
4   Empirical Strategy

4.1 Main Specifications
To identify the effect of CAL on student outcomes, we exploit both time and geographical
variation in the implementation of the education reform. Along the time dimension, we
compare cohorts who were at most 14 years old at the time of the policy implementation
to cohorts who were at least 15 years old. The first group attended middle school after the
reform and was exposed to computer-assisted learning, while the second group was either
already attending a higher grade or was in the labor market when the policy went into
effect. Along the geographical dimension, we instead exploit the staggered implementation
in different counties across four years. As described in Section 2.2, the program reached 678
counties (G1) in 2004, 893 counties (G2) in 2005, 493 counties (G3) in 2006, and 380 counties
(G4) in 2007. In addition, it was not implemented in 416 counties (G5).
    As a practical example of our identification strategy, we can compare education and
labor outcomes between individuals born in 1990 in Jinzhai county and individuals born in
the same year in Taihu county. The former group attended middle school after the policy
implementation in 2004 and was exposed to CAL. In contrast, the latter group had already
completed middle school when the program reached Taihu in 2006. Comparing the long-
term outcomes of these two groups of individuals, however, does not isolate the effect of
the program. If residents of Jinzhai, for example, tend to always complete more years of
education, a single cross-county comparison could lead to biased estimates for the effect
of the CAL reform. In addition to comparing outcomes along the first dimension, we can
therefore compare the outcomes of individuals not exposed to the policy in either county
(for example, born in 1988). The differences in outcomes between the two groups capture
cross-county variation that is constant across cohorts. By subtracting this last result from
the first comparison, we can isolate the effect of CAL.
    We estimate the following difference-in-differences specifications:

                                                         
         Yibc =  +  · Treatbc + Wibc ·  + c + b + Polc · Treatbc ·  + c · tb + ibc ,       (1)

where the unit of observation is an individual i who was born in year b and was living
in a rural part of county c at the age of 12. The dependent variable Yibc measures several
outcomes related to education, labor-market performance, internet usage, and noncognitive
skills. The regressor of interest Treatbc indicates the treatment status for a given county
and birth cohort. It is 1 for cohorts that attended middle school after the implementation
                                                
of the reform in their county. The matrix Wibc is a set of individual controls: gender, an
indicator variable for minority groups, an indicator for the presence of siblings, and paternal


                                              13
education level (three dummy variables for junior high, high school, and college or more).
                                                                                                 
The controls c and b are county and birth-cohort fixed effects, respectively. The matrix Polc
controls for the implementation of other education reforms in rural counties at the turn of the
twenty-first century. Specifically, it takes into account a bundle of policies to increase middle-
school completion rates in western counties (captured by a dummy for western counties), a
reform that decreased the cost of compulsory education in some rural provinces27 (captured
by a dummy identifying targeted provinces), the construction of rural boarding schools28
(captured by a dummy identifying 372 counties that were designated to receive the newly
built boarding schools), and the consolidation of rural schools29 (captured by the county-level
percentage decrease in the number of schools between 2000 and 2007). All these variables are
interacted with the main treatment Treatbc to check whether the effects of these concurrent
policies coincided with the timing of the CAL reform. We also include a county-specific linear
time trend (c · tb ) to control for underlying linear trends in the outcomes that differ across
counties. To address the potential serial correlation and heteroscedasticity, we cluster the
standard errors at the county level.
    The coefficient  measures the intent-to-treat effect of the program on outcome Yibc .30
The identifying assumption underlying the difference-in-differences specification is that out-
comes would have followed similar cross-cohort trends between counties in different treatment
groups (counties treated at different times or never treated) had they not been affected by
the CAL implementation. In this regard, a major concern is that treated counties might
not have been randomly selected and, as a consequence, that the post-reform divergence in
outcomes might be the result of other unobserved factors, not of education technology. In
the next sections, we address this issue and other threats to identification.


4.2 Differences between Counties
Part of our identification strategy exploits the staggered implementation of the CAL pro-
gram. In this section, we study how counties that received CAL in different years differ

27
   Xiao, Li, and Zhao, 2017.
28
   Luo et al., 2009; https://web.archive.org/web/20201029170527/http://www.moe.gov.cn/jyb_xxgk/
   gk_gbgg/moe_0/moe_1/moe_2/tnull_5409.html.
29
   Liu et al., 2010; Mo et al., 2012; https://web.archive.org/web/20201029170832/http://www.gov.cn/
   gongbao/content/2001/content_60920.htm.
30
   The analysis is an intent-to-treat for two reasons. First, the CFPS does not provide information on the
   actual year of completion of middle school for the respondents. We therefore use their birth cohort to
   determine whether they were exposed to the policy. Second, even though it stated multiple times that the
   implementation had been completed successfully and according to plan, the government did not release
   information on the program compliance rate by county. We therefore assume that all rural schools in a
   county received the program during the planned implementation year. Section 6 provides several tests of
   these assumptions.


                                                    14
in terms of observable characteristics at baseline. This analysis is important because it
is clear that the Chinese government did not pick random areas to receive the education
policy. Official documents provide several insights on the selection process.31 In particular,
the government gave priority to counties in midwestern provinces, with a larger share of
rural population and poorer internet and communication infrastructure. We collected sev-
eral county-level variables measured in 2002 (China County Statistical Yearbook), two years
before the program implementation (Table 2), including the criteria that the government
used in the selection of counties. We use this dataset to conduct an array of balancing tests
between CAL and non-CAL locations.32
    We find three main results. First, as expected, the selection criteria are strong predictors
of participation in the CAL program. Compared with non-CAL areas (G5), CAL counties
(G1 to G4) were 39% more likely to be located in midwestern China and had 40% more
rural residents, 84% fewer cellphone users, 91% fewer internet users, 45% fewer post offices,
and 67% fewer telephone users (Table 2, panel A, column 6).
    Second, the selection criteria capture most of the baseline differences between CAL and
non-CAL counties. Without controlling for selection criteria, 19 out of 23 variables show sta-
tistically significant differences between CAL and non-CAL areas (Table 2, panel B, column
6). Most of these unconditional means suggest that CAL counties were less economically
developed than non-CAL counties at baseline. After controlling for the selection criteria,
however, most estimates are economically small and only two variables still indicate a statis-
tically significant difference between CAL and non-CAL locations (Table 2, panel B, column
7). In the case of average wages, for example, the unconditional difference is 77% (lower
wages in CAL counties), while the conditional difference is only 5% (lower wages in CAL
counties) and not statistically significant.
    Third, CAL counties that received the education technology in different years were similar
in terms of baseline characteristics (Table E2). Most of the available variables are balanced
between G1 (CAL from 2004), G2 (CAL from 2005), G3 (CAL from 2006), and G4 loca-
tions (CAL from 2007). Out of 116 balancing checks, most have small magnitude and only
five instances reveal statistically significant differences at the 5% level. Official government
guidelines suggested that CAL implementation should start in locations with better com-
munication infrastructure in order to ensure a smoother process. The data, however, does
not reveal large differences in communication infrastructures in 2002 between counties that

31
   "Pilot work plan for modern distance education project in rural primary and secondary
   schools," Ministry of Education, National Development and Reform Commission, and Min-
   istry of Finance, 2003, https://web.archive.org/web/20201029171912/http://old.moe.gov.cn/
   /publicfiles/business/htmlfiles/moe/moe_356/200409/3886.html.
32
   These variables include both urban and rural areas. County-level statistics just for rural areas are not
   available.


                                                    15
received CAL early (G1 and G2) and counties that received CAL later (G3 and G4) (Table
E3).
    In addition to analyzing baseline differences, we use CFPS data to estimate linear and
nonlinear trends in outcomes across cohorts that preceded the implementation of CAL tech-
nology (those born between 1977 and 1988). This analysis allows us to evaluate whether
individuals in CAL and non-CAL counties were drifting apart in terms of education and
labor-market outcomes even before the implementation of the program. We estimate three
different types of pre-reform trends interacted with a dummy for G5 counties: linear trends
in birth cohorts (Table 3, panel A), quadratic trends (Table 3, panel B), and cubic trends
(Table 3, panel C).33 The results indicate the lack of significant pre-reform trends in outcomes
between CAL and non-CAL counties. A one-year age difference in birth cohorts, for example,
predicts only 0.016 additional years of education in non-CAL locations, a 0.1% increase from
the mean (Table 3, panel A, column 1). Similarly, a one-year age difference predicts lower
math skills by only 0.002 (Table 3, panel A, column 2). The estimation of quadratic and
cubic trends confirms these findings.34
    These findings affect the rest of our analysis in two ways. First, we acknowledge that CAL
and non-CAL counties differed at baseline. We therefore include county-specific linear trends
in all our specifications. Second, in addition to using all counties available in the CFPS, we
show the effect of education technology using only observations from CAL locations, which
were similar in terms of observable characteristics before the policy implementation.


4.3 Differences between Cohorts
A second source of variation in our analysis comes from differences in the exposure to CAL
across birth cohorts. CAL cohorts were, at most, age 14 at the time of the policy implemen-
tation in their county, while non-CAL cohorts were either older or in non-CAL locations. In
this section, we use CFPS data to show how CAL and non-CAL cohorts differ in terms of
demographics.
    Overall, the data indicate that cohorts with different exposure to CAL have similar
demographic characteristics (Table E5, column 1). Out of 17 variables, only 3 indicate a
statistically significant difference. In addition to not being statistically different from zero,
most of the other coefficients are also small in magnitude. CAL individuals, for example,
are only 0.6% less likely to be male and 1.5% less likely to be part of a minority group,
and they have on average 0.07 more siblings. CAL and non-CAL cohorts also have similar

                                                                                                         
33
   All these specifications also include cohort fixed effects, county fixed effects, and the same set Wibc of
   individual controls.
34
   There is no evidence of positive and significant pre-reform trends in treated counties even if we set up the
   dataset as an event study (Table E4).


                                                      16
distributions of paternal and maternal education. These results are confirmed if we limit the
sample to only individuals from CAL counties (G1 to G4 locations; Table E5, column 5).


5       Empirical Findings

5.1 Event Studies
We start the analysis by showing the dynamic effect of the CAL implementation. Specifically,
we estimate all the lags and leads of the effects of the program with the following event study
specification:

                                           4
                                                             
                            Yibc =  +           k · Dk + Wibc ·  + c + b + ibc .                            (2)
                                        k=-12

The dummy variables Dk are equal to 1 in areas with CAL k years before or after the reform,
and equal to 0 otherwise. The event periods range from -13 for cohorts who were 27 years
old at the time of the policy implementation to 4 for cohorts who were 10 years old. The
reference group (excluded category) is k =-13. As a result, the parameters of interest identify
the effects of CAL k years following or preceding its implementation, relative to the earliest
event period in the sample.
    Most outcomes show a similar pattern (Figure 2). Among cohorts who were too old to
benefit from CAL, the coefficients are not statistically different from zero and do not generate
noticeable trends across cohorts. The estimates show a discontinuity starting from the first
cohort exposed to CAL (14 years old). The post-reform effects indicate an improvement in
the education and labor-market outcomes. Relative to individuals who were 27 at the time
of the policy, for example, completed education increased by 1.20 years among 14-year-olds,
by 1.21 years among 13-year-olds, by 1.11 years among 12-year-olds, by 1.62 years among 11-
year-olds, and by 1.61 years among 10-year-olds. The estimates are smaller and insignificant
for pre-reform cohorts: completed education increased by 0.31 years among 15-year-olds, by
0.44 years among 16-year-olds, and by 0.12 years among 17-year-olds (Figure 2, panel A).35
    The CFPS does not provide information on the actual year of completion of middle school
for each respondent. The actual exposure to the program could be different from the one
imputed by birth year if a student either enrolled in school before the standard age, skipped
grades, or repeated grades before completing middle school. To address this form of mea-
surement bias, we propose a slight variation to the event study described above. The cohorts

35
     In this analysis, individuals from non-CAL counties (G5) are assigned to different periods as if CAL had
     been implemented in the G5 locations starting in 2004, together with the first batch of counties (G1). This
     assumption on the distribution of non-CAL individuals across event periods, however, does not affect the
     results (Figure E2 for completed education).


                                                        17
who are at higher risk of being mislabeled are those closer to the policy implementation.
We therefore drop from the estimating sample those who were age 14 (period 0), 15 (period
-1) and 16 (period -2) at the time of the reform (Figure E1). All outcomes show a clear
discontinuity after the introduction of CAL.36
    The event studies indicate that the effect of the program does not change with exposure
duration to CAL. The coefficients estimated on 14 years old, treated for only 1 year, are
smaller but not statistically different from the coefficients estimated on 11 or 10 years old,
treated for the whole duration of middle school. The lack of a strong dose response might
speak to the mechanism through which the program affected student outcomes. Specifi-
cally, CAL lectures taught rural students more-effective learning methodologies, compared
to the more-rudimentary ones employed by local teachers.37 As an example, unlike tradi-
tional lectures, CAL recorded Chinese lectures did not force memorization of traditional
poems, focused on explaining their content, taught students how to search for the meaning
of unknown words, and included illustrations and other audiovisual elements. These features
taught students a general approach to tackle other poems and written texts. The benefits
of learning a better studying method can be substantial after the first exposure (the first
CAL year) and only marginal with further repetitions (additional CAL years).38 Moreover,
it should be noted that our analysis uses long-run variables and quite general cognitive skills.
We might have been able to detect a stronger dose response if we had focused on short-term
education achievements, such as in-class test scores, which build upon knowledge learned
during previous school years. Finally, the lack of a dose response might reflect the fact that
schools were using CAL recorded lectures more intensely in higher grades in order to prepare
students for the high-stake high-school entry exam.39


5.2 Effect of CAL on Academic Achievement
After estimating event studies, we move to the analysis of the main difference-in-differences
specification. These regressions confirm that individuals exposed to computer-assisted learn-
36
   In addition to event studies, we can estimate the main equation (1) by dropping from the sample counties
   in the bottom decile of average wage in 2002. In less-developed counties, in fact, the Chinese compulsory
   education law allows student to postpone enrollment (https://web.archive.org/web/20200328143812/
   http://www.npc.gov.cn/wxzl/gongbao/2000-12/06/content_5004469.htm). Estimating the analysis
   on richer counties does not affect the results, suggesting that measurement error in exposure to the policy
   is not a major source of bias (Table E6).
37
   This feature of the CAL lectures was also discussed in the popular press (Gong, 2005).
38
   Specifically, learning a new studying method does not necessarily build on previous knowledge, while
   learning math or Chinese in a given grade usually depends on notions learned during previous school
   years.
39
   Part of the CAL teaching materials included advice on how to prepare a study plan for an examina-
   tion (Feng and Cao, 2007). This type of information would have been particularly useful for more-senior
   students.


                                                     18
ing had improved education outcomes in the long run (Table 4, panel A). Relative to non-
CAL individuals, CAL cohorts completed 0.85 additional years of education. Given that the
average years of education in the sample are 9.12, this estimate indicates a 9.3% increase in
formal schooling. Increased years of schooling translated into a 7.2% higher probability of
successfully completing middle school.40
    In addition to enabling us to look at the impact on schooling, the CFPS allows us to
measure changes in cognitive skills at the time of the survey, seven to ten years after the
implementation of the program. CAL individuals' scores were on average 0.18 higher in
math and 0.23 higher in Chinese. These increases in the CFPS test scores can explain 72%
of the 0.85 additional years of education, suggesting that the test scores are able to reflect
most of the observed increase in formal education.41
    Finally, CAL individuals were 6.6% more likely to have participated in informal studies
or training programs not leading to a degree. However, this coefficient is not statistically
significant, suggesting that the policy primarily influenced formal academic achievements.
    It can be instructive to compare these results with the findings in the literature. Most
of the existing studies share two characteristics. First, they focus on test scores attained in
the months immediately following the implementation of education technology. Second, they
tend to focus on math tests. Our results show that the positive effects of the CAL program
lasted for at least ten years after the exposure to education technology, and that they are
not restricted to test scores attained in the classroom.


5.3 Effect of CAL on Labor-Market Outcomes
In addition to allowing us to measure the impact on academic achievement, our setting
provides an opportunity to study the effect of CAL on labor-market outcomes because we
observe individuals several years after the reform (Table 4, panel B).
    Overall, we do observe an increase in labor-market participation, albeit imprecisely es-
timated. At the time of the survey, participation in the labor force of CAL individuals was
6.3% higher in the full sample with all counties (not statistically significant) and 9.6% higher
in the restricted sample with only treated counties (significant at the 5% level). Conditional
on being part of the labor force, CAL individuals earned more (+59%) and were employed
in jobs that relied more on cognitive abilities (+0.28 ) and less on manual skills (-0.27 ).
Moreover, they were 4.8% less likely (equal to a 24% decrease from the mean) to work as

40
   Moreover, Table E7 shows that the main findings are robust to computing p-values adjusted for multiple
   hypothesis tests.
41
   To compute this percentage, we regressed years of education on math and Chinese test scores, controlling for
   birth cohort and county fixed effects. This sample includes non-CAL individuals exclusively. The estimated
   coefficient of the math test score is 2.56, while the estimated coefficient of the Chinese test score is 0.63.


                                                       19
farmers, one of the most common entry-level jobs in rural counties.
    Next, we investigate the relationship between education and earnings. According to the
meta-analysis by Churchill and Mishra (2018) using data from 59 empirical studies on China,
one additional year of education in China increases earnings by 20%. Based on this estimate,
0.85 additional years of education can explain 34% of the observed increase in earnings
((0.85  0.1831)/0.463). This result suggests that the increase in human capital associated
with the CAL reform generated high returns in the labor market, at least compared to the
education policies considered by Churchill and Mishra (2018).
    We delve deeper into these initial findings by decomposing the total earnings effect
into an across-occupation component, across-migration status, and a within-occupation-and-
migration component (more details in Appendix C). In particular, the earning premium may
arise because CAL education increased individuals' likelihood to work in well-paid occupa-
tions, reduced the barrier to migration from rural to urban areas, or increased productivity in
the same occupation and geographical area. The results from this decomposition analysis are
shown in Table E8. The dependent variable is the logged average earnings in the correspond-
ing occupation or migration status in columns 1 and 2, and the logged earnings premium
within each occupation and migration status in column 3. CAL individuals are employed
in occupations with 15.5% higher average earnings. CAL individuals earn 1.3% more due
to the fact that they are more likely to migrate from rural to urban areas. Moreover, CAL
individuals earn on average 29.5% more within each occupation and migration status. The
across-occupation, across-migration, and within-occupation-and-migration channels, then,
can explain 33%, 3%, and 64% of the total effect on earnings, respectively.
    In conclusion, these results suggest that the exposure to CAL in middle schools substan-
tially improved labor-market outcomes by increasing the likelihood of being employed in a
higher-paying job (close to 1/3 of the total effect) and by increasing productivity within a
given occupation (2/3 of the total effect). If we focus on just the productivity-enhancing
component, the earnings effect is close to a 30% increase. This effect size is large but consis-
tent with the fact that the Chinese labor market experienced a widespread computerization
over the last decade.42 A larger share of jobs became dependent on computer skills, and CAL
students might have been readier for this transition.


5.4 Effect of CAL on Computer and Internet Usage
In this section, we examine the effect of CAL on computer and internet use in the long run
(Table 4, panel C). We exploit a set of questions from the survey that asked respondents

42
     Specifically, the inflation-adjusted price of a computer declined by 60% from 1995 to 2015, while ICT
     investments experienced a 9% annual growth rate (CCW Research group, https://web.archive.org/
     web/20201029173830/http://www.edu.cn/html/info/10plan/).


                                                     20
how frequently they use the internet for different purposes. CAL individuals were 8.2% more
likely to use the internet. Considering that 54% of the sample had internet access in 2014, this
coefficient indicates a 15% increase from the baseline. Similarly, the frequency of computer
use among CAL individuals was 0.28 higher for work-related reasons and 0.17 higher for
social networking.
    These findings are in line with previous evidence of a positive effect of computer-assisted
learning on student computer skills, as reported, for example, by Angrist and Lavy (2002),
Fairlie and Robinson (2013), and Beuermann et al. (2015).43 Our results contribute to these
findings by showing that increased computer use persists during adulthood and is applied to
a wider range of activities, such as work-related tasks.


5.5 Effect of CAL on Noncognitive Outcomes
Here, we examine the effect of CAL on long-run, self-reported noncognitive outcomes. Over-
all, CAL is associated with worse noncognitive traits, but the effects are imprecisely estimated
(Table 4, panel D). Individuals exposed to CAL were less satisfied about their lives (-0.04 ,
but not statistically significant) and less likely to be happy (-0.18 , but not statistically
significant). Moreover, they were more likely to be anxious (-0.17 , significant at the 10%
level) and nervous (-0.24 , significant at the 10% level).44
     Overall, our findings suggest that exposure to CAL in middle school is associated with a
mildly negative, albeit noisy, effect on noncognitive skills. The large amount of noise in these
estimates might indicate the presence of opposing forces. On the one hand, recent findings
show a positive relationship between teacher quality and students' noncognitive outcomes
(Jackson, 2018). On the other hand, the medical literature has emphasized that intensive
computer use at work is associated with higher levels of stress (Kraut et al., 1998; Thom´    ee,
H¨arenstam, and Hagberg, 2012; Kim et al., 2016). Although this setting does not allow us to
further explore different mechanisms, the results indicate that further research on this topic
is warranted.




43
   Previous studies have highlighted how increased computer skills can have unintended consequences on
   academic achievement in the short term. Tech-savvy students with access to the internet might increase
   the time dedicated to leisure, such as playing video games, at the expense of studying. Our setting,
   however, is different, because rural students were unlikely to have access to the internet outside of school
   for noninstructional purposes.
44
   High values in the noncognitive variables identify better outcomes: higher levels of life satisfaction and less
   anxiety.


                                                       21
5.6 The Reduction of the Rural­Urban Gap
The CFPS data indicate that there were stark differences between urban and rural areas
before the CAL implementation. On average, individuals living in rural areas had 4.1 fewer
schooling years (9.09 vs. 13.22), earned 80% less, and received a score 0.84 lower on the math
test and 0.62 lower on the Chinese test (Table E9, column 3). We then apply our estimated
effects of CAL (the estimates from Table 4) to the average outcomes of individuals living in
rural areas. We divide this estimated improvement in outcomes by the baseline rural­urban
gap in order to quantify its reduction. Our findings suggest that the CAL program drove
a significant reduction in the Chinese rural­urban economic gap. In particular, we estimate
that CAL reduced the gap in schooling years by 21%, in earnings by 78%, in math skills by
22%, and in Chinese skills by 37% (Table E9, column 5).45
    The CAL program obtained these results with relatively small costs per student. Accord-
ing to official data released by the government at the end of 2007, the CAL program cost
CNY 11.1 billion and reached more than 100 million students in rural primary and secondary
schools.46 Therefore, the program had a direct cost per student of at most CNY 111 or USD
17.47 This cost figure is substantially below our estimate of the individual increase in earnings
discounted over the life cycle, which is equal to CNY 42,995 or USD 6,432 (Appendix D for
more details).


6    Robustness Checks

Overall, our analysis indicates a positive effect of CAL on a wide variety of outcomes, ranging
from education achievements and labor-market choices to internet usage. In this subsection,
we provide a battery of robustness checks that reinforce these findings.

Only CAL counties. County-level data showed that CAL and non-CAL areas differed at
baseline, while CAL areas shared similar characteristics. These findings indicated that, while
inclusion in the program was correlated with observables, the implementation order among
CAL counties was not. In this section, we further show that our results do not depend on the
presence of individuals from non-CAL counties in the control group. We can, in fact, estimate
the main specifications using only observations from CAL respondents (Table 4, columns 5

45
   These estimates might be an understatement of the true benefits of the policy because our data from 2014
   do not allow us to compute the effect on labor-market outcomes for students who were exposed to CAL
   in primary school.
46
   https://web.archive.org/web/20201029160144/http://www.moe.gov.cn/jyb_xwfb/xw_fbh/moe_
   2069/moe_2095/moe_2100/moe_1851/tnull_29185.html. The exact number of students reached by the
   program is not available.
47
   The conversion uses the exchange rate available on 10/22/2020.


                                                    22
to 8). For most outcomes, the coefficients obtained with this restricted sample are close in
magnitude to the coefficients estimated on the full sample. The standard errors, however,
tend to be slightly larger due to the smaller number of observations. Completed education,
for example, increased by 0.85 years among individuals exposed to CAL in the baseline
sample (Table 4, column 1) and by 0.75 years in the restricted sample (Table 4, column 5).
Similarly, math skills increased by 0.18 in both the full and the restricted samples.

Internet use outside of rural schools. Although it is possible that the CAL program
increased internet use outside of rural schools, it is unlikely that this channel confounds
our findings. First, the policy installed the satellite receiving systems, necessary to receive
broadband internet, as well as computers and other multimedia equipment, only in the
targeted schools. Other local institutions, private firms, and households would have needed
to buy a satellite dish to access the internet both before and after the program. Second,
even if some spillover exists--for example, if CAL led to an increase in the internet speed
in the treated regions--few Chinese families could have benefited from it. In fact, only 4.8%
of households in rural China owned a computer in 2006.48 Third, we exploit the Annual
Survey of Industrial Firms (ASIF) between 2002 and 2007 to examine the effects of the CAL
program on firms' outcomes, such as TFP, profits, and value added. If the use of broadband
internet had spillover effects in the local economies, we should observe some changes in
firm behavior (Hjort and Poulsen, 2019). In the Chinese case, however, the effects of CAL
across all outcomes are economically small and statistically insignificant, indicating that the
program had no effect on firm performance (Table E10).

Changes to the ITT specification. Our results are robust to changes in the main ITT
specification. First, our treatment variable is based on the county-level implementation plan
published by the government in 2004. However, our results hold if we compute exposure to
the CAL reform using the prior plan at the level of prefectures, the Chinese administrative
level above counties (Table E11, panel A).49 Second, a few counties might have completed the
implementation of the CAL reform earlier than planned, leading to possible measurement
error in the treatment variable. Our results are robust to dropping these areas from the
sample (Table E11, panel B). Third, in the original plan, some counties in the Shandong
province were not supposed to receive any CAL equipment, but a report indicates that all

48
   This statistic comes from the China Health and Nutrition Survey (CHNS). Similarly, only 1.2% of indi-
   viduals in urban China used a computer or the internet to search for jobs in 2003 (Chinese General Social
   Survey). Because our analysis is conducted in rural China, the share of internet users is expected to be
   much lower than 1.2%.
49
   https://web.archive.org/web/20201029171912/http://old.moe.gov.cn//publicfiles/business/
   htmlfiles/moe/moe_356/200409/3886.html


                                                    23
counties in this province implemented the program.50 In the baseline estimations, we included
counties in the Shandong province among treated locations. However, our results hold if we
drop all counties in the Shandong province from the sample, suggesting that these locations
are not instrumental for generating the main findings (Table E11, panel C).

Trends correlated with selection criteria. In the main specifications, we included
county-specific linear trends to control for cross-county time-varying changes in the outcomes
(Table E12, panel A). In this section, we show that our results are robust to the inclusion
of different trends. First, we include more aggregated prefecture-specific linear trends, which
capture time-varying variation in larger geographical areas (Table E12, panel B). Second,
we already showed that the selection criteria used by the Chinese government to determine
participation in the CAL program (midwestern location, share of rural residents, preexisting
communication infrastructure) captured most of the baseline differences between CAL and
non-CAL areas (Table 2). We also estimate alternative specifications with linear trends
interacted with these six selection criteria. The inclusion of these trends does not qualitatively
modify the main findings, although it leads to slightly smaller coefficients and lower R2
(Table E12, panel C). Third, the estimation of specifications without any trend leads to
similar treatment effects, reinforcing the idea that our main findings do not depend on the
inclusion of a specific set of trends (Table E12, panel D).

Using different birth cohorts. Our sample includes all individuals living in rural areas
at age 12 and born between 1977 (first year after the cultural revolution) and 1994 (last year
available in the survey). Here, we show that adding or subtracting birth cohorts produces
qualitatively similar findings. First, we drop older birth cohorts in order to have a sample of
individuals who attended middle school as close as possible to the CAL implementation. We
estimate a first set of specifications on individuals born between 1980 and 1994, and a second
set of specifications on individuals born between 1985 and 1994. In spite of a substantial
reduction in the sample sizes--up to 40% smaller than the baseline--most coefficients remain
close to the baseline estimates (Table E13). Completed education, for example, increased by
0.85 years in the baseline sample (1977­1994, 4,996 observations), by 0.87 years in the sample
of individuals born between 1980 and 1994 (4,189 observations), and by 0.80 years in the
sample of individuals born between 1985 and 1994 (2,971 observations). Second, we include
older cohorts born from 1970 to 1976. In this case, the coefficients tend to be larger than the
baseline estimates (Table E13, panel D), corroborating our decision to include only cohorts
born after the cultural revolution. We find similar results if we use age at the time of the

50
     https://web.archive.org/web/20201029201249/http://www.gov.cn/govweb/jrzg/2006-09/01/
     content_375331.htm


                                               24
policy implementation, instead of birth cohorts (Table E14).

Effects concentrated among middle-school graduates. The Chinese government in-
troduced CAL in primary and middle schools. In this section, we test whether the effects
of CAL are stronger among individuals who completed middle school and were therefore
exposed to CAL for a longer period. We estimate a set of regressions in which we further
interact the effect of CAL with a dummy equal to 1 for middle-school graduates. For the
majority of outcomes, the effect of CAL is larger or concentrated among the subsample
of middle-school graduates (Table E15). Relative to the baseline, the effect of CAL among
middle-school graduates is 77% larger for completed education, 92% larger for math skills,
and 47% larger for Chinese skills. In all these cases, the difference in the effect of CAL
between middle-school graduates and other individuals is statistically different from zero.

Excluding effects from other policies. We now test whether concurrent Chinese poli-
cies not directly targeting rural schools might be responsible for the estimated effects of
CAL. There are two important Chinese reforms that were implemented in the early 2000s:
the trade liberalization following WTO accession, which started in 2001; and the expansion
of college enrollment, which started in 1998. We control for these concurrent policy changes
by interacting birth-cohort fixed effects with two variables (pre-WTO prefecture-level im-
port tariff, and prefecture-level number of college students) that describe the effect of these
reforms on each Chinese county.51 Our specifications, which in their baseline version already
include controls for several education policies, are robust to the inclusion of these additional
variables (Table E16).

Placebo tests. We can also perform standard placebo tests in which we randomize the
implementation of CAL. First, we restrict the sample to pre-reform birth cohorts, and we
randomize the first birth cohort to be exposed to CAL. We therefore simulate the policy in
the pre-reform period by randomly picking a starting date in each county. For each outcome,
we perform 500 estimations on 500 samples with a different randomized placebo policy. The
distributions of the estimated coefficients of computer-assisted learning indicate the lack of
any effect stemming from the placebo policies (Figure E3).
    Second, we use all cohorts born between 1977 and 1994 (and living in a rural area at age
12), but we randomly assign counties to a different treatment group. In doing so, we fix the

51
     We follow the same strategy used by Topalova (2010) and Edmonds, Pavcnik, and Topalova (2010) to
     construct the prefecture-level tariff in 2001 (before treatment) and capture the effect of trade liberaliza-
     tion. Specifically, the prefecture-level tariff is measured as: Tariffc,2001 = i Emp
                                                                                       Empc × Tariffi,2001 , in which
                                                                                          ic


     i denotes the manufacturing industry; Empic is the predetermined total employment of industry i in
     prefecture c in 1990; and Tariffi,2001 is the import tariff rate of industry i in year 2001.


                                                          25
share of G1 (CAL in 2004), G2 (CAL in 2005), G3 (CAL in 2006), G4 (CAL in 2007), and G5
(no CAL) counties to be equal to those that we observe in the actual CAL implementation.
The distributions of the coefficients of CAL suggest that the random treatment allocation
does not generate significant results (Figure E4).

Matching CAL and non-CAL individuals. To further limit the differences between
CAL and non-CAL individuals, we can match the two groups on observables using propensity
scores. We compute propensity scores using the main baseline characteristics available in
the CFPS: birth-cohort fixed effects, gender, minority status, number of siblings, parental
education, parental occupation, and parental affiliation to the Communist Party. We employ
a nearest-neighbor algorithm with a low caliper of 0.001. We then re-estimate the main
specifications on the matched sample. The results are qualitatively similar to the baseline
estimates, although they tend to have larger magnitudes and standard errors (Table E18).
The larger magnitude of the coefficients reinforces the idea that the presence of non-CAL
individuals does not drive the main findings. If anything, the better outcomes in non-CAL
areas might negatively bias the effect of CAL.


7   Possible Mechanisms

In this section, we explore the different channels that might have generated the improvements
in student achievement. The CAL reform could have improved pedagogy in three major
ways. First, it allowed rural teachers to use new technology, such as computers, internet
access, and multimedia rooms, to improve their own lectures and quality of teaching. Second,
it allowed students to grow computer skills by installing computer rooms and including
computer science in the curriculum. Third, it allowed rural students to be exposed to much-
higher-quality teaching through the lectures recorded by some of the best teachers in the
country.

Rural teachers. We start this analysis by discussing the influence of the policy on the
quality of the rural teachers. Prior evidence on this topic indicates that access to computers
is unlikely to improve the quality of local teachers for at least two reasons. First, access
to a labor-replacing teaching technology, such as recorded lectures deployed from Beijing,
can reduce the effort of local teachers, instead of stimulating it (Taylor, 2018). Second, as
documented by anecdotal evidence, local teachers in Chinese rural schools did not have the
experience or skills needed to incorporate the new technology in their own lectures, in spite
of the training provided by the program administrators (Feng and Cao, 2007). Specifically,
many articles written by teachers who had direct experience with the program report that


                                             26
local teachers were making ample use of the recorded lectures without modifying them or
incorporating them in their own lectures.
    Our data support these anecdotes. In two distinct sets of regressions, we interact the
effect of CAL with a dummy equal to 1 for above-median average teacher education (Table 5,
panel A) and with a dummy equal to 1 for above-median average teacher­student ratio, both
measured in 2000 (Table 5, panel B).52 This analysis indicates that the CAL program did not
interact significantly with teachers' characteristics measured at baseline. In the presence of
a strong influence of CAL on local teachers, instead, we should expect to see different effects
for low-ability and high-ability teachers (like in Taylor (2018)). These findings are consistent
with Muralidharan, Singh, and Ganimian (2019), which finds that the implementation of
the education software Mindspark in India improved student outcomes without affecting the
quality of local teachers.

Computer skills. Next, we study the role played by increased computer skills. Our find-
ings suggest that access to computers by itself might have had a positive influence on stu-
dents. In fact, students exposed to CAL in middle school were significantly more likely to
use the internet and computers seven to ten years after the reform (Table 4, panel C).
    However, two pieces of evidence suggest that the overall influence of access to computers
on education and labor outcomes might be limited. First, it was common for Chinese middle
schools to exclude computer science from the curriculum in the last year in order to better
prepare students for the high-stakes high-school entry exam.53 If computer science played a
big role in increasing long-term education and labor outcomes, we should expect to observe
small or zero effects on the cohort treated only during the last year of middle school (14
years old at the time of implementation; Figure 2). The lack of a dose response in the event
studies indicates that this hypothesis is not supported by the data. Second, we interact the
effect of CAL with a dummy equal to 1 for above-median availability of internet access in
the county of residence in 2002 (China County Statistical Yearbook; Table 5, panel C). The
interaction terms tend to be statistically insignificant, indicating that a more widespread
internet proliferation, which could have allowed students to better exercise their computer
skills outside school, did not have large effects on the outcomes.



52
   The variable "teacher­student ratio" is measured at the county level and comes from the China County Sta-
   tistical Yearbook. The variable "average teacher education" is measured at the prefecture level and comes
   from the census data. We obtain it by restricting the sample to teachers and calculating the prefecture-level
   average years of education. We need to compute it at the prefecture level, instead of the more granular
   county level, because there are too few observations within each county.
53
   During the period under consideration, computer science was not one of the disciplines covered by the
   high-school enrollment exam.


                                                      27
Remote learning. Finally, we explore the role played by the lectures and the related teach-
ing materials recorded in Beijing. Our data suggest that this change in pedagogy improved
student outcomes. First, unlike the other two components of the program discussed above,
the deployment of these lectures was highly standardized across different geographical areas.
Therefore, the lack of cross-county heterogeneity in the treatment effects is in and of itself
evidence in favor of the hypothesis that recorded lectures were important.54 In addition to the
aforementioned lack of heterogeneity with respect to school inputs and internet availability,
we interact the effect of CAL with a dummy equal to 1 for counties in the midwest (Table 5,
panel D) and with a dummy equal to 1 for counties with above-median average wages in 2002
(China County Statistical Yearbook; Table 5, panel E). These new interactions tend to be
statistically insignificant, confirming the lack of cross-county heterogeneity. The effectiveness
of remote learning in improving student outcomes in Chinese rural areas is consistent with
the findings of a recent study in Ghanian primary schools (Johnston and Ksoll, 2019) and a
recent study in Mexican secondary schools (Navarro-Sola, 2019).55
    In addition, even if we do not find cross-county heterogeneities, some individual charac-
teristics significantly interact with the effect of the CAL reform. Specifically, women (Table
5, panel F) and individuals with less-educated fathers (Table 5, panel G) experienced larger
increases in completed education. Both findings are consistent with the hypothesis that the
increase in education quality through remote learning played a major role. The fact that
women might respond more to an increase in quality of education is in line with the findings
in Chetty, Friedman, and Rockoff (2014). Moreover, students from lower-educated families
might have benefited more from the recorded lectures because their parents were less likely
to make up for the low-quality rural teachers before the reform (Lavy and Schlosser, 2011).


8       Conclusions

We analyzed a large-scale policy in China, the largest education-technology intervention
in the world to date, which introduced computer-assisted learning in rural primary and
middle schools. The program was designed to deploy high-quality lectures recorded by the
country's best teachers to students in underdeveloped rural areas through broadband satellite
internet. Our analysis indicates that the policy improved student outcomes in the long run.
Individuals exposed to the program stayed in school longer and showed higher cognitive skills
even ten years after the exposure to education technology. In the labor market, they received
significantly higher earnings and became more likely to be employed in occupations focusing
54
     Walters (2015) uses a similar approach to study the effect of Head Start.
55
     The fact that access to higher-quality education seems to be the main channel behind the treatment effects
     suggests that the same reform would be less effective in urban schools, in which quality of education is
     already higher.


                                                       28
on cognitive skills. Seven to ten years after the program, the same individuals were more
likely to use the internet and computers. Our analysis indicates that access to lectures by
high-quality teachers was an important driver of these results. Other pedagogical changes,
such as access to computers for local teachers and the introduction of computer science in
the curriculum, mattered less.
    It is widely believed that technology can have an important role in the education produc-
tion function. Our results make three main contributions to the debate on computer-assisted
learning. First, we showed that the effects of computer-assisted learning can last for several
years after the initial exposure to education technology. These findings complement existing
evidence that shows how computer-assisted learning might improve test scores in the months
immediately after its implementation. Second, we showed that the positive effects of educa-
tion technology can be tracked across different outcomes. In our setting, computer-assisted
learning affected education outcomes, labor-market performance, and internet usage. Third,
we showed how technology can be an effective way to close the rural­urban gap in education.
Students in rural schools are often at a disadvantage because the quality of school inputs
is severely lacking. The best teachers tend to work in urban schools due to more attractive
geographical amenities and better career prospects. This disparity in school inputs is difficult
to erase by just offering subsidies for relocation to rural areas.
    As proved by the Chinese experience, monetary incentives are not sufficient to overcome
the perceived disutility of living in remote rural locations. Technology, however, is able
to connect students in rural schools to the best teachers in the country without teacher
relocation. Considering that the rural­urban gap is a phenomenon common in both developed
and developing countries, our findings have important policy implications that transcend
the Chinese experience. It is important to note, however, that our results might represent an
upper bound of the benefits generated by a CAL reform. In China, compliance to government
policies tends to be high. Developing countries with different institutions might face bigger
challenges in convincing rural schools to adopt newer technologies.



References
Ai, Yong and Peng Liu. 2008. "The Causes of the Loss of Rural Teachers in Poorer
 Areas." Public Administration Investigation, 1: 82­87.
Angrist, Joshua and Victor Lavy. 2002. "New evidence on classroom computers and
 pupil learning." Economic Journal, 112(482): 735­765.
Banerjee, Abhijit V., Shawn Cole, Esther Duflo, and Leigh Linden. 2007. "Reme-
 dying education: Evidence from two randomized experiments in India." Quarterly Journal
 of Economics, 122(3): 1235­1264.



                                              29
Barrow, Lisa, Lisa Markman, and Cecilia Elena Rouse. 2009. "Technology' s Edge:
  The Educational Benefits of Computer-Aided Instruction." American Economic Journal:
  Economic Policy, 1(1): 52­74.
Beg, Sabrin A., Adrienne M. Lucas, Wasaq Halim, and Umar Saif. 2019. "Beyond
  the Basics: Improving Post-Primary Content Delivery through Classroom Technology."
  NBER Working Paper No. 25704.
Bertrand, Marianne and Jessica Pan. 2013. "The Trouble with Boys: Social Influences
  and the Gender Gap in Disruptive Behavior." American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
  nomics, 5(1): 32­64.
Beuermann, Diether W., Julian Cristia, Santiago Cueto, Ofer Malamud, and
  Yyannu Cruz-Aguayo. 2015. "One laptop per child at home: Short-term impacts from
  a randomized experiment in Peru." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
  7(2): 53­80.
Brandt, Loren, Johannes Van Biesebroeck, and Yifan Zhang. 2012. "Creative ac-
  counting or creative destruction? Firm-level productivity growth in Chinese manufactur-
  ing." Journal of Development Economics, 97(2): 339­351.
Brown, Philip H. and Albert Park. 2002. "Education and poverty in rural China."
  Economics of Education Review, 21(6): 523­541.
Bulman, George and Robert W Fairlie. 2016. "Technology and education: Computers,
  software, and the internet." In Handbook of the Economics of Education. Vol. 5, 239­280.
  Elsevier.
Carrell, Scott E and James E West. 2010. "Does professor quality matter? Evidence from
  random assignment of students to professors." Journal of Political Economy, 118(3): 409­
  432.
Chetty, Raj, John N Friedman, and Jonah E Rockoff. 2014. "Measuring the impacts of
  teachers II: Teacher value-added and student outcomes in adulthood." American economic
  review, 104(9): 2633­79.
Churchill, Sefa Awaworyi and Vinod Mishra. 2018. "Returns to education in China:
  a meta-analysis." Applied Economics, 50(54): 5903­5919.
Clotfelter, Charles T., Helen F. Ladd, and Jacob L. Vigdor. 2009. "The academic
  achievement gap in grades 3 to 8." The Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(2): 398­419.
Edmonds, Eric V., Nina Pavcnik, and Petia Topalova. 2010. "Trade adjustment
  and human capital investments: Evidence from indian tariff reform." American Economic
  Journal: Applied Economics, 2(4): 42­75.
Escueta, Maya, Vincent Quan, Andre Joshua Nickow, and Philip Oreopoulos.
  2017. "Education Technology: An Evidence-Based Review." NBER working paper 23744.
Fairlie, Robert W. and Jonathan Robinson. 2013. "Experimental Evidence on the
  Effects of Home Computers on Academic Achievement among Schoolchildren." American
  Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5(3): 211­240.
Fairlie, Robert W. and Rebecca A. London. 2012. "The Effects of Home Computers
  on Educational Outcomes: Evidence from a Field Experiment with Community College
  Students." Economic Journal, 122(561): 727­753.
Fan, Yi, Junjian Yi, and Junsen Zhang. 2019. "Rising Intergenerational Income Per-
  sistence in China." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, forthcoming.
Feng, Linyu and Yajun Cao. 2007. "Exploration of Teaching and Learning Strategies

                                            30
  Under Three Models of the "Rural Distance Education Project"." China Educational In-
  formation, 1: 23­24.
Figlio, David N., Mark Rush, and Lu Yin. 2013. "Is It Live or Is It Internet? Exper-
  imental Estimates of the Effects of Online Instruction on Student Learning." Journal of
  Labor Economics, 31(4): 763­784.
Figlio, David N, Morton O Schapiro, and Kevin B Soter. 2015. "Are tenure track
  professors better teachers?" Review of Economics and Statistics, 97(4): 715­724.
Frey, Bruno S. and Felix Oberholzer-Gee. 1997. "The Cost of Price Incentives: An Em-
  pirical Analysis of Motivation Crowding- Out." American Economic Review, 87(4): 746­
  755.
Gong, Daomin. 2005. "Distance education supports a blue sky of rural primary and sec-
  ondary education."
Gong, Jie, Yi Lu, and Hong Song. 2018. "The Effect of Teacher Gender on Students'
  Academic and Noncognitive Outcomes." Journal of Labor Economics, 36(3): 743­778.
Goolsbee, Austan and Jonathan Guryan. 2006. "The Impact of Internet Subsidies in
  Public Schools." Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(2): 336­347.
Hannum, Emily. 1999. "Political Change and the Urban-Rural Gap in Basic Education in
  China, 1949-1990." Comparative Education Review, 43(2): 193­211.
Harris, Douglas N. and Tim R. Sass. 2011. "Teacher training, teacher quality and
  student achievement." Journal of Public Economics, 95(7-8): 798­812.
Heckman, James J. and Yona Rubinstein. 2001. "The Importance of Noncognitive
  Skills : Lessons from the GED Testing Program." American Economic Review: Papers &
  Proceedings, 91(2): 145­149.
Hjort, Jonas and Jonas Poulsen. 2019. "The arrival of fast internet and employment in
  Africa." American Economic Review, 109(3): 1032­1079.
Jackson, C. Kirabo. 2018. "What Do Test Scores Miss? The Importance of Teacher Effects
  on Non-Test Score Outcomes." Journal of Political Economy, 126(5): 2072­2107.
Jacob, Brian A. and Lars Lefgren. 2004. "Remedial Education and Student Achieve-
  ment: A Regression-Discontinuity Analysis." The Review of Economics and Statistics,
  86(1): 226­244.
Jacob, Brian A. and Lars Lefgren. 2008. "Can Principals Identify Effective Teachers?
  Evidence on Subjective Performance Evaluation in Education." Journal of Labor Eco-
  nomics, 26(1): 101­136.
Johnston, Jamie and Christopher Ksoll. 2019. "Effectiveness of Interactive Satellite-
  Transmitted Instruction: Experimental Evidence from Ghanaian Primary Schools." work-
  ing paper, Stanford University.
Jones, Damon, David Molitor, and Julian Reif. 2019. "What Do Workplace Wellness
  Programs Do? Evidence From the Illinois Workplace Wellness Study." Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, forthcoming.
Kim, Taeshik, Mo Yeol Kang, Min sang Yoo, Dongwook Lee, and Yun Chul
  Hong. 2016. "Computer use at work is associated with self-reported depressive and anxiety
  disorder." Annals of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 28(57).
Kraut, Robert, Michael Patterson, Vicki Lundmark, Sara Kiesler, Tridas
  Mukopadhyay, and William Scherlis. 1998. "Internet Paradox. A Social Technology
  That Reduces Social Involvement and Psychological Well-Being?" American Psychologist,

                                            31
  53(9): 1017­1031.
Lai, Fang, Linxiu Zhang, Xiao Hu, Qinghe Qu, Yaojiang Shi, Yajie Qiao, Matthew
  Boswell, and Scott Rozelle. 2013. "Computer assisted learning as extracurricular tutor?
  Evidence from a randomised experiment in rural boarding schools in Shaanxi." Journal of
  Development Effectiveness, 5(2): 208­231.
Lai, Fang, Linxiu Zhang, Yu Bai, Chengfang Liu, Yaojiang Shi, Fang Chang,
  and Scott Rozelle. 2016. "More is not always better: evidence from a randomised ex-
  periment of computer-assisted learning in rural minority schools in Qinghai." Journal of
  Development Effectiveness, 8(4): 449­472.
Lai, Fang, Renfu Luo, Linxiu Zhang, Xinzhe Huang, and Scott Rozelle. 2015.
  "Does computer-assisted learning improve learning outcomes? Evidence from a randomized
  experiment in migrant schools in Beijing." Economics of Education Review, 47: 34­48.
Lavy, Victor. 2009. "Performance Pay and Teachers' Effort, Productivity, and Grading
  Ethics." American Economic Review, 99(5): 1979­2011.
Lavy, Victor and Analia Schlosser. 2011. "Mechanisms and Impacts of Gender Peer
  Effects at School." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(2): 1­33.
Liu, Chengfang, Linxiu Zhang, Renfu Luo, Scott Rozelle, and Prashant Loyalka.
  2010. "The effect of primary school mergers on academic performance of students in rural
  China." International Journal of Educational Development, 30(6): 570­585.
Luo, Renfu, Yaojiang Shi, Linxiu Zhang, Chengfang Liu, Scott Rozelle, and Brian
  Sharbono. 2009. "Malnutrition in China's rural boarding schools: The case of primary
  schools in Shaanxi Province." Asia Pacific Journal of Education, 29(4): 481­501.
Malamud, Ofer and Cristian Pop-Eleches. 2011. "Home computer use and the devel-
  opment of human capital." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(2): 987­1027.
Marr´ e, Alexander. 2017. "Rural Education At A Glance, 2017 Edition." United States
  Department of Agricolture.
McPherson, Michael S. and Lawrence S. Bacow. 2015. "Online higher education:
  Beyond the hype cycle." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29(4): 135­154.
McQuaide, Shiling. 2009. "Making Education Equitable in Rural China through Distance
  Learning." International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning, 10(1): I1­I21.
Mellstr¨ om, Carl and Magnus Johannesson. 2008. "Crowding Out in Blood Donation:
  Was Titmuss Right?" Journal of the European Economic Association, 6(4): 845­863.
Mo, Di, Hongmei Yi, Linxiu Zhang, Yaojiang Shi, Scott Rozelle, and Alexis
  Medina. 2012. "Transfer paths and academic performance: The primary school merger
  program in China." International Journal of Educational Development, 32(3): 423­431.
Mo, Di, Linxiu Zhang, Renfu Luo, Qinghe Qu, Weiming Huang, Jiafu Wang,
  Yajie Qiao, Matthew Boswell, and Scott Rozelle. 2014. "Integrating computer-
  assisted learning into a regular curriculum: evidence from a randomised experiment in
  rural schools in Shaanxi." Journal of Development Effectiveness, 6(3): 300­323.
Mo, Di, Weiming Huang, Yaojiang Shi, Linxiu Zhang, Matthew Boswell, and
  Scott Rozelle. 2015. "Computer technology in education: Evidence from a pooled study
  of computer assisted learning programs among rural students in China." China Economic
  Review, 36: 131­145.
Muralidharan, Karthik, Abhijeet Singh, and Alejandro J. Ganimian. 2019. "Dis-
  rupting Education? Experimental Evidence on Technology-Aided Instruction in India."

                                            32
  American Economic Review, 109(4): 1426­1460.
Muralidharan, Karthik and Venkatesh Sundararaman. 2011. "Teacher Performance
  Pay: Experimental Evidence from India." Journal of Political Economy, 119(1): 39­77.
Navarro-Sola, Laia. 2019. "Secondary School Expansion through Televised Lessons: The
  Labor Market Returns of the Mexican Telesecundaria." working paper, Northwestern Uni-
  versity.
Office of Modern Distance Education Project for China's Rural Primary and
  Middle Schools. 2009. Building the Bridge to the Future: Modern Distance Education
  Project for China's Rural Primary and Middle Schools. Beijing:People's Education Press.
Sonalde Desai and Veena Kulkarni. 2008. "Changing Educational Inequalities in India
  in the Context of Affirmative Action." Demography, 45(2): 245­270.
Taylor, Eric S. 2018. "New Technology and Teacher Productivity." working paper, Harvard
  University.
Taylor, Eric S. and John H. Tyler. 2012. "The Effect of Evaluation on Teacher Perfor-
  mance." American Economic Review, 102(7): 3628­3651.
Thom´  ee, Sara, Annika H¨     arenstam, and Mats Hagberg. 2012. "Computer use and
  stress, sleep disturbances, and symptoms of depression among young adults - a prospective
  cohort study." BMC Psychiatry, 12(176).
Topalova, Petia. 2010. "Factor Immobility and Regional Effects of Trade Liberalization:
  Evidence from India." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(October): 1­41.
Walters, Christopher R. 2015. "Inputs in the production of early childhood human capi-
  tal: Evidence from head start." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(4): 76­
  102.
Wang, Zhuzhu, Haijun Zeng, and Ying Wang. 2015. "ICT Integration in Rural Class-
  rooms." In Approach of ICT in Education for Rural Development. , ed. Haijun Zeng,
  Weifeng Xia, Jinghua Wang, and Rong Wang, Chapter 2, 67­125. SAGE China Studies.
Westfall, Peter H. and S. Stanley Young. 1993. Resampling-based Multiple Testing:
  Examples and Methods for p-value Adjustment. John Wiley & Sons.
Xiao, Cunjuan. 2018. "Investigation and Reflection on the Loss of Rural Teachers in Un-
  derdeveloped Areas." Wuyi College Journal, 4: 26­30.
Xiao, Yun, Li Li, and Liqiu Zhao. 2017. "Education on the cheap: The long-run effects
  of a free compulsory education reform in rural china." Journal of Comparative Economics,
  45(3): 544­562.
Xie, Yu and Xiang Zhou. 2014. "Income inequality in today's China." Proceedings of the
  National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 111(19): 6928­6933.
Xu, Hongwei and Yu Xie. 2015. "Number Series Test in the 2012 Wave of China Family
  Panel Studies." Technical Report CFPS-31.
Yu, S. Q. and Minjuan J. Wang. 2006. "Modern distance education project for the
  rural schools of China: recent development and problems." Journal of Computer Assisted
  Learning, 22(4): 273­283.
Zhang, Yanhong. 2006. "Urban-Rural Literacy Gaps in Sub-Saharan Africa: The Roles of
  Socioeconomic Status and School Quality." Comparative Education Review, 50(4): 581­
  602.
Zhou, Shiwu and Ling Wang. 2010. "Current situation, Causes, and Countermeasures of
  Teacher Mobility in Poorer Rural Areas. A Case Study of Lincang City, Yunnan Province."

                                            33
 Yunnan Education­Middle School Teachers, 4­5.
Zhu, Xiaodong. 2012. "Understanding China's growth: Past, present, and future." Journal
 of Economic Perspectives, 26(4): 103­24.




                                          34
Figures and Tables

                Figure 1: Implementation of Computer-Aided Learning




Notes: The map shows the implementation of computer-aided learning in different
Chinese counties. Rural areas in different counties received computer-aided learning
in 2004 (G1), 2005 (G2), 2006 (G3), and 2007 (G4). Some rural areas were not
part of the program (G5). Sources: "Pilot work plan for modern distance educa-
tion project in rural primary and secondary schools," Ministry of Education, Na-
tional Development and Reform Commission, and Ministry of Finance, 2003, available
at http://old.moe.gov.cn//publicfiles/business/htmlfiles/moe/moe 356/200409/3886.html.
The full list of counties by implementation year is available in Appendix A.1.




                                         35
          Figure 2: Leads and Lags in the Effect of Computed-Assisted Learning




          A. Years of completed education                                B. Math skills




                  C. Chinese skills                            D. Log earnings
Notes: These figures show differences between cohorts exposed to computer-aided learning (CAL=1)
and cohorts not exposed (CAL=0). Each panel shows the coefficients k from the following event
study: Yibc =  + 4
                                       
                     k=-12 k · Dk + Wibc ·  + c + b + ibc . The variable Dk is equal to 1 in areas
with computer-assisted learning after the reform (k  0), while is equal to 0 otherwise. The omitted
birth cohort completed middle school 13 years before the reform (27 years old at the time of the
reform). Individuals in areas that did not receive computer-aided learning are distributed across
periods according to their age when the reform was first implemented. Figure E2 shows that this
assumption does not affect the results. Vertical dashed bars are 95% confidence intervals computed
from standard errors clustered at the county level. Source: CFPS, 2010 and 2014, individuals born
from 1977.




                                                36
                                               Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                                    All observations                                No CAL                     CAL
                                                 Mean             Std. dev.               Mean           Std. dev.   Mean            Std. dev.
                                                   (1)               (2)                    (3)              (4)       (5)              (6)

                                                             Panel A: Demographics
 Birth cohort                                    1985.65             5.09                 1983.94            4.34    1991.91           1.35
 Male                                             0.50               0.50                  0.50              0.50     0.51             0.50
 Minority                                          0.11              0.32                  0.12              0.32      0.09            0.29
 Siblings (dummy)                                  0.87              0.34                   0.87             0.34      0.87            0.34
 Father: no edu                                    0.25              0.43                  0.27              0.44      0.20            0.40
 Father: primary edu                              0.30               0.46                  0.30              0.46     0.32             0.47
 Father: junior high edu                           0.31              0.46                   0.30             0.46      0.37            0.48
 Father: high school edu                           0.12              0.33                   0.13             0.33      0.10            0.30
 Father: college or more                           0.01              0.10                  0.01              0.10      0.01            0.10
 Father: member of Communist party                 0.09              0.28                  0.09              0.29     0.07             0.26
 Father: manager                                   0.05              0.21                  0.05              0.22      0.04            0.20
 Mother: no edu                                    0.50              0.50                  0.51              0.50      0.43            0.50
 Mother: primary edu                               0.26              0.44                  0.25              0.43     0.29             0.46
 Mother: junior high edu                          0.19               0.39                  0.18              0.39     0.23             0.42
 Mother: high school edu                          0.05               0.21                  0.05              0.22     0.04             0.20
 Mother: college or more                          0.00               0.05                  0.00              0.05     0.01             0.07
 Mother: member of Communist party                 0.01              0.12                  0.01              0.12      0.01            0.12
 Mother: manager                                   0.01              0.10                  0.01              0.09      0.01            0.12
                                                          Panel B: Education outcomes
 Years of education                                9.34              4.01                   9.07             4.16     10.34            3.21
 Middle school diploma                             0.71              0.46                   0.68             0.47     0.79             0.41
 High school diploma                               0.34              0.47                   0.33             0.47     0.40             0.49
 College degree                                    0.14              0.35                  0.15              0.36     0.09             0.29
 Informal education                                0.12              0.32                   0.11             0.32     0.13             0.33
 Math score                                       -0.08              1.00                  -0.16             1.01     0.19             0.91
 Chinese score                                    -0.09              1.00                  -0.17             1.02     0.21             0.82
                                                         Panel C: Labor market outcomes
 Labor force participation                        0.58               0.49                   0.56             0.50      0.65            0.48
 Log earnings                                     9.04               1.39                   9.12             1.36      8.68            1.47
 Cognitive skills                                 0.00               1.00                  -0.04             1.00     0.25             0.99
 Manual skills                                    0.00               1.00                   0.03             1.01     -0.16            0.95
 Farmer                                           0.17               0.38                   0.20             0.40     0.06             0.24
                                                             Panel D: Internet usage
 Internet use (dummy)                              0.58              0.49                   0.54             0.50     0.80             0.40
 Frequency in using computer for work             -0.00              1.00                  -0.04             0.99     0.21             1.01
 Frequency in using computer for socializing      -0.00              1.00                  -0.10             0.99     0.51             0.89
                                                           Panel E: Noncognitive skills
 Satisfaction index                               -0.00              0.82                  -0.01             0.83     0.06             0.77
 Popularity                                        0.00              1.00                  -0.02             1.01     0.11             0.95
 Happiness                                        -0.00              1.00                  -0.01             1.01      0.04            0.93
 Getting along with others                        -0.00              1.00                  -0.00             1.01     0.01             0.93
 Anxiety index                                    -0.00              0.81                  -0.00             0.83     0.02             0.76
 Depression                                       -0.00              1.00                  -0.00             1.02     0.02             0.92
 Nervousness                                      0.00               1.00                   0.00             1.01     -0.02            0.94
 Difficulty in doing things                       -0.00              1.00                  -0.01             1.02     0.05             0.91

Notes: Summary statistics on all birth cohorts in the sample (columns 1 and 2), on birth cohorts
who did not benefit from computer-assisted learning (columns 3 and 4), and on birth cohorts
who benefitted from computer-assisted learning (columns 5 and 6). Source: CFPS, 2010 and 2014,
individuals born from 1977.




                                                                       37
                               Table 2: Baseline Differences Between Geographical Areas
                                                                Group 1         Group 2           Group 3   Group 4   Group 5     Diff.     Cond. Diff.
                                                                  (1)             (2)               (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)          (7)

                                                                    Panel A: Selection criteria
 Midwest                                                          0.76            0.38              0.46      0.50      0.11    0.390***
                                                                 (0.44)          (0.49)            (0.51)    (0.51)    (0.31)     (0.069)
 Share of rural residents                                         0.84            0.83              0.78      0.84      0.42    0.402***
                                                                 (0.10)          (0.14)            (0.24)    (0.11)    (0.38)     (0.065)
 Log number of cellphone users (/10k residents)                   6.07            6.18              6.28      6.19      8.00    -1.819***
                                                                 (0.88)          (0.91)            (0.99)    (0.88)    (1.08)     (0.211)
 Log number of internet users (/10k residents)                    3.74            3.84              4.06      3.44      6.22    -2.430***
                                                                 (1.11)          (1.30)            (1.64)    (2.17)    (1.59)     (0.307)
 Log value of postal services (10k CNY/10k residents)             4.17            4.35              4.29      3.74      4.79     -0.608**
                                                                 (1.02)          (0.98)            (0.89)    (0.98)    (1.29)     (0.236)
 Log number of telephone users (/10k residents)                   6.74            6.90              6.95      6.55      7.92    -1.113***
                                                                 (0.52)          (0.60)            (0.74)    (0.81)    (0.79)     (0.148)
                                                                 Panel B: County characteristics
 Log population (/10k residents)                                  3.94             4.03             4.04       4.13     4.55    -0.514***     -0.178
                                                                 (0.83)          (0.81)            (0.82)    (0.92)    (0.76)     (0.151)    (0.153)
 Log GDP in primary sector (10k CNY/10k residents)                6.92            7.11              6.89       6.69     6.92        0.011     -0.046
                                                                 (0.56)          (0.55)            (0.66)    (0.74)    (0.51)     (0.105)    (0.125)
 Share of primary sector                                           0.03            0.07             0.03      0.03      0.01     0.035***    0.020**
                                                                 (0.04)          (0.14)            (0.03)    (0.04)    (0.02)     (0.010)    (0.010)
 Share of secondary sector                                         0.32            0.31             0.30      0.30      0.46    -0.149***     -0.030
                                                                 (0.19)          (0.18)            (0.13)    (0.18)    (0.12)     (0.026)    (0.031)
 Share of tertiary sector                                         0.64             0.62             0.66       0.67     0.53    0.114***       0.010
                                                                 (0.17)          (0.17)            (0.12)    (0.18)    (0.13)     (0.026)    (0.031)
 Log wage bill (10k CNY/10k residents)                             5.94           6.04              6.06      5.82      7.45    -1.476***     -0.055
                                                                 (0.61)          (0.60)            (0.92)    (0.59)    (1.16)     (0.205)    (0.075)
 Log yield of major crops (10k tons/10k residents)                 7.92           7.81              7.37       7.62     7.11      0.583**     -0.163
                                                                 (0.75)          (1.16)            (1.17)    (1.07)    (1.51)     (0.274)    (0.227)
 Log revenues of local government (10k CNY/10k residents)          5.48           5.63              5.84      5.27      7.34    -1.771***     -0.189
                                                                 (1.16)          (0.62)            (1.35)    (1.00)    (1.42)     (0.257)    (0.141)
 Log expenses of local government (10k CNY/10k residents)         6.11            6.17              6.25       6.02     7.51    -1.366***     -0.085
                                                                 (0.37)          (0.40)            (0.87)    (0.65)    (1.30)     (0.225)    (0.164)
 Log expenses for science (10k CNY/10k residents)                 -0.71           -0.25             0.29      -0.37     2.27    -2.516***     -0.320
                                                                 (1.18)          (0.94)            (1.50)    (1.60)    (1.92)     (0.346)    (0.268)
 Log expenses for education (10k CNY/10k residents)                4.66           4.74              4.80      4.44      5.63    -0.955***     -0.059
                                                                 (0.40)          (0.44)            (0.74)    (0.69)    (1.19)     (0.207)    (0.174)
 Log deposits (10k CNY/10k residents)                             8.07             8.26             8.34       8.07    10.23    -2.029***     -0.106
                                                                 (0.80)          (0.78)            (1.19)    (0.94)    (1.43)     (0.255)    (0.091)
 Log loans (10k CNY/10k residents)                                 7.86            7.87             8.04      7.88      9.94    -2.030***     -0.147
                                                                 (0.81)          (0.83)            (1.28)    (0.82)    (1.39)     (0.250)    (0.107)
 Log number of tertiary schools (/100k residents)                  0.02           0.03              0.06      0.04      0.19    -0.154***      0.023
                                                                 (0.08)          (0.11)            (0.15)    (0.11)    (0.18)     (0.033)    (0.016)
 Log number of secondary schools (/100k residents)                1.70            1.66              1.67       1.30     1.49        0.110     0.104
                                                                 (0.61)          (0.64)            (0.77)    (0.95)    (0.55)     (0.118)    (0.081)
 Log number of primary schools (/100k residents)                  3.50            3.53              3.62       3.08     2.12     1.334***    0.383**
                                                                 (1.10)          (0.91)            (1.13)    (1.46)    (0.88)     (0.183)    (0.180)
 Log number of students in tertiary schools (/10k residents)       0.60            0.75             0.87      1.35      3.67    -2.794***     -0.078
                                                                 (1.59)          (1.83)            (2.04)    (2.10)    (2.46)     (0.457)    (0.190)
 Log number of students in secondary schools (/10k residents)      6.22           6.23              6.21       5.87     6.14        0.007      0.054
                                                                 (0.52)          (0.61)            (0.67)    (0.90)    (0.52)     (0.110)    (0.075)
 Log number of students in primary schools (/10k residents)        6.67           6.77              6.61       6.35     6.15     0.479***      0.187
                                                                 (0.65)          (0.62)            (0.76)    (1.07)    (0.66)     (0.133)    (0.116)
 Log number of teachers in tertiary schools (/10k residents)       0.25            0.35             0.44      0.59      1.82    -1.417***      0.039
                                                                 (0.72)          (0.94)            (1.10)    (0.98)    (1.36)     (0.248)    (0.107)
 Log number of teachers in secondary schools (/10k residents)      3.25           3.32              3.34       3.01     3.37       -0.124      0.040
                                                                 (0.51)          (0.56)            (0.57)    (0.72)    (0.54)     (0.107)    (0.067)
 Log number of teachers in primary schools (/10k residents)        3.62           3.70              3.71       3.38     3.30     0.320***      0.142
                                                                 (0.56)          (0.59)            (0.66)    (0.92)    (0.59)     (0.119)    (0.097)
 Log number of hospitals beds (/100k residents)                   5.13            5.08              5.08       4.98     5.68    -0.609***      0.084
                                                                 (0.46)          (0.47)            (0.67)    (0.54)    (0.72)     (0.131)    (0.061)


Notes: This table shows baseline differences between Chinese counties. Rural counties received computer-
aided learning in 2004 (G1), 2005 (G2), 2006 (G3), 2007 (G4). More urban counties were not part of the
program (G5). Columns 1 to 5 show averages of observable characteristics measured in 2002. Column 6 shows
the difference between groups 1 to 4 and group 5. Column 7 shows the estimated difference between G1-
G4 and G5 after controlling for selecting criteria. Standard deviations (columns 1 to 5) or robust standard
errors (columns 6 and 7) in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source: China County Statistical
Yearbook, 2002.



                                                                               38
          Table 3: Trends Before the Implementation of Computer-Assisted Learning

                        Years of   Math      Chinese         MS              LM            Log      Internet   Anxiety
                       education   skills     skills       diploma       participation   earnings     use       index
                          (1)        (2)        (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)        (7)        (8)


                                              Panel A: Linear trends
  G5 x Linear trend      0.016      -0.002     0.011        -0.006          -0.004        0.010      -0.007     -0.024
                        (0.041)    (0.009)    (0.010)      (0.005)         (0.006)       (0.016)    (0.006)    (0.019)
  Observations           3,246     3,246       3,246         3,246          3,246         2,762      2,202      2,200
  R2                     0.420     0.354       0.360         0.232          0.162         0.277      0.335      0.143

                                             Panel B: Quadratic trends
  G5 x Linear trend      0.014      0.023      0.084         0.007           0.014        -0.026     -0.008     -0.137
                        (0.367)    (0.073)    (0.095)      (0.044)         (0.052)       (0.151)    (0.054)    (0.104)
  G5 x Linear trend2     0.000      -0.001     -0.003       -0.001          -0.001         0.001      0.000     0.004
                        (0.014)    (0.003)    (0.004)      (0.002)         (0.002)       (0.006)    (0.002)    (0.004)
  Observations           3,246     3,246       3,246         3,246          3,246         2,762      2,202      2,200
  R2                     0.420     0.354       0.360         0.232          0.162         0.277      0.335      0.143
  F-test                 0.92       0.90        0.45          0.32          0.76           0.77       0.49       0.19

                                              Panel C: Cubic trends
  G5 x Linear trend      -0.550     0.138      -0.266       0.147          -0.501*        0.502      -0.177     -0.805
                        (2.077)    (0.485)    (0.560)      (0.248)         (0.298)       (0.935)    (0.328)    (0.723)
  G5 x Linear trend2      0.047     -0.011      0.026       -0.012         0.043*         -0.043     0.014       0.061
                        (0.169)    (0.040)    (0.044)      (0.020)         (0.025)       (0.075)    (0.027)    (0.060)
  G5 x Linear trend3     -0.001      0.000     -0.001        0.000         -0.001*         0.001     -0.000     -0.002
                        (0.004)    (0.001)    (0.001)      (0.001)         (0.001)       (0.002)    (0.001)    (0.002)
  Observations           3,246     3,246       3,246         3,246          3,246         2,762      2,202      2,200
  R2                     0.420     0.354       0.360         0.232          0.162         0.277      0.335      0.144
  F-test                 0.97       0.97        0.31          0.48          0.34           0.84       0.57       0.28

  Mean                   8.77       -0.24      -0.23         0.66           0.54           9.19      0.50       -0.02
  Std. dev.              4.05        0.96      1.01          0.47           0.50           1.34      0.50       0.84

Notes: This table shows pre-reform trends in education and labor outcomes between individuals
in treated counties (G1 to G4) and individuals in counties that did not receive computer-assisted
learning (G5). Individuals are assigned to different counties based on their residence at age 12 . Panel
                                                                            
A estimates linear pre-reform trends: Yibc = +1 ·tb ·G5c +b +c +Wibc ·+ibc . In this specification,
b are birth cohort fixed effects, c are counties fixed effects, G5c is equal to 1 for individuals in
                                 
untreated counties (G5), and Wibc is a set of individual characteristics. Panel B estimates quadratic
                                                                        
pre-reform trends: Yibc =  + 1 · tb · G5c + 2 · t2
                                                 b · G5c + b + c +Wibc ·  + ibc . Panel C estimates cubic
                                                                                       
pre-reform trends: Yibc =  + 1 · tb · G5c + 2 · t2                  3
                                                     b · G5c + 3 · tb · G5c + b + c + Wibc ·  + ibc . Rural
counties received computer-aided learning in 2004 (G1), 2005 (G2), 2006 (G3), and 2007 (G4).
Some counties never received the program (G5). The dependent variables are: completed years of
education (col. 1), math skills (col. 2), Chinese skills (col. 3), dummy for middle school diploma
(col. 4), labor market participation (col. 5), log earnings (col. 6), frequency of internet use for work
(col. 7), and an index for level of mental stress (col. 8). All regressions include individuals born
between 1977 and 1988. Standard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses, *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source: CFPS, 2010 and 2014, individuals born from 1977.




                                                        39
              Table 4: Effects of Computer-Assisted Learning on Long-Term Outcomes

                                                     Full sample: G1-G5                              Treated counties: G1-G4
                                          CAL           Obs.        R2           Mean      CAL            Obs.         R2       Mean
                                                                                outcome                                        outcome
                                           (1)           (2)        (3)           (4)       (5)            (6)        (7)        (8)

                                                 Panel A: Education outcomes
  Years of education                     0.848***       4,996      0.429         9.12      0.745**       4,191       0.400      8.43
                                          (0.304)                                          (0.316)
  Middle school diploma                   0.072**       4,996      0.241         0.69      0.074**       4,191       0.219      0.63
                                          (0.029)                                          (0.033)
  Informal education                       0.066        2,841      0.180         0.11       0.037        2,347       0.163      0.09
                                          (0.046)                                          (0.050)
  Math skills                            0.183**        4,996      0.368        -0.15      0.183**       4,191       0.337     -0.30
                                          (0.080)                                          (0.088)
  Chinese skills                         0.227***       4,996      0.389        -0.16     0.183***       4,191       0.381     -0.30
                                          (0.064)                                          (0.066)
                                             Panel B: Labor market outcomes
  Labor force participation                0.063        4,996      0.161         0.56      0.096**       4,191       0.150      0.52
                                          (0.039)                                          (0.045)
  Log earnings                           0.463***       3,889      0.281         9.13     0.379***       3,232       0.251      9.02
                                          (0.120)                                          (0.142)
  Cognitive skills                       0.279***       3,341      0.302        -0.03      0.213*        2,771       0.275     -0.17
                                          (0.107)                                          (0.112)
  Manual skills                          -0.270**       3,341      0.268         0.02     -0.235**       2,771       0.225      0.16
                                          (0.105)                                          (0.118)
  Farmer                                 -0.048**       4,996      0.279         0.20     -0.057**       4,191       0.268      0.24
                                          (0.021)                                          (0.023)
                                                    Panel C: Internet usage
  Internet use (dummy)                   0.082**        3,109      0.404         0.54      0.071         2,554       0.394      .47
                                         (0.038)                                          (0.047)
  Freq. in using computer for work       0.276**        3,109      0.285        -0.04      0.199         2,554       0.246      -.19
                                         (0.138)                                          (0.159)
  Freq. in using computer to socialize   0.165**        3,109      0.417        -0.10      0.130         2,554       0.392      -.25
                                         (0.080)                                          (0.089)
                                                 Panel D: Noncognitive skills
  Satisfaction index                      -0.039        3,105      0.122        -0.01      -0.032        2,550       0.112      -.05
                                         (0.094)                                          (0.115)
  Happiness                               -0.184        3,106      0.142        -0.01      -0.218        2,551       0.139     -0.06
                                         (0.114)                                          (0.141)
  Anxiety index                          -0.172*        3,107      0.164          0        -0.182        2,324       0.155     -0.02
                                         (0.098)                                          (0.115)
  Nervousness                            -0.243*        3,109      0.149          0       -0.280*        2,554       0.146       0
                                         (0.135)                                          (0.168)

Notes: This table shows differences between cohorts who were exposed to computer-aided learning
(CAL=1) and cohorts who were not (CAL=0). Each row-column combination shows the coefficient
 from a different regression of exposure to computer-aided learning on several outcome variables:
                                                   
Yibc =  +  · CALbc + b + c + Wibc ·  + Polc · CALbc ·  + c · tb + ibc . In this specification, b
                                                                
are birth cohort fixed effects, c are county fixed effects, Wibc is a set of individual characteristics
(an indicator variable for minority groups, the number of siblings, and dummy variables measuring
                                  
the paternal schooling level), Polc is a set of variables describing other education policies (a bundle
of policies to increase middle school completion in western counties, a reform of education finance
in rural schools, the construction of rural boarding schools, and the consolidation of rural schools),
and tb is a linear trend in birth cohorts. Columns 1 to 4 include all geographical areas. Columns
5 and 8 restrict the sample to areas that received the program at some point (G1-G4). Standard
errors clustered at the county level in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source: CFPS,
2010 and 2014, individuals born from 1977.          40
                                         Table 5: Heterogeneous Effects

                              Years of     Math           Chinese         MS              LM            Log      Internet   Anxiety
                             education     skills          skills       diploma       participation   earnings     use       index
                                (1)         (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)        (7)        (8)


                                               Panel A: Average teacher education
CAL                           0.893**     0.188**        0.249***        0.071**       0.084**        0.441***   0.088**    -0.226**
                              (0.343)     (0.092)         (0.073)        (0.032)       (0.042)         (0.134)   (0.042)     (0.109)
CAL*Teacher education          -0.187      -0.022          -0.090         0.003         -0.091          0.090     -0.027    0.231**
                              (0.506)     (0.119)         (0.109)        (0.049)       (0.069)         (0.178)   (0.065)     (0.114)
                                             Panel B: Average teacher-student ratio
CAL                           0.857**     0.171*         0.229***        0.065**       0.096**        0.395***   0.099**    -0.186*
                              (0.342)     (0.091)         (0.075)        (0.029)       (0.042)         (0.136)   (0.042)    (0.104)
CAL*Teacher­student ratio      -0.431      -0.011          -0.065         0.018        -0.120*          0.233     -0.090     0.086
                              (0.489)     (0.127)         (0.112)        (0.054)       (0.061)         (0.172)   (0.065)    (0.132)
                                                    Panel C: Internet proliferation
CAL                           0.856**     0.175*         0.237***       0.084***        0.096**       0.501***   0.095**     -0.163
                              (0.334)     (0.091)         (0.073)        (0.029)        (0.043)        (0.130)   (0.042)    (0.103)
CAL*Internet proliferation     -0.438      -0.025          -0.096         -0.058       -0.122**         -0.198    -0.087     -0.010
                              (0.513)     (0.128)         (0.125)        (0.057)        (0.059)        (0.173)   (0.059)    (0.126)
                                                  Panel D: Geographic heterogeneity
CAL                            0.429       0.126          0.186**        0.074**        0.084*        0.335**     0.061      -0.141
                              (0.345)     (0.101)         (0.081)        (0.037)        (0.050)       (0.134)    (0.048)    (0.107)
CAL*Midwest                    0.776       0.106           0.077          -0.004         -0.040        0.237      0.036      -0.055
                              (0.473)     (0.122)         (0.112)        (0.046)        (0.057)       (0.153)    (0.057)    (0.106)
                                                       Panel E: Average wage
CAL                           0.897**     0.162*         0.198***       0.109***       0.110**        0.393***    0.031      -0.129
                              (0.357)     (0.085)         (0.075)        (0.034)       (0.049)         (0.143)   (0.047)    (0.119)
CAL*Above-median wage          -0.069      0.052           0.100          -0.032        -0.046          -0.019   0.123**     0.027
                              (0.523)     (0.134)         (0.119)        (0.046)       (0.058)         (0.174)   (0.059)    (0.106)
                                                           Panel F: Gender
CAL                            0.580*      0.132          0.160**         0.020          0.047        0.320**     0.062      -0.182
                              (0.349)     (0.091)         (0.076)        (0.032)        (0.044)       (0.152)    (0.046)    (0.115)
CAL*Female                    0.537**      0.103           0.135*       0.103***         0.031        0.292*      0.038       0.020
                              (0.259)     (0.071)         (0.071)        (0.029)        (0.037)       (0.152)    (0.037)    (0.088)
                                                     Panel G: Paternal education
CAL                            0.407        0.082         0.171**         0.054           0.072       0.385***    0.055      -0.160
                              (0.294)      (0.082)        (0.066)        (0.036)        (0.045)        (0.130)   (0.041)    (0.098)
CAL*Primary edu. or less     0.843***     0.197***        0.105*          0.033          -0.016         0.158     0.048      -0.018
                              (0.251)      (0.073)        (0.061)        (0.038)        (0.033)        (0.125)   (0.043)    (0.077)

Notes: This table shows how CAL education interacts with school inputs, as well as county-level
and individual characteristics. It shows estimates from regressions that interact exposure to CAL
with a dummy for counties with above-median teacher education in 2000 (panel A, China County
Statistical Yearbook), a dummy for counties with above-median teacher­student ratio in 2000
(panel B, Census), a dummy for counties with above-median availability of the internet in 2002
(panel C, data from China County Statistical Yearbook), a dummy for counties in the midwest
(panel D), a dummy for counties with above-median wage in 2002 (panel E, data from China
County Statistical Yearbook), a dummy for female students (panel F), or a dummy for fathers with
primary education or less (panel G). Standard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses,
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source: CFPS, 2010 and 2014, individuals born from 1977.



                                                                  41
               Online Appendix - Not For Publication


A     More Details on the CAL Program

A.1 County-level Rollout
The list of counties by implementation year comes from the following official sources by the Chinese
Ministry of Education:

    · 2004: https://web.archive.org/web/20201107144943/http://www.moe.gov.cn/srcsite/A06/jcys_
      jyzb/200406/t20040607_82060.html

    · 2005: https://web.archive.org/web/20201105225420/http://www.moe.gov.cn/srcsite/A06/jcys_
      jyzb/200510/t20051011_82044.html

    · 2006: https://web.archive.org/web/20201105225730/http://www.moe.gov.cn/srcsite/A06/jcys_
      jyzb/200606/t20060621_82053.html; https://web.archive.org/web/20201105225830/http://www.
      moe.gov.cn/srcsite/A06/jcys_jyzb/200605/t20060523_82046.html

    · 2007: https://web.archive.org/web/20201105225930/http://www.moe.gov.cn/srcsite/A06/jcys_
      jyzb/200707/t20070702_82048.html; https://web.archive.org/web/20201105230059/http://www.
      moe.gov.cn/srcsite/A06/jcys_jyzb/200705/t20070514_82057.html


A.2 Implementation of the CAL Program
Although this paper focuses on middle schools exclusively, the Modern Distance Education Program
was implemented in three types of education institutions: small-scale rural primary schools, which
we will call rural teaching sites, rural primary schools, and rural middle schools. The implementation
of the program in these three institutions varied to accommodate the different needs of their students
and teachers.
    First, rural teaching sites received DVD-player sets, including a TV, a DVD player, and teaching
CDs prepared by the best teachers in the country (Figure A1, panel A). Second, in addition to
the DVD-player sets, rural primary schools received satellite teaching receiving stations (Figure
A1, panel B). These more complex setup included outdoor satellite antennas, TVs, satellite TV
receivers, satellite data reception equipment (such as a modem compatible with satellite broadband
internet), a broadband satellite internet connection, and other related equipment. In other words,
the participating rural primary schools were connected to the internet through satellites (Figure
A2). Third, in addition to DVD-player sets and satellite stations, rural middle schools received
computer classrooms. This classroom included a projector, a central control station, a DVD-player
set, a TV, a network of computers, and other related equipment (Figure A1, panel C).
    In rural middle schools, the availability of new technology introduced three new pedagogical
approaches. First, in the regular classrooms, local teachers could use the DVD-player sets to play
the teaching CDs prepared by some of the best teachers in the country (Figure A3, panel A). More-
over, local teachers could use the DVD-player sets to enhance their own lectures with audiovisual
components. Second, the satellite receiving stations could be used to download and stream the
lectures and related teaching materials prepared by the CAL program. Moreover, these stations
could be used by local teachers to access the internet for teaching activities (Figure A3, panel

                                                 A1
B). Third, computer rooms could be used to allow students to follow from their own device the
lectures and teaching materials prepared by the CAL program, instead of following them from a
single shared screen (Figure A3, panel C). Moreover, computers allowed students to take interactive
quizzes and exercised based on the CAL lectures. Finally, computer classrooms could be used to
introduce computer science in the curriculum of participating middle schools.
    Office of Modern Distance Education Project for China's Rural Primary and Middle Schools
(2009) reports data on the utilization of the CAL technology (Table A1). The share of schools using
CAL equipment for more than 20 hours per week was 58% for computer rooms, 22% for satellite
stations, and 33% for DVD-players sets. The share of schools using CAL equipment between 16 and
20 hours a week was 27% for computer rooms, 43% for satellite stations, and 36% for DVD-players
sets. The share of schools using CAL equipment between 6 and 15 hours per week was 14% for
computer rooms, 32% for satellite stations, and 29% for DVD-players sets. Finally, the share of
schools using CAL equipment less than 5 hours per week was only 1% for computer rooms, 3% for
satellite stations, and 2% for DVD-players sets.
    We can use these statistics to compute a lower bound of the number of courses per week in which
the average student was exposed to the equipment provided by the CAL program. Specifically, we
use the center of these intervals, as well as the lowest bound of the top category (twenty hours), to
compute for how many weekly hours the average participating middle school used CAL equipment.
The estimate is equal to (58%  20 + 27%  18 + 14%  10.5 + 1%  2.5) + (22%  20 + 43%  18 +
32%  10.5 + 3%  2.5) + (33%  20 + 36%  18 + 29%  10.5 + 2%  2.5) = 49.7 total hours per
week. Assuming that the mean number of classes per school is ten and that each school had only
one computer room, one satellite set, and one DVD-player set, we can conclude that the average
student was exposed to CAL equipment for at least 49.7/10 = 4.97 hours, or 6.6 45-minute lectures
per week.




                                                A2
                               Figure A1: CAL in Middle Schools




               Panel A: DVD player sets                    Panel B: Satellite receiving stations




                                      Panel C: Computer rooms
Notes: These pictures come from Office of Modern Distance Education Project for China's Rural
Primary and Middle Schools (2009) and Wang, Zeng, and Wang (2015). In Wang, Zeng, and Wang
(2015), they are Figure 2.2, 2.3, and 2.4, respectively.


                                                A3
                   Figure A2: Installation of Satellite Receiving Systems




Notes: The picture shows the installation of a satellite receiving system in a primary school in Yun-
long County, Yunnan province. Source: https://web.archive.org/web/20090107112617/http:
//www.dalidaily.com/tupian/20060809/035306.html.




                                                A4
                       Figure A3: Use of CAL Equipment for Pedagogy




              Panel A: CD-based teaching             Panel B: Distance education based on satellite stations




                            Panel C: Lectures in computer classrooms
Notes: Panel A shows CD-based teaching in a school in a minority region of Western China. Panel
B shows distance education based on a satellite teaching receiving station in a rural primary school
of Huining county in the Gansu Province. Panel C shows distance education in the computer room
of a rural middle schools of Baokang county in the Hubei Province. In Wang, Zeng, and Wang
(2015), they are Figure 2.11, 2.16, and 2.20, respectively.




                                                A5
                          Figure A4: Visits from MoE Inspectors




Notes: These pictures show the visits of inspectors from the Ministry of Education (MoE) in Lu-
ohe, Henan Province, in 2008. Source: https://web.archive.org/web/20201104211707/http:
//news.haedu.cn/dsjj/lh/633670300790718750.html.


                         Table A1: Utilization of CAL Equipment

                                           DVD           Satellite      Computer
                                          stations       stations        rooms
                                            (1)             (2)            (3)

               More than 20 hours           33%            22%             58%
               16-20 hours                  36%            43%             27%
               6-15 hours                   29%            32%             14%
               Less than 5 hours             2%             3%              1%
Notes: These data come from Office of Modern Distance Education Project for China's Rural
Primary and Middle Schools (2009) and Wang, Zeng, and Wang (2015) (Figure 2.23).


A.3 Anecdotal Evidence on Benefits of CAL Program
The following comments are from discussion and feedback about the CAL program by students,
teachers, and their school principals.

     "The CAL program provides me with the opportunity to be instructed by the most
     excellent teachers. I always feel that now I am a student in an elite school in a modern
     city. I like their teaching styles a lot, which makes abstract and boring classes much
     more interesting and variegated."
     -A middle school student in a rural middle school in Guyuan city, Ningxia province.
     "I am 54 years old and less educated. It is difficult for me to keep my knowledge up to
     date. Previously, I felt it was extremely difficult for me to properly teach and motivate
     my students. Now, with the influx of modern education technology, everything has
     changed. With the help of a younger teacher in our school, I am now able to use a
     computer and multimedia content in class."

                                                  A6
      -A primary school teacher in Gansu province.
      "The rural schools in our country face several common difficulties: outdated teaching
      style, old and less-educated teachers, and limited finances and information. This pro-
      gram is an effective way to solve these difficulties. Furthermore, the program connects
      the rural schools to the outside world and provides students in rural schools with the
      opportunity to enjoy high-quality teaching materials."
      -Guo Jinchuan, a principal in a rural middle school in Guyuan city, Ningxia province.
      "The CAL program was like a new paradigm for education. We noticed that the digi-
      tal lectures have become the students' favorites. When students are instructed by the
      modern program, they are more focused and motivated. With the help of videos and
      multimedia materials, they show more interest and confidence in dealing with difficult
      questions. This program is extremely helpful for our rural schools that were lacking of
      information and knowledge. It makes students in rural schools enjoy the same educa-
      tional materials that students in urban areas have available."
      ­A teacher in a rural school in Tongling county, Anhui province.

Reference: http://old.moe.gov.cn//publicfiles/business/htmlfiles/moe/moe_1851/
200711/29185.html


B     More Details on the Data

B.1 CFPS Cognitive Tests
The CFPS cognitive test includes a literacy test and a math test. The basis of the CFPS literacy
and math tests is the Guttman scale. Specifically, all questions can be strictly arranged according to
their difficulty. Answering a given question correctly implies that the respondent can answer all the
easier questions. Similarly, answering one question incorrectly means that the respondent cannot
move immediately to the harder questions. The major advantage of the Guttman scale design is to
save data collection time and reduce the time commitment of respondents.
    In the CFPS test, respondents start answering questions in ascending order of difficulty. The
test ends either when the total number of questions is reached (34 literacy and 24 math questions)
or when the respondent answers three subsequent questions incorrectly. In the latter case, the last
question answered correctly determines the final score. In order to further improve the fairness
and precision of the test, there are three different starting points based on the education level
of the respondents. In other words, the first question of both the literacy and math test differs
between respondents with at most primary education, respondent with middle school education, and
respondents with at least high school education. If respondents answer the first question incorrectly,
they are moved to the lower starting point (if a lower starting point exist) and restart the test.
    In the data, the results of the literacy and math tests are highly and significantly correlated with
years of completed education. Specifically, we regressed years of education on math and Chinese
test scores, controlling for birth cohort and county fixed effects. This sample includes non-CAL
individuals exclusively in order to exclude any influence of the reform on this relationship. The
estimated coefficient of the math test score is 2.56, while the estimated coefficient of the Chinese
test score is 0.63. Both coefficients are highly statistically significant.




                                                  A7
B.2 Noncognitive Outcomes
For ease of interpretation, we normalize each measurement to have a mean of zero and standard
deviation of one.

Satisfaction Index
1. Popularity: Rate your popularity from 1-10, with 1 the lowest and 10 the highest
2. Happiness: Rate your happiness from 1-10, with 1 the lowest and 10 the highest
3. Getting along with others: Rate how well you are getting along with others, with 1 the lowest
and 10 the highest

Anxiety Index
1. Depression: How frequently have you been feeling depressed in the past month? (1) Almost every
day; (2) Always; (3) About half of the time; (4) Sometimes; (5) Never
2. Nervousness: How frequently have you been feeling nervous in the past month? (1) Almost every
day; (2) Always; (3) About half of the time; (4) Sometimes; (5) Never
3. Difficulty in doing things: How frequently have you been feeling difficult in doing things in the
past month? (1) Almost every day; (2) Always; (3) About half of the time; (4) Sometimes; (5)
Never


C    Decomposition of the Earning Effect
Specifically, we decompose the overall effect on earnings using the following framework:

                                     E [Y | D = 1] - E [Y | D = 0] =
                                1     N                   1  N
                           =   [N     i=1 Yi | D = 1] - [ N  i=1 Yi | D = 0]

                            1        N
                         = [N        i=1 [(Yi - Y o - Y m ) + Y o + Y m ] | D = 1]
                            1       N
                         -[ N       i=1 [(Yi - Y o - Y m ) + Y o + Y m ] | D = 0]                (3)

                                     ~om | D = 1] - E [Y
                                = E [Y                 ~om | D = 0]
                                + E [Y o | D = 1] - E [Y o | D = 0]
                                + E [Y m | D = 1] - E [Y m | D = 0]
The outcome variable Yi measures the earnings of individual i; the dummy D indicates the treatment
status; N is the total number of workers employed; Y o is the average wage for occupation o; and Y m
is the average wage for individuals with migration status m (a dummy variable equal to 1 in case of
migration from rural to urban areas after age 12). The variable Y  ~om is the deviation of individual
i's earnings from occupation o's and migration status m's average earnings. The first component in
the last three rows of equation (3) measures the "within-occupation-migration" earning premium as
the individual deviation from the mean. The second component measures the "across-occupation"
earning premium generated by computer-assisted learning. The third component measures the
"across-migration" earning premium.




                                                    A8
D       Cost-Benefit Analysis
Our results consistently show that computer-assisted learning improved students' long-term out-
comes. Specifically, individual monetary returns from CAL are statistically and economically sig-
nificant: an estimated increase in earnings of 59% and a shift towards occupations that focus more
on cognitive skills and less on manual skills. In this section, we compare these higher earnings with
the financial costs of implementing and maintaining the program.

Life-cycle increase in earnings. The CAL program increased individual earnings in adulthood
for children who were treated in middle school by 59%, compared with the control group. Following
the framework in Chetty, Hendren and Katz (2016), we employ this estimate for a cost-benefit
analysis. We assume that: (1) this 59% increase in individual earnings remains constant over the
life cycle; (2) the life cycle profile of earnings for the individuals exposed to CAL follows the average
earnings profile of the Chinese population; (3) the discount rate is 5%. Moreover, we ignore real
wage growth rate.
     In the 2014 CFPS sample, the average earnings in rural counties for those not exposed to CAL
were CNY 10,499. Therefore, the estimated undiscounted effect of CAL on earnings is 10,499*59%
= CNY 6,194. Assuming that the number of working years is 30, the undiscounted total life-cycle
increase in earnings is CNY 185,820 (6,194*30). Without taking into account the wage growth rate,
its discounted present value is CNY 42,995 or USD 6,432 (185,820/(1+0.05)^30).

Fiscal cost. The total financial cost of implementing the CAL program was CNY 11.1 billion. The
government reported that the program reached more than 100 million students in rural primary and
secondary schools.56 Since the exact number of students reached by the program is not available,
we use 100 million students for our computations. Therefore, the per-student cost was CNY 111 or
USD 17.

Conclusions. Overall, our cost-benefit analysis indicates that the cost per capita of the CAL
program was far smaller than its per-capita earnings gains. It is worth noting that this simple
analysis omits many factors that should be considered in a more comprehensive cost-benefit eval-
uation. First, our calculations do not account for the economic gains obtained from sources other
than earnings. Second, widespread proficiency in using computers or the internet is an important
driver of economic growth. Our computations, however, do not take into account the possibly
large positive externalities generated by having a more technologically savvy population. Third,
our calculations do not take into account wage growth. These three points make our estimated
lifetime increase in earnings a "lower bound" of the true earnings increase. Fourth, we do not have
data on the upkeep costs needed to maintain the CAL equipment in good working condition. Even
though these maintenance costs could be large, it is implausible to assume that they would cancel
the difference between the individual benefits and the direct implementation costs.




56
     https://web.archive.org/web/20201029160144/http://www.moe.gov.cn/jyb_xwfb/xw_fbh/moe_
     2069/moe_2095/moe_2100/moe_1851/tnull_29185.html.


                                                  A9
E     Additional Figures and Tables

                 Figure E1: Leads and Lags Using Doughnut-Hole Approach




           A. Years of completed education                                      B. Math skills




                   C. Chinese skills                                 D. Log earnings
                                                                                            4
Notes: Each panel shows the coefficients k from the following event study: Yibc =  + k=-12 k · Dk +
   
Wibc ·  + c + b + ibc . The variable Dk is equal to 1 in areas with computer-assisted learning after the
reform (k  0). The omitted birth cohort completed middle school 13 years before the reform (27 years
old at the time of the reform). The estimation drops cohorts who should have completed middle school
either the year before or the same year of the policy implementation. These individuals, in fact, might have
an incorrect exposure to the treatment due to grade retention or earlier-than-normal enrollment in school.
Vertical dashed bars are 95% confidence intervals computed from standard errors clustered at the county
level. Source: CFPS, 2010 and 2014, individuals born from 1977.




                                                   A10
   Figure E2: Years of Completed Education, Different Distributions of G5 Individuals




        A. Using G1 distribution                            B. Using G2 distribution




        C. Using G3 distribution                            D. Using G4 distribution

Notes: Each panel shows the coefficients k from the following event study: Yibc =  +
   4                
   k=-12 k · Dk + Wibc ·  + c + b + ibc . The variable Dk is equal to 1 in areas with computer-
assisted learning after the reform (k  0), and is equal to 0 otherwise. The omitted birth
cohort completed middle school 13 years before the reform (27 years old at the time of
the reform). Individuals in areas that did not receive computer-aided learning (G5) are
distributed across periods according to their age when the reform was first implemented in
G1 (panel A), G2 (panel B), G3 (panel C), and G4 (panel D). The dependent variable is
completed years of education. Vertical dashed bars are 95% confidence intervals computed
from standard errors clustered at the county level. Source: CFPS, 2010 and 2014, individuals
born from 1977.




                                             A11
           Figure E3: Placebo Test, Random CAL Among Pre-Reform Cohorts




          A. Years of completed education                                  B. Math skills




                  C. Chinese skills                              D. Log earnings
Notes: This placebo test randomizes the implementation of the reform among birth cohorts who
completed middle school before the actual reform. The figures show the distribution of the coefficient
of "false" CAL exposure for different long-term outcomes. The sample includes only individuals who
were not actually exposed to CAL in middle school. Source: CFPS, 2010 and 2014, individuals born
from 1977.




                                                A12
            Figure E4: Placebo Test, Random CAL Among Different Counties




          A. Years of completed education                                 B. Math skills




                  C. Chinese skills                             D. Log earnings
Notes: This placebo test randomizes the implementation of the reform among different counties.
The figures show the distribution of the coefficient of "false" CAL exposure for different long-term
outcomes. Source: CFPS, 2010 and 2014, individuals born from 1977.




                                               A13
                                           Table E1: Variable List

                                                Panel A: Education outcomes
  Years of education                                             2014   wave,   missing   values   filled   in   with   2010   wave
  Middle school diploma                                          2014   wave,   missing   values   filled   in   with   2010   wave
  High school diploma                                            2014   wave,   missing   values   filled   in   with   2010   wave
  College degree                                                 2014   wave,   missing   values   filled   in   with   2010   wave
  Math score                                                     2014   wave,   missing   values   filled   in   with   2010   wave
  Chinese score                                                  2014   wave,   missing   values   filled   in   with   2010   wave
                                           Panel B: Labor market outcomes
  Labor force participation                                      2014   wave,   missing   values   filled   in   with   2010   wave
  Log earnings                                                   2014   wave,   missing   values   filled   in   with   2010   wave
  Cognitive skills                                               2014   wave,   missing   values   filled   in   with   2010   wave
  Manual skills                                                  2014   wave,   missing   values   filled   in   with   2010   wave
  Farmer                                                         2014   wave,   missing   values   filled   in   with   2010   wave
                                                  Panel C: Internet usage
  Internet use (dummy)                                           2014 wave
  Frequency in using computer for work                           2014 wave
  Frequency in using computer for socializing                    2014 wave
                                                Panel D: Noncognitive skills
  Satisfaction index                                             2014   wave
  Popularity                                                     2014   wave
  Happiness                                                      2014   wave
  Getting along with others                                      2014   wave
  Anxiety index                                                  2014   wave
  Depression                                                     2014   wave
  Nervousness                                                    2014   wave
  Difficulty in doing things                                     2014   wave

Notes: The CFPS is a survey with a panel design. Our analysis is based on the 2014 wave.
We use observations from the 2010 wave only when observations are not available in 2010.
We cannot carry out this procedure for variables measuring internet usage or noncognitive
skills because the questionnaire is not consistent across waves.




                                                           A14
                             Table E2: Differences Between Treated Geographical Areas
                                                                    Group 1         Group 2         Group 3      Group 4     Mean    Standard
                                                                   vs. G2-3-4      vs. G1-3-4      vs. G1-2-4   vs. G1-2-3           Deviation
                                                                      (1)              (2)            (3)          (4)       (5)        (6)

                                                                     Panel A: Selection criteria
 Midwest                                                           0.329***          -0.184*         -0.047       0.006      0.50      0.50
                                                                    (0.108)          (0.097)        (0.116)      (0.116)
 Share of rural residents                                            0.023            0.016          -0.059        0.017     0.82      0.16
                                                                    (0.029)          (0.030)        (0.050)      (0.030)
 Log number of cellphone users (/10,000 residents)                   -0.143           -0.006         0.128         0.009     6.18      0.91
                                                                    (0.214)          (0.184)        (0.222)      (0.211)
 Log number of internet users (/10,000 residents)                    -0.063            0.077          0.355       -0.437     3.79      1.55
                                                                    (0.301)          (0.297)        (0.373)      (0.490)
 Log value of postal services (10k CNY/10k residents)                -0.010           0.274          0.137      -0.546**     4.18      0.98
                                                                    (0.243)          (0.195)        (0.211)      (0.234)
 Log number of telephone users (/10,000 residents)                   -0.081           0.152           0.176      -0.327*     6.81      0.67
                                                                    (0.136)          (0.128)        (0.165)      (0.183)


 Log population (/10,000 residents)                                  -0.119          -0.006          0.005         0.119     4.03      0.83
                                                                    (0.200)         (0.165)         (0.189)      (0.213)
 Log GDP in primary sector (10k CNY/10,000 residents)                -0.020         0.272**          -0.062      -0.305*     6.94      0.63
                                                                    (0.140)         (0.118)         (0.151)      (0.169)
 Share of primary sector                                             -0.018         0.041*          -0.023*       -0.019     0.05      0.09
                                                                    (0.014)         (0.022)         (0.013)      (0.014)
 Share of secondary sector                                            0.018           0.001          -0.003       -0.014     0.31      0.17
                                                                    (0.045)         (0.034)         (0.033)      (0.041)
 Share of tertiary sector                                            -0.000          -0.042           0.026        0.034     0.64      0.16
                                                                    (0.041)         (0.032)         (0.031)      (0.040)
 Log wage bill (10k CNY/10,000 residents)                            -0.049           0.094           0.100       -0.194     5.98      0.68
                                                                    (0.151)         (0.129)         (0.196)      (0.145)
 Log yield of major crops (10,000 tons/10,000 residents)              0.277          0.181           -0.411       -0.090     7.69      1.08
                                                                    (0.203)         (0.222)         (0.262)      (0.253)
 Log revenues of local government (10k CNY/10,000 residents)         -0.117           0.092           0.342       -0.383     5.57      1.01
                                                                    (0.271)         (0.175)         (0.290)      (0.236)
 Log expenses of local government (10k CNY/10,000 residents)         -0.050           0.043           0.137       -0.159     6.15      0.58
                                                                    (0.105)         (0.104)         (0.184)      (0.149)
 Log expenses for science (10k CNY/10,000 residents)               -0.584**          -0.014         0.691**       -0.157     -0.24     1.30
                                                                    (0.292)         (0.238)         (0.331)      (0.370)
 Log expenses for education (10k CNY/10,000 residents)               -0.020           0.107           0.153      -0.298*     4.68      0.57
                                                                    (0.109)         (0.105)         (0.159)      (0.155)
 Log deposits (10k CNY/10,000 residents)                             -0.159          0.093            0.177       -0.168     8.20      0.92
                                                                    (0.200)         (0.173)         (0.257)      (0.221)
 Log loans (10k CNY/10,000 residents)                                -0.061          -0.060           0.167       -0.032     7.91      0.93
                                                                    (0.203)         (0.179)         (0.273)      (0.203)
 Log number of tertiary schools (/100,000 residents)                 -0.019          -0.007           0.022        0.004     0.04      0.11
                                                                    (0.022)         (0.023)         (0.033)      (0.026)
 Log number of secondary schools (/100,000 residents)                 0.123          0.100            0.099      -0.368*     1.60      0.74
                                                                    (0.156)         (0.141)         (0.175)      (0.212)
 Log number of primary schools (/100,000 residents)                   0.053          0.129            0.214       -0.465     3.45      1.13
                                                                    (0.266)         (0.209)         (0.260)      (0.325)
 Log number of students in tertiary schools (/10,000 residents)      -0.335          -0.196          -0.007        0.605     0.87      1.89
                                                                    (0.404)         (0.379)         (0.461)      (0.485)
 Log number of students in secondary schools (/10,000 residents)      0.090           0.125           0.080      -0.351*     6.15      0.68
                                                                    (0.137)         (0.131)         (0.155)      (0.200)
 Log number of students in primary schools (/10,000 residents)        0.052           0.232          -0.031       -0.351     6.63      0.77
                                                                    (0.165)         (0.142)         (0.176)      (0.235)
 Log number of teachers in tertiary schools (/10,000 residents)      -0.183          -0.081           0.052        0.235     0.40      0.94
                                                                    (0.189)         (0.192)         (0.243)      (0.230)
 Log number of teachers in secondary schools (/10,000 residents)      0.007           0.117           0.121      -0.304*     3.25      0.60
                                                                    (0.128)         (0.116)         (0.133)      (0.163)
 Log number of teachers in primary schools (/10,000 residents)        0.000           0.121           0.119       -0.300     3.62      0.68
                                                                    (0.144)         (0.129)         (0.153)      (0.203)
 Log number of hospitals beds (/100,000 residents)                    0.073           0.022           0.016       -0.119     5.07      0.53
                                                                    (0.114)         (0.101)         (0.145)      (0.128)


Notes: This table shows baseline differences between the geographical areas that received computer-aided
learning (G1 2004, G2 2005, G3 2006, G4 2007). Columns 1 to 4 show the estimated difference (and standard
error) between different groups. Columns 5 and 6 shows the average and standard deviation of each dependent
variable. Robust standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source: China County
Statistical Yearbook, 2002.



                                                                                A15
           Table E3: Differences Between Treated Geographical Areas, Continued

                                        Group 1          Group 2         Group 3
                                           (1)             (2)             (3)

                                         Share of rural residents
                     Group 2              -0.008             -              -
                                         (0.032)             -              -
                     Group 3              -0.064          -0.056            -
                                         (0.054)         (0.053)            -
                     Group 4              -0.004          0.003           0.059
                                         (0.033)         (0.033)         (0.054)
                            Log number of cellphone users (/10,000 residents)
                     Group 2              0.111             -                -
                                         (0.241)            -                -
                     Group 3              0.214           0.103              -
                                         (0.279)         (0.249)             -
                     Group 4              0.122           0.011           -0.092
                                         (0.269)         (0.238)         (0.276)
                            Log number of Internet users (/10,000 residents)
                     Group 2              0.100              -               -
                                         (0.323)             -               -
                     Group 3              0.323            0.223             -
                                         (0.413)         (0.396)             -
                     Group 4              -0.297          -0.397          -0.620
                                         (0.532)         (0.516)         (0.579)
                                        Log population (/10,000)
                     Group 2              0.092             -               -
                                         (0.221)            -               -
                     Group 3              0.100           0.007             -
                                         (0.247)         (0.210)            -
                     Group 4              0.191           0.099           0.091
                                         (0.268)         (0.234)         (0.258)
                                  Log GDP (10k CNY/10,000 residents)
                     Group 2              0.187               -              -
                                         (0.150)              -              -
                     Group 3              -0.032           -0.219            -
                                         (0.183)          (0.160)            -
                     Group 4              -0.226         -0.413**         -0.194
                                         (0.200)          (0.180)        (0.208)

Notes: This table shows baseline differences between the geographical areas that received computer-aided
learning (G1 2004, G2 2005, G3 2006, G4 2007) for few selected observable characteristics. Robust standard
errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source: China County Statistical Yearbook, 2002.


                                                   A16
     Table E4: Trends Before the Implementation of Computer-Aided Learning, Event
                                       Studies

                      Years of   Math      Chinese         MS              LM            Log      Internet   Anxiety
                     education   skills     skills       diploma       participation   earnings     use       index
                        (1)        (2)        (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)        (7)        (8)


                                            Panel A: Linear trends
  Linear trend         0.527      -0.252     -0.176       0.064           0.081         -0.045     -0.153     0.011
                      (0.627)    (0.174)    (0.143)      (0.073)         (0.146)       (0.266)    (0.092)    (0.381)
  Observations         2,970      2,970      2,970        2,970           2,970         2,454      1,926      1,924
  R2                   0.426      0.368      0.396        0.233           0.165         0.272      0.368      0.183

                                           Panel B: Quadratic trends
  Linear trend         0.429      -0.085     -0.029       0.066            0.083        -0.052     -0.093      0.096
                      (0.387)    (0.116)    (0.090)      (0.048)         (0.083)       (0.196)    (0.061)    (0.210)
  Linear trend2        0.098     -0.167*    -0.147*       -0.002          -0.002         0.006     -0.060     -0.086
                      (0.383)    (0.098)    (0.081)      (0.038)         (0.078)       (0.167)    (0.080)    (0.206)
  Observations         2,970      2,970      2,970        2,970           2,970         2,454      1,926      1,924
  R2                   0.426      0.368      0.396        0.233           0.165         0.272      0.368      0.183
  F-test               0.54        0.23       0.18         0.33           0.39           0.96       0.19       0.55

                                            Panel C: Cubic trends
  Linear trend         0.320      -0.098     -0.008        0.039          0.110         0.120      -0.038     0.162
                      (0.486)    (0.134)    (0.096)      (0.061)         (0.089)       (0.224)    (0.068)    (0.228)
  Linear trend2        0.079     -0.170*    -0.143*       -0.007          0.002         0.033      -0.048     -0.072
                      (0.391)    (0.098)    (0.078)      (0.038)         (0.078)       (0.169)    (0.083)    (0.207)
  Linear trend3        -0.001     -0.000      0.000       -0.000          0.000        0.002*       0.001     0.001
                      (0.003)    (0.001)    (0.001)      (0.000)         (0.000)       (0.001)    (0.000)    (0.001)
  Observations         2,970      2,970      2,970        2,970           2,970         2,454      1,926      1,924
  R2                   0.426      0.368      0.396        0.234           0.165         0.273      0.369      0.184
  F-test               0.65        0.39       0.32         0.36           0.44           0.26       0.06       0.62

  Mean                 8.51       -0.28      -0.28          0.64          0.53           9.02      0.49       -0.02
  Std. dev.            4.10        1.01      1.05           0.48          0.50           1.36      0.50       0.84

Notes: This table shows pre-reform trends in education and labor outcomes in treated counties (G1
to G4). The sample is organized as an event study in which period 0 is the first year with CAL
education in each treated county. The pre-reform trends cover periods -13 to -1. Individuals are
assigned to different counties based on their residence at age 12 . Panel A estimates linear pre-
                                                       
reform trends: Yibc =  + 1 · CAL tb + b + c + Wibc ·  + c · tb + ibc . In this specification, CAL tb
is a linear trend that measures the distance of birth cohorts to the implementation of the reform in
                                                                                   
their county, b are birth cohort fixed effects, c are county fixed effects, Wibc is a set of individual
characteristics, and tb is a linear trend in the event periods. Panel B estimates quadratic pre-reform
                                                            
trends: Yibc =  + 1 · CAL tb + 2 · CAL t2     b + b + c + Wibc ·  + c · tb + ibc . Panel C estimates cubic
pre-reform trends: Yibc =  + 1 · CAL tb + 2 · CAL t2                    3
                                                         b + 3 · CAL tb + b + c + Wibc ·  + c · tb + ibc .
The dependent variables are: completed years of education (col. 1), math skills (col. 2), Chinese
skills (col. 3), dummy for completed middle school education (col. 4), labor market participation
(col. 5), log earnings (col. 6), frequency of internet use for work (col. 7), and an index for level of
mental stress (col. 8). All regressions include individuals born between 1977 and 1988. Standard
errors clustered at the county level in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source: CFPS,
2010 and 2014, individuals born from 1977.




                                                      A17
                            Table E5: Baseline Differences Between Cohorts

                                                  Full sample: G1-G5                        Treated counties: G1-G4
                                        CAL          Obs.        R2     Mean      CAL            Obs.         R2       Mean
                                                                       outcome                                        outcome
                                         (1)         (2)        (3)      (4)       (5)            (6)        (7)        (8)


  Male                                   -0.006     5,176      0.051    0.50        0.001        4,357      0.024      0.49
                                        (0.046)                                   (0.053)
  Minority                               -0.015     5,176      0.639    0.12      -0.030*        4,357      0.643      0.14
                                        (0.015)                                   (0.017)
  Number of siblings                      0.072     5,167      0.420    1.65       0.081         4,349      0.377      1.83
                                        (0.070)                                   (0.079)
  Father: no edu                       -0.074**     5,000      0.242    0.27     -0.093**        4,195      0.252      .29
                                        (0.034)                                   (0.038)
  Father: primary edu                    0.061      5,000      0.100    0.30       0.052         4,195      0.096      0.30
                                        (0.042)                                   (0.045)
  Father: junior high edu                 0.030     5,000      0.140    0.30        0.056        4,195      0.136      0.28
                                        (0.045)                                   (0.051)
  Father: high school edu                -0.006     5,000      0.091    0.13       -0.002        4,195      0.087      0.13
                                        (0.028)                                   (0.032)
  Father: college or more                -0.011     5,000      0.088    0.01     -0.012**        4,195      0.058      0.01
                                        (0.007)                                   (0.005)
  Father: member of Communist party       0.021     4,734      0.086    0.09       0.017         3,964      0.083      0.10
                                        (0.019)                                   (0.020)
  Father: manager                         0.025     4,023      0.120    0.05        0.018        3,375      0.102      0.04
                                        (0.020)                                   (0.022)
  Mother: no edu                      -0.089***     5,033      0.283    0.51       -0.055        4,229      0.286      0.55
                                        (0.033)                                   (0.039)
  Mother: primary edu                     0.041     5,033      0.116    0.25     0.063**         4,229      0.121      0.25
                                        (0.029)                                   (0.032)
  Mother: junior high edu                 0.006     5,033      0.226    0.18       -0.036        4,229      0.201      0.16
                                        (0.033)                                   (0.034)
  Mother: high school edu             0.045***      5,033      0.095    0.05      0.031*         4,229      0.085      0.04
                                        (0.015)                                   (0.016)
  Mother: college or more                -0.003     5,033      0.115    0.00       -0.003        4,229      0.073      0.00
                                        (0.007)                                   (0.007)
  Mother: member of Communist party       0.004     4,757      0.099    0.01        0.009        3,991      0.096      0.01
                                        (0.010)                                   (0.012)
  Mother: manager                        -0.007     3,641      0.144    0.01       -0.001        3,094      0.135      0.00
                                        (0.012)                                   (0.014)


Notes: This table shows baseline differences between cohorts who could benefit from
computer-aided learning (CAL=1) and cohorts who were too old to benefit (CAL=0). Each
row-column combination shows the coefficient  from a different regression of exposure to
computer-aided learning in a county on baseline individual characteristics: Baselineibc =
 +  · CALbc + b + c + ibc , where b are birth cohort fixed effects and c are county
fixed effects. Rural counties received computer-aided learning in 2004 (G1), 2005 (G2), 2006
(G3), 2007 (G4). Some counties never received the program (G5). Columns 1 to 4 include
all geographical areas. Columns 5 and 8 restrict the sample to areas that received the pro-
gram at some point (G1-G4). All regressions include individuals born between 1977 and
1994. Standard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.1. Source: CFPS, 2014 wave, individuals born from 1977.



                                                            A18
                              Table E6: Dropping Low-Wage Counties

                   Years of     Math     Chinese      MS           LM            Log       Internet    Anxiety
                  education     skills    skills    diploma    participation   earnings      use        index
                     (1)         (2)       (3)        (4)          (5)           (6)         (7)         (8)


  CAL              0.950***    0.221**   0.261***   0.098***     0.074*        0.310**     0.099**      -0.064
                    (0.335)    (0.093)    (0.077)    (0.032)     (0.043)       (0.147)     (0.048)     (0.122)

  Observations      3,531       3,531     3,531      3,531        3,531         2,725       2,145       2,143
  R2                0.426       0.372     0.412      0.233        0.139         0.271       0.387       0.146
  Mean              8.65        -0.25     -0.26      0.66          0.54          9.06        0.50       0.00
  Std. dev.          4.22        1.02      1.07       0.48        0.50           1.36        0.50        0.82

Notes: This table shows the results dropping from the estimating sample the counties in the bottom
decile of average wage. The remaining counties are less likely to have residents who started schools
after the standard age (and therefore possibly miscategorized by the ITT specification). Standard
errors clustered at the county level in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source: CFPS,
2010 and 2014, individuals born from 1977.


                  Table E7: P-values Adjusted for Multiple Hypothesis Tests

                   Years of    Math      Chinese       MS          LM             Log       Internet     Anxiety
                  education    skills     skills     diploma   participation    earnings      use         index
                     (1)         (2)       (3)         (4)          (5)           (6)          (7)         (8)


 CAL              0.848***     0.183**   0.227***    0.072**       0.063        0.463***     0.082**     -0.172*
                   (0.304)     (0.080)    (0.064)    (0.029)      (0.039)        (0.120)     (0.038)     (0.098)

 P-value (W-Y)      0.015       0.040    <0.001       0.040        0.125         0.005        0.090       0.110
 P-values (B-H)     0.018       0.029    0.002        0.029        0.113        <0.001        0.103       0.149
 P-values (S-H)     0.018       0.029     0.002       0.029        0.113        <0.001        0.099       0.144

Notes: This table computes adjusted p-values using three different methodologies: Westfall-Young
(Westfall and Young, 1993), Bonferroni-Holm, and Sidak-Holm. The table uses the user-written
Stata command wyoung (Jones, Molitor, and Reif, 2019). All specifications include birth cohort fixed
effects, a set of individual characteristics (an indicator variable for minority groups, the number of
siblings, and dummy variables measuring the paternal schooling level), and county-specific linear
trends. Standard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1. Source: CFPS, 2010 and 2014, individuals born from 1977.




                                                    A19
                       Table E8: Decomposition of the CAL Effect on Earnings
                       Across occupations:            Across migration:     Within occupation and migration:
                       Log mean earnings              Log mean earnings     Log deviation from mean earnings
                               (1)                           (2)                            (3)
  CAL                       0.155***                        0.013                          0.295**
                             (0.051)                       (0.009)                         (0.117)

  Observations               3,889                          3,889                           3,889
  R2                         0.255                          0.367                           0.193

Notes: This table shows the decomposition of the total effect of CAL on earnings. Column 1 shows
the effect of CAL on the log average earnings in each occupation. It measures movements across
occupations of individuals exposed to computer-assisted learning. Column 2 shows the effect of
CAL on the log average earning in each migration status (a dummy equal 1 for individuals who
migrated from rural to urban areas after age 12). Column 3 shows the effect of CAL on the distance
between individual earnings and the average earnings in a given occupation and migration status.
These specifications also include birth cohort fixed effects, county fixed effects, a set of individual
characteristics (an indicator variable for minority groups, the number of siblings, and dummy
variables measuring the paternal schooling level), and county-specific linear trends in birth cohorts.
Standard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Source: CFPS, 2014 wave, individuals born from 1977.


                            Table E9: Effect of CAL on Urban-Rural Gap

                            Urban             Rural           Urban-rural      Effect of            Reduction in
                            sample           sample              gap            CAL                 urban-rural
                                                                                                        gap
                              (1)             (2)                    (3)         (4)                    (5)

  Years of education         13.22            9.09                   4.13       0.848                   21%
  Log earnings               9.71             9.12                   0.59       0.463                   78%
  Math score                 0.68            -0.16                   0.84       0.183                   22%
  Chinese score              0.45            -0.17                   0.62       0.227                   37%



Notes: Column 1 and column 2 presents the average statistics for individuals living in urban and
rural areas and not exposed to CAL. Column 3 computes the baseline urban-rural gap. Column
4 shows the estimated effect of CAL for each outcome (from Table 4). Column 5 is the estimated
effect of CAL on the preexisting rural-urban gap. The percentages in column 5 are derived by
dividing the estimated improvement in a given outcome for individuals living in rural areas by the
baseline urban-rural gap.




                                                       A20
                         Table E10: CAL Effect on Firm Performance

                                                       TFP                      Profit             Value added
                                                        (1)                      (2)                   (3)
                  CAL                                  0.007                     -0.003              0.0004
                                                      (0.008)                   (0.017)             (0.0093)

                  Mean dep. var.                       4.00                      6.59                  8.71
                  Observations                      1,287,749                 1,053,959             1,310,604
                  R2                                  0.780                     0.806                 0.839
Notes: This table shows the effect of CAL on the performance of Chinese firms. These specifications
also include firm fixed effects, county fixed effect, and year fixed effect, as well as county-specific
linear trends. For the construction of TFP, we follow the methodology used by Brandt, Van Biese-
broeck, and Zhang (2012) on a sample of Chinese manufacturing firms (index number estimates
of productivity). Profit and value added are expressed in thousands of CNY. Standard errors clus-
tered at the county level in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source: Annual Surveys
of Industrial Firms (ASIF), 2002 to 2007.


             Table E11: Robustness of ITT Estimates to Implementation of Reform

                         Years of         Math         Chinese          MS             LM            Log        Internet   Anxiety
                        education         skills        skills        diploma      participation   earnings       use       index
                           (1)             (2)           (3)            (4)              (5)         (6)          (7)        (8)

                                              Panel A: Treatment at prefecture level
  CAL                    0.766**          0.105        0.173**         0.043          0.013        0.399***     0.076**    -0.221**
                         (0.307)         (0.080)       (0.070)        (0.031)        (0.041)        (0.131)     (0.037)     (0.092)
  Observations            4,996           4,996         4,996          4,996           4,996        3,889        3,109      3,107
  R2                      0.408           0.348         0.369          0.222           0.148        0.267        0.381      0.149
                                 Panel B: Dropping counties that completed implementation early
  CAL                    0.807**         0.195**      0.217***        0.063**        0.067*        0.495***     0.083**    -0.178*
                         (0.309)         (0.080)       (0.065)        (0.029)        (0.040)        (0.121)     (0.039)    (0.097)
  Observations            4,834           4,834         4,834          4,834           4,834        3,755        3,035      3,034
  R2                      0.433           0.372         0.384          0.242           0.165        0.285        0.401      0.156
                                              Panel C: Dropping Shandong province
  CAL                   0.916***         0.188**      0.234***        0.067**         0.060        0.483***     0.088**     -0.156
                         (0.308)         (0.081)       (0.064)        (0.029)        (0.041)        (0.124)     (0.038)    (0.097)
  Observations            4,783           4,783         4,783          4,783           4,783        3,721        2,954      2,952
  R2                      0.430           0.365         0.386          0.241           0.164        0.282        0.410      0.164


Notes: This table shows the robustness of the intent-to-treat results to the implementation of
the reform. In panel A, the treatment variable is based on the original implementation plan at
the prefecture level. Therefore, all counties within a prefecture receive the same treatment year,
regardless of their actual first year of implementation. Panel B drops all counties in the Guizhou
province. These areas might have completed the implementation of the reform in 2006, instead of
in 2007 as originally planned. Panel C drops all counties in the Shandong province. Even though
these areas were not supposed to receive the program, a report suggests that they implemented
it. Standard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Source: CFPS, 2010 and 2014.

                                                                A21
                 Table E12: Different Trends, Effects of Computer-Assisted Learning

                       Years of   Math         Chinese         MS             LM            Log      Internet   Anxiety
                      education   skills        skills       diploma      participation   earnings     use       index
                         (1)        (2)          (3)            (4)              (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)


                                               Panel A: County-level trends
  CAL                 0.848***    0.183**      0.227***       0.072**        0.063        0.463***   0.082**    -0.172*
                       (0.304)    (0.080)       (0.064)       (0.029)       (0.039)        (0.120)   (0.038)    (0.098)
  Observations          4,996      4,996        4,996          4,996          4,996        3,889      3,109      3,107
  R2                    0.429      0.368        0.389          0.241          0.161        0.281      0.404      0.164

                                              Panel B: Prefecture-level trends
  CAL                 0.814***    0.173**      0.222***       0.069**        0.057        0.463***   0.084**    -0.179*
                       (0.297)    (0.078)       (0.064)       (0.028)       (0.038)        (0.117)   (0.038)    (0.099)
  Observations          4,996      4,996        4,996          4,996          4,996        3,889      3,109      3,107
  R2                    0.426      0.365        0.387          0.235          0.157        0.278      0.398      0.157

                                            Panel C: Trends in selecting criteria
  CAL                  0.525*      0.119       0.163**         0.049        0.064*        0.397***   0.091**     -0.090
                       (0.305)    (0.082)      (0.070)        (0.032)       (0.033)        (0.105)   (0.039)    (0.072)
  Observations          4,858      4,858        4,858          4,858          4,858        3,778      3,018      3,016
  R2                    0.402      0.343        0.367          0.206          0.134        0.247      0.356      0.121

                                                    Panel D: No trends
  CAL                  0.730**    0.163**      0.181***      0.073***       0.061**       0.437***   0.122***    -0.073
                       (0.296)    (0.074)       (0.059)       (0.028)       (0.030)        (0.108)    (0.036)   (0.067)
  Observations          4,996      4,996        4,996          4,996          4,996        3,889      3,109      3,107
  R2                    0.400      0.341        0.363          0.205          0.134        0.245      0.357      0.121

  Mean                  9.12       -0.15        -0.16          0.69           0.56          9.13       0.50      0.00
  Std. dev.             4.14        1.00        1.02           0.46           0.50          1.36       0.50      0.82

Notes: This table shows differences between cohorts who were exposed to computer-aided learning
(CAL=1) and cohorts who were not (CAL=0). Each panel shows the coefficient  from a different
regression of exposure to computer-aided learning on several outcome variables: Yibc =  +  ·
                                 
CALbc + b + c + Wibc ·  + Polc · CALbc ·  + trendsbc + ibc . The trends are: interactions between
county fixed effects and linear trends in birth cohorts (baseline, panel A); interactions between
prefecture fixed effects and linear trends in birth cohorts (panel B); interactions between county
characteristics measured in 2003 (share of rural residents, number of cellphone users, number of
internet users, number of post offices, number of telephone users, a dummy for midwest regions)
and linear trends in birth cohorts (panel C); no county-specific trends (panel D). Standard errors
clustered at the county level in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source: CFPS, 2010
and 2014, individuals born from 1977.




                                                           A22
          Table E13: Different Birth Cohorts, Effects of Computer-Assisted Learning

                       Years of    Math         Chinese         MS               LM            Log      Internet   Anxiety
                      education    skills        skills       diploma        participation   earnings     use       index
                         (1)        (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)        (7)        (8)


                                             Panel A: Baseline (1977-1994)
  CAL                 0.848***    0.183**       0.227***      0.072**           0.063        0.463***   0.082**    -0.172*
                       (0.304)    (0.080)        (0.064)      (0.029)          (0.039)        (0.120)   (0.038)    (0.098)
  Observations          4,996      4,996         4,996           4,996          4,996         3,889      3,109      3,107
  R2                    0.429      0.368         0.389           0.241          0.161         0.281      0.404      0.164

                                                  Panel B: 1980-1994
  CAL                 0.872***    0.191**       0.234***     0.079***          0.071*        0.466***   0.079*      -0.120
                       (0.307)    (0.082)        (0.065)      (0.030)          (0.040)        (0.131)   (0.044)    (0.102)
  Observations          4,189      4,189         4,189           4,189          4,189         3,203      2,520      2,518
  R2                    0.428      0.357         0.391           0.238          0.161         0.289      0.395      0.181

                                                  Panel C: 1985-1994
  CAL                  0.801**    0.179**       0.171**       0.084**          0.074*        0.446***    0.033      -0.133
                       (0.339)    (0.089)       (0.068)       (0.034)          (0.044)        (0.148)   (0.049)    (0.113)
  Observations          2,971      2,971         2,971           2,971          2,971         2,144      1,652      1,652
  R2                    0.404      0.333         0.368           0.224          0.173         0.310      0.409      0.235

                                                  Panel D: 1970-1994
  CAL                 0.940***    0.206***      0.226***      0.078**          0.063*        0.457***   0.113***    -0.132
                       (0.303)     (0.078)       (0.064)      (0.030)          (0.036)        (0.107)    (0.037)   (0.081)
  Observations          7,606      7,606         7,606           7,606          7,606         6,159      5,164      5,160
  R2                    0.436      0.394         0.401           0.241          0.150         0.268      0.408      0.132

  Mean                  9.12       -0.15          -0.16          0.69           0.56           9.13       0.50      0.00
  Std. dev.             4.14        1.00          1.02           0.46           0.50           1.36       0.50      0.82


Notes: This table shows differences between cohorts who were exposed to computer-aided learning
(CAL=1) and cohorts who were not (CAL=0). Each row-column combination shows the coefficient
 from a different regression of exposure to computer-aided learning on several outcome variables:
                                                
Yibc =  +  · CALbc + b + c + Wibc ·  + Polc · CALbc ·  + c · tb + ibc . The estimating samples
are: cohorts between 1977 and 1994 (baseline, panel A); cohorts between 1980 and 1994 (panel B);
cohorts between 1985 and 1994 (panel C); cohorts between 1970 and 1994 (panel D). Standard
errors clustered at the county level in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source: CFPS,
2010 and 2014, individuals born from 1977.




                                                           A23
              Table E14: Different Age Groups, Effects of Computer-Assisted Learning

                         Years of   Math      Chinese        MS            LM            Log      Internet   Anxiety
                        education   skills     skills      diploma     participation   earnings     use       index
                           (1)        (2)       (3)             (4)        (5)           (6)        (7)        (8)


                                                 Panel A: 10-27
  CAL                    0.903***   0.189**   0.231***     0.075**        0.058        0.473***   0.087**     -0.153
                          (0.307)   (0.079)    (0.064)     (0.030)       (0.038)        (0.119)   (0.039)    (0.096)
  Observations            4,964      4,964     4,964           4,964      4,964         3,870      3,095      3,093
  R2                      0.422      0.361     0.383           0.232      0.156         0.283      0.392      0.162

                                                 Panel B: 10-24
  CAL                    0.909***   0.188**   0.227***     0.081***      0.068*        0.441***   0.073*      -0.138
                          (0.302)   (0.079)    (0.063)      (0.031)      (0.040)        (0.127)   (0.043)    (0.100)
  Observations            4,151      4,151     4,151           4,151      4,151         3,175      2,500      2,498
  R2                      0.416      0.349     0.377           0.234      0.163         0.290      0.393      0.182

                                                 Panel C: 10-21
  CAL                    0.764**    0.183**   0.177***     0.077**        0.058        0.395***    0.050     -0.190*
                         (0.326)    (0.084)    (0.067)     (0.031)       (0.043)        (0.135)   (0.048)    (0.112)
  Observations            3,404      3,404     3,404           3,404      3,404         2,521      1,950      1,949
  R2                      0.411      0.338     0.370           0.232      0.175         0.307      0.399      0.227

  Mean                     9.19      -0.13     -0.15           0.69       0.56           9.15      0.55       0.00
  Std. dev.                4.11       1.00     1.01            0.46       0.50           1.36      0.50       0.82


Notes: This table shows differences between cohorts who were exposed to computer-aided learning
(CAL=1) and cohorts who were not (CAL=0). Each row-column combination shows the coefficient
 from a different regression of exposure to computer-aided learning on several outcome variables:
                                              
Yibc =  +  · CALbc + b + c + Wibc ·  + Polc · CALbc ·  + c · tb + ibc . The estimating samples are:
individuals who were between 10 and 27 years old at the time of the policy implementation (panel
A); individuals who were between 10 and 24 years old at the time of the policy implementation
(panel B); individuals who were between 10 and 21 years old at the time of the policy implementa-
tion (panel C). Standard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.1. Source: CFPS, 2010 and 2014.




                                                         A24
        Table E15: Middle School Graduates, Effects of Computer-Assisted Learning

                        Years of    Math       Chinese         LM             Log          Manual      Internet   Anxiety
                       education    skills      skills     participation    earnings        skills       use       index
                          (1)         (2)         (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)        (7)        (8)


  CAL                  -2.279***   -0.614***   -0.280***     0.159***       0.489***         -0.023      -0.084    -0.174
                         (0.412)     (0.117)    (0.106)       (0.046)        (0.183)        (0.141)     (0.072)   (0.140)
  CAL*Middle school     3.786***    0.965***   0.614***     -0.117***         -0.032       -0.294***   0.194***    0.002
                         (0.250)     (0.076)    (0.081)       (0.043)        (0.173)        (0.108)     (0.070)   (0.112)

  Observations           4,996       4,996       4,996        4,996           3,889           3,341     3,109      3,107
  R2                     0.458       0.398       0.401        0.163           0.281           0.269     0.407       0.164
  Mean                   9.12        -0.15       -0.16        0.56             9.13            0.02      0.54       0.00
  Std. dev.               4.14        1.00        1.02         0.50           1.36             1.01      0.50       0.82
  Effect on MS grads     1.507       0.351       0.334        0.042           0.457          -0.317     0.110      -0.171
                        (0.314)     (0.083)     (0.065)      (0.042)         (0.125)        (0.105)    (0.040)    (0.098)

Notes: This table shows how the implementation of the reform in middle schools interacted with
graduating middle school. Standard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses, *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source: CFPS, 2010 and 2014, individuals born from 1977.


                         Table E16: Controlling for Concurrent Policies

                        Years of    Math       Chinese        MS               LM            Log       Internet   Anxiety
                       education    skills      skills      diploma        participation   earnings      use       index
                          (1)         (2)         (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)        (7)        (8)


  CAL                   0.599*       0.100     0.155**      0.051**           0.067        0.382***     0.035      -0.151
                        (0.306)     (0.075)    (0.062)      (0.026)          (0.047)        (0.125)    (0.040)    (0.110)

  Observations           4,194       4,194       4,194          4,194         4,194          3,254      2,650      2,649
  R2                     0.352       0.311       0.263          0.234         0.172          0.267      0.390      0.166
  Mean                   9.71        -0.02       -0.01          0.72           0.57           9.21       0.58      0.03
  Std. dev.               3.67        0.92        0.87           0.45         0.50            1.32       0.49       0.81

Notes: This table shows differences between cohorts who were exposed to computer-aided learning
(CAL=1) and cohorts who were not (CAL=0). In addition to the controls for concurrent education
policies, also included in all baseline regressions, these specifications include controls for the trade
liberalization following WTO accession, which started in 2001, and for the expansion of college
enrollment, which started in 1998. We control for these concurrent policy changes by interacting
birth cohort fixed effects with two variables (pre-WTO prefecture-level import tariff, and prefecture-
level number of college students) that describe the effect of these reforms on each Chinese prefecture.
Standard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source:
CFPS, 2010 and 2014, individuals born from 1977.




                                                          A25
                                      Table E17: Matching Outcomes

                                                  Full sample: G1-G5                       Matched sample: G1-G5
                                         G5          Obs.        R2     Mean       G5          Obs.        R2       Mean
                                                                       outcome                                     outcome
                                         (1)         (2)        (3)      (4)       (5)          (6)       (7)        (8)

  Male                                    0.019     4,874      0.007    0.50       0.012       1,559     0.037      0.53
                                        (0.031)                                  (0.047)
  Minority                                0.033     4,874      0.123    0.13     -0.012*       1,559     0.029      0.01
                                        (0.046)                                  (0.007)
  Number of siblings                   -0.372**     4,865      0.163    1.72      -0.118       1,559     0.154      1.21
                                        (0.154)                                  (0.100)
  Father: no edu                          0.056     4,710      0.064    0.27       0.028       1,559     0.096      0.25
                                        (0.044)                                  (0.039)
  Father: primary edu                  -0.062**     4,710      0.018    0.30      -0.019       1,559     0.046      0.36
                                        (0.031)                                  (0.044)
  Father: junior high edu                -0.019     4,710      0.049    0.30      -0.038       1,559     0.140      0.33
                                        (0.039)                                  (0.040)
  Father: high school edu                 0.008     4,710      0.015    0.12       0.028       1,559     0.028      0.06
                                        (0.023)                                  (0.020)
  Father: college or more               0.017*      4,710      0.008    0.01       0.001       1,559     0.013      0.00
                                        (0.009)                                  (0.001)
  Father: member of Communist party       0.018     4,456      0.008    0.09       0.009       1,559     0.020      0.02
                                        (0.017)                                  (0.010)
  Father: manager                       0.040*      3,762      0.016    0.04       0.027       1,243     0.029      0.03
                                        (0.023)                                  (0.024)
  Mother: no edu                          0.082     4,739      0.083    0.52       0.076       1,559     0.145      0.54
                                        (0.050)                                  (0.052)
  Mother: primary edu                 -0.097***     4,739      0.014    0.26     -0.058*       1,559     0.045      0.26
                                        (0.031)                                  (0.033)
  Mother: junior high edu                 0.003     4,739      0.074    0.17      -0.024       1,559     0.158      0.19
                                        (0.042)                                  (0.041)
  Mother: high school edu                 0.009     4,739      0.014    0.04       0.006       1,559     0.034      0.01
                                        (0.016)                                  (0.011)
  Mother: college or more                 0.002     4,739      0.006    0.00      -0.001       1,559     0.013      0.00
                                        (0.004)                                  (0.001)
  Mother: member of Communist party       0.009     4,478      0.004    0.01      -0.001       1,559     0.022      0.00
                                        (0.006)                                  (0.001)
  Mother: manager                       0.019*      3,417      0.017    0.01       0.006       1,112     0.028      0.01
                                        (0.010)                                  (0.009)


Notes: This table shows baseline differences between cohorts from areas that received the program
at some point (G5=0) and cohorts from areas that never received the program (G5=1). Each
row-column combination shows the coefficient  from a different regression: Baselineibc =  +  ·
G5bc + b + k k · sk · tc + ibc , where b are birth cohort fixed effects, sk are county characteristics
measured in 2003 (share of rural residents, number of cellphone users, number of internet users,
number of post offices, number of telephone users, and a dummy for midwest regions), and tb is a
linear trend in birth cohorts. Columns 1 to 4 include the whole sample. Columns 5 and 8 restrict
the sample to individuals from areas that received the program at some point (G1-G4) matched
to individuals from areas that never received the reform (G5). Matching was performed using the
following individual variables: birth cohort fixed effects, paternal education, paternal affiliation to
the Communist Party, gender, minority status, and number of siblings. Standard errors clustered
at the county level in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source: CFPS, 2010 and 2014,
individuals born from 1977.



                                                            A26
           Table E18: Matching G1-4 to G5, Effects of Computer-Assisted Learning

                      Years of   Math      Chinese       MS            LM            Log      Internet   Anxiety
                     education   skills     skills     diploma     participation   earnings     use       index
                        (1)        (2)       (3)            (4)        (5)           (6)        (7)        (8)


  CAL                 1.193*      0.145    0.266*      0.180**        -0.067        0.358      0.149      -0.145
                      (0.664)    (0.121)   (0.135)     (0.074)       (0.097)       (0.300)    (0.111)    (0.281)

  Observations         1,685     1,685      1,685          1,685      1,685         1,307      1,103      1,103
  R2                   0.474     0.436      0.388          0.341      0.280         0.390      0.496      0.305
  Mean                 9.52      -0.04      -0.04          0.71        0.57          9.23       0.55      0.02
  Std. dev.             3.75      0.89       0.90           0.46      0.49           1.31       0.50       0.83

Notes: The specifications match individuals who were born in areas that received computer-assisted
learning to individuals who were born in areas that did not receive the reform. Matching was
performed using the following individual variables: birth cohort fixed effects, paternal education,
paternal affiliation to the Communist Party, gender, minority status, and number of siblings. Stan-
dard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source:
CFPS, 2010 and 2014, individuals born from 1977.




                                                     A27
