                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    GENDER DIFFERENCES IN NEGOTIATION AND POLICY FOR IMPROVEMENT

                                        Maria Recalde
                                        Lise Vesterlund

                                      Working Paper 28183
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28183


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2020




Recalde acknowledges financial support from Australian Research Council grant DE190100585
and from The University of Melbourne. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Maria Recalde and Lise Vesterlund. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Gender Differences in Negotiation and Policy for Improvement
Maria Recalde and Lise Vesterlund
NBER Working Paper No. 28183
December 2020
JEL No. J16,J3

                                          ABSTRACT

Men more than women succeed when negotiating over labor-market outcomes, and gender
differences in negotiation likely contribute to the gender wage gap and to horizontal and vertical
segregation in the labor market. We review the evidence on the many initiatives that have been
put in place to reduce the effect of gender differences in negotiation. Categorizing these as either
`fix-the-women' or `fix-the-institutions' initiatives we find serious challenges to the former.
Women do not appear to be broken and encouraging them to negotiate more and differently often
backfires. The evidence suggests that `fix-the-institution' initiatives are more effective in
reducing gender differences in outcomes. Concerns of adverse effects of banning negotiations or
salary history requests have not materialized, and preliminary evidence points to reductions in the
gender differences in negotiation outcomes. The strongest evidence on effectiveness in narrowing
gender disparities is found for policies that increase transparency. Numerous studies find that
gender differences in negotiation diminish when it is clear what to expect from the negotiation
and suggest that initiatives which improve transparency are likely to help equalize opportunities
at the bargaining table.


Maria Recalde
University of Melbourne
Department of Economics
Melbourne
Australia
maria.recalde@unimelb.edu.au

Lise Vesterlund
Department of Economics
University of Pittsburgh
4916 Posvar Hall
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
and NBER
vester@pitt.edu
1. Introduction


Gender differences in negotiation are frequently used to explain why men and women
advance at different rates (e.g., Bertrand, 2018), why they select different occupations, and
secure different compensation (e.g., Blau and Kahn, 2017). Indeed, field evidence is
consistent with negotiation differences contributing to the persistent gender wage gap and
to men and women holding different occupations and different ranks within occupation
(e.g., Greig, 2008; Card, Cardoso, and Kline, 2016; Säve-Söderbergh, 2019).

Considering the potential impact on labor-market outcomes, it is no surprise that
substantive work has examined when and why men and women approach negotiation
differently. The overarching conclusion is that there are gender differences in both
willingness and ability to negotiate, and that these are sensitive to the characteristics of the
negotiation (for reviews see Bowles et al. 2005; Bowles and McGinn 2008;  Stuhlmacher
and Walters 1999; Bertrand 2011; Azmat and Petrongolo 2014; Mazei et al. 2015; Kugler
et al. 2018; and Hernandez-Arenaz and Iriberri, 2019a).

The striking finding by Babcock and Laschever (2003), that out of new MBA graduates
57% of men and only 7% of women negotiated the compensation for their first job, is one
of many that point to the robust evidence that women less than men pursue negotiations.
Although negotiation in the labor market is of key concern, the limited information on the
value of the employee-employer match and the parties' outside options challenges
inference on gender differences in negotiation.1 Many studies instead rely on controlled
experiments which similarly find that men negotiate more often than women (e.g., Bowles
et al. 2005; Small et al 2007; Kray and Gelfand 2009; Amanatullah and Morris, 2010;
Kugler et al., 2018; Gihleb et al 2020). The evidence is more mixed when examining the
ability to negotiate. While some studies point to female employees securing worse
outcomes than male employees (e.g., Dittrich et al., 2014; Barron, 2003), there is
substantial evidence that the male advantage depends on the negotiation setting (Pradel et
al. 2005).2



                                     
1
  See Andersen et al (2018b) for a field study where the value of the negotiated item is better assessed.
2
  A substantial literature examines if men and women receive differential treatment when bargaining. Ayres
(1991, 1995) and Ayres and Siegelman (1995) report on an audit study for car sales, finding that single
women are quoted higher prices than single men. Castillo et al. (2013) examine negotiations for taxi rides,
finding that statistical discrimination drives gender differences in outcomes. Consistent with statistical
discrimination, Busse et al. (2017) find, for buyers who appear uninformed, higher prices for women than
men. However, audit studies instruct buyers on how to negotiate and do not capture differences in negotiation.
List (2004) instead examines free-form negotiations over sports cards and finds that statistical discrimination
gives rise to a male advantage. With transactions only occurring 3% of the time, it is however difficult to
capture differences in negotiation.
Research points to a number of factors that affect gender differences in negotiation.3
Differences are less pronounced when it is clear that something is negotiable and what the
bargaining range is (Bowles et al., 2005; Rigdon, 2012; Kugler et al., 2018; Small et al.,
2007; Leibbrandt and List, 2015). That is, ambiguity amplifies the difference. Differences
also depend on whether the negotiation activates stereotypes (Kray et al., 2002), with
differences increasing when female negotiation violates gender norms. The response to
such stereotypes may result from stereotype threat, or from the correct expectation that
backlash is greater toward women who violate gender norms (Bowles et al., 2007; Tinsley
et al, 2009).4 Gender differences are also found to be smaller when individuals negotiate
on behalf of someone else rather than on behalf of themselves (Bowles et al., 2005;
Amanatullah & Morris, 2010; Amanatullah & Tinsley, 2013) and when negotiation occurs
in less competitive environments (Bowles et al., 2005).5 Finally, the positional role matters
with gender differences arising for the party with less power (Dittrich et al., 2014; Exley
et al., 2020).6

Although gender differences in negotiation vary with the characteristics of the negotiation,
there is consensus that the characteristics of labor-market negotiations are largely those
that give rise to a gender gap in willingness and ability to negotiate. For example, labor
negotiations are generally on behalf of oneself; tend to be competitive; and it is often
ambiguous what may be negotiated.

Recognizing that men hold an advantage in labor-market negotiations has led to initiatives
that aim to reduce differences in negotiation or in the effect such differences may have on
outcomes. Some of these may be characterized as `fixing-the-women' initiatives, whether
it be for women to negotiate more or improve their negotiation skills. Others instead center
on "fixing-the-institution" and include a direct ban on negotiations, banning requests for
salary history, and changing wage transparency. We will review the literature on each of
these initiatives and the evidence on their effectiveness.
                                      
3
  While ultimatum games limit the negotiation interaction to a take-it-or-leave-it offer, the setting nonetheless
provides insights on why women fare worse in negotiations (Eckel and Grossman 2001; Solnick 2001).
Reviewing the literature, Eckel et al. (2008) conclude that women are more egalitarian, expect and ask for
less, and are less likely to fail in reaching an agreement.
4
  For gender differences in negotiation expectation see also Eckel et al. (2008) and Andersen et al. (2018a).
5
  As for negotiation, the literature on competition reveals robust differences on the extensive margin (Niederle
and Vesterlund 2007) and more context-dependent differences on the intensive margin (Gneezy et al. 2003).
See Niederle and Vesterlund (2011) for a review, and Niederle and Vesterlund (2008) for the connection
between negotiation and competition.
6
  Other factors may affect gender differences in negotiation including the sex of negotiating partners (Eckel
and Grossman, 2001; Solnick, 2001; Bowles et al., 2007; Sutter et al., 2009; Hernandez-Arenaz and Iriberri,
2018), the framing as a negotiation or an ask (Small et al., 2007), communication mode (Bowles and Babcock
2013; Bowles 2013), and sharing norms (Hernandez-Arenaz and Iriberri 2019b). Differences in preferences,
such as risk aversion and fairness concerns, may also play a role (see Croson and Gneezy 2009 and Niederle
2015 for a review). Finally, Bursztyn et al. (2017) find that single women opt out of negotiation because
pursuing career enhancing actions may decrease their success in the marriage market.
2. `Fixing the women'
 
The finding that men are more able and willing to negotiate in the labor market tempt
recommendations that women should mirror their behavior by negotiating more and
improving their negotiation skills. While there is substantial public support for such
programs, there has until recently been little evidence on their effectiveness. This section
reports on research studying these `fix-the-women' initiatives and their challenges.

2.a. Lean-In Recommendation

The finding that both men and women gain from negotiation and that women are less likely
to pursue such opportunities suggests that women are leaving substantial lifetime earnings
on the table (Babcock and Laschever, 2003). This has led to a push for women to negotiate
more and to lean in (e.g., Sandberg 2013).

Exley, Niederle, and Vesterlund (2020, ENV henceforth) note that in making the
recommendation for women to lean in and negotiate more, we are missing the
counterfactual. Of course, the recommendation is harmless if the "worst that can happen is
that they say no." However, there are many cases where instead negotiation is costly, and
it is less clear that negotiating more improves outcomes.7

ENV design an experiment to examine the effect of increased negotiation. "Workers" and
"firms" each perform a task, and then decide how to split the surplus of their joint efforts.
They run two versions of their study: a "choice treatment", where workers are offered an
initial wage and decide whether they want to accept it or instead negotiate; and an "always
treatment", where workers still see an initial wage offer but have to negotiate. Negotiations
may last up to 3 minutes and are done via anonymous chat messages. The joint firm-worker
surplus is reduced in the event of a bargaining impasse, as the worker and the firm then
each secure a payment that is lower than had the negotiation not been initiated.

The ENV choice treatment confirms that women don't enter all negotiations: 34% of the
time they take the initial wage offer and opt out of the negotiation. This occurs although
negotiations increase wages. In fact, there is very little downside to women negotiating:
74% secure final wages above the initially offered wage, and only 13% get a lower final
wage. Confirming field evidence, women often avoid negotiations, although negotiations
are beneficial.

                                     
7
  Negotiations may be costly immediately (costs of time, disutility from asking); in the future (backlash,
reputation, future negotiation); or there may be costs from bargaining impasse (affecting future collaboration,
legal costs, or retraction of earlier offers). 
To determine the counterfactual of increased negotiation, ENV compares the outcomes
women achieve when they avoid some negotiations (choice treatment) to when they always
negotiate (always treatment). The treatment where participants always negotiate
backfires--there are no additional gains from negotiation and the share of negotiations that
decrease earnings increase to 33%. Rather than improving women's earnings, the
additional negotiations decrease earnings and make women worse off.

ENV shows that selection is key to increased negotiations being costly. Women know
when it is beneficial to negotiate and they use that knowledge to avoid costly negotiations
in the choice treatment. Examination of the counterfactual makes clear that the finding that
"women who enter negotiations gain from doing so" does not imply that all women should
negotiate.

With the recommendation to lean in being directed at women, ENV also asks if men are
better at deciding when to negotiate. Results confirm that men negotiate more often than
women (74% vs 66% of the time) and that they too gain from negotiation. However,
comparing the distributions of earnings between the `choice' and `always' treatments
shows no evidence that their decisions are superior to women's. Nonetheless, ENV
confirms a greater push for women to negotiate. Respondents of an online survey were
more likely to recommend more frequent salary negotiations for women than for men (75
vs 54%). In fact, participants presented with information about the initial ENV
experimental design were willing to pay to remove the worker's choice to opt out of the
negotiation. This willingness to restrict the choice arises despite an asymmetry in
information where the `paternalistic' participant only knows the distribution of initial
offered wages, while the worker knows the initial offered wage and whether negotiation is
likely to be beneficial. Importantly, this willingness to pay to remove the worker's
negotiation choice is more prevalent when faced with a female than a male worker.

The ENV study demonstrates that people are willing to pay to remove women's choice to
negotiate, even though women know whether negotiations benefit them, and increased
negotiations decrease individual earnings. The study serves as a caution against the blanket
recommendation that women should negotiate more.

2.b. Improving Negotiation Skills

Another approach to `fixing-women' is to improve their negotiation skills. Evidence that
experience improves negotiated outcomes has fueled the expectation that negotiation
training reduces the gender gap in compensation. For example, the American Association
of University Women has initiated free nationwide negotiation workshops for 10 million
women to `close the pay gap, one workshop at a time'. Although substantial resources are
used to improve negotiation skills, there is limited evidence of the impact such training has
on salary negotiations, let alone on gender differences in outcomes.8

An exception is Stevens et al. (1993) which has 60 MBA students participate in two
different negotiation programs. All participants first receive a basic 4-hour negotiation
training and are then assessed through knowledge tests and salary-negotiation simulations
with confederates who provide raises based on the successful use of negotiation tactics.
This first-stage assessment reveals a gender gap in negotiated salaries which is found to
result from men and women setting different goals for the negotiation. Participants are then
subjected to one of two negotiation training programs: one emphasizing goal setting, and
the other augmenting training in goal setting with general self-management training.9 A
second stage assessment reveals that although goal setting improves the skills of both men
and women, it has no differential effect and does not eliminate gender differences in
negotiation outcomes. The augmented training does, however, improve skills more for
women than men, closing the gender gap. The authors find that augmented training works
by increasing the perceived control women have over negotiation outcomes. Confidence is
also shown to affect the effectiveness of training.

While Stevens et al. (1993) demonstrates that training can affect men and women
differently, training effectiveness is assessed in an environment where the response to
negotiation is gender neutral. There is ample evidence that the response to negotiation
differs by gender, and that women more than men may experience backlash. For example,
Bowles et al. (2007) reports on experiments where participants evaluate hypothetical job
candidates after seeing interview transcripts and videos. Treatments vary the candidate's
gender and whether the candidate asks for higher compensation. Results show no gender
difference in evaluation in the absence of pay requests, and lower evaluation scores for
women who ask for higher compensation than men who do the same. Further, requests for
higher compensation decreases willingness to work with female candidates, while there is
no effect for male candidates.

Importantly, Amanatullah and Morris (2010) shows that backlash is anticipated by women.
In an experiment that varies whether participants negotiate on behalf of themselves or on
behalf of others, the authors ask participants to report the salary threshold above which
they think they would be perceived as "pushy" and would cause the hiring manager to

                                    
8
  Evidence on the effectiveness of negotiation training on outcomes is mixed (Movius 2008). For gender
differences in negotiation performance, Mazei et al (2015) documents that experience reduces gender
differences.
9
  The augmented self-management training adds identifying performance obstacles, planning to overcome
obstacles, self-monitoring progress, and self-administering rewards. There is no control group receiving no
training in the study. 
"punish them for being too demanding." Results show that women anticipate backlash
when negotiating for themselves, but not for others. Further, the anticipated size of this
backlash when negotiating for themselves is large with women asking for approximately
15% lower wages and making larger salary concessions than men.

This literature suggests that training programs may backfire if they encourage negotiations
that subsequently result in backlash. Bowles and Babcock (2013) and Bear and Babcock
(2017) explore negotiation tactics that account for gender norms and find that these can be
effective in reducing the gender gap in negotiation outcomes. Bowles and Babcock (2013)
show that relational accounts can improve negotiation outcomes for women by reducing
social backlash. Relational accounts include techniques such as expressing concerns for
organizational relationships and using a `supervisor-excuse' script that validates a
negotiation initiation because someone else suggested it.

Bear and Babcock (2017) study priming techniques that reduce the gender incongruency
women experience when they negotiate for themselves. They vary whether prior to
negotiating participants: (1) think of situations where the use of assertive and forceful
tactics helped them succeed in a negotiation, and (2) imagine that they are negotiating on
behalf of a close friend. Participants were informed that these tactics improve performance
when negotiating on behalf of self. Subjects participate in simulated face-to-face
negotiations in a masculine buyer-seller environment. Results show that in the absence of
primes, men outperform women. Gender differences, however, disappear with primes. An
online study further investigates the effect of primes on negotiation aspirations, and shows
in the absence of a prime, women have lower negotiation-performance aspirations than
men, while no gender differences arise under primes. Interestingly, the aspirations of men
do not change across treatments while the aspirations of women do.

A recent study by Ashraf et al. (2020) explores the effect of negotiation training on
education rather than labor-market outcomes. A field experiment with 2,366 grade 8 girls
in Lusaka, Zambia randomizes girls into three treatments (within schools): negotiation
training, safe space, and control. The negotiation treatment has participants attend six 2-
hour training sessions with material similar to that of a modified MBA negotiation class.
The safe space treatment consists of the same number of 2-hour sessions but instead has
girls play games, work on homework, and spend time with each other.

Ashraf et al. (2020) find that negotiation training increases average school enrollment in
grades 10 and 11 by 10% relative to the control treatment. The effect of the safe space
treatment is smaller and not significantly different from the control or negotiation treatment
when looking at overall school enrollment. However, analysis of enrollment in high quality
schools, which prepare girls for college entry exams, reveal no impact of the safe space
treatment and a positive impact of the negotiation treatment. The impact on school
enrollment grows over time, indicating that benefits accumulate and may spill over to the
labor and marriage markets.

Together these studies suggest that negotiation training programs that are comprehensive
enough to increase women's confidence and sense of control over the negotiation may
reduce the gender gap in negotiation outcomes.10 However, the evidence on the impact of
pure negation training is more limited, and it is clear that such training needs to account
for the potential for backlash. Additional work is needed to understand training effects on
salary and promotion negotiations as well as impacts on the gender gap in labor-market
outcomes.

3. Fixing Institutions

It has been argued that the first step should not be to fix the women, but rather the
institutions in which they work. Several such initiatives seek to restrict negotiations by
banning them, eliminating the possibility of inquiring about past salary history, and by
making wages within organizations transparent. While the first two initiatives take as given
gender differences in negotiation and attempt to remove the effects of such differences, the
latter instead relies on the evidence that negotiation differences are more prevalent when
the negotiation is ambiguous.

3.a. Banning Salary Negotiations

Evidence that gender differences in negotiation skill contribute to the gender wage gap
along with concerns that negotiation skills rather than productivity differences lead to
variation in compensation, has led some corporations to directly ban negotiations. For
example, Reddit banned negotiations in 2015 with the aim of eliminating the disadvantage
women have at the bargaining table. Other companies have followed, and the policy has
been noted as an effective way of eliminating wage disparities (Kray, 2015). Negotiation
bans, however, have their own challenges, as there is a risk associated with leaving it up to
management to secure equal pay for men and women.

Gihleb, Landsman and Vesterlund (2019, henceforth GLV) explores the effects of a
negotiation ban. They argue that the extent to which a negotiation ban is effective in
reducing the gender wage gap depends on the potential bias of the manager, and on why
negotiation is effective in raising compensation. For example, they show in a simple
                                    
10
    A recent study by McKelway (2019) examines self-efficacy/confidence training (rather than negotiation
skills training) and finds it increased women's self-efficacy, employment, and income.
 
theoretical model that if the decision to negotiate serves as a credible signal on productivity,
and the productivity distribution of men dominates that of women, then men will negotiate
more than women and secure higher earnings. A negotiation ban could back-fire in such a
setting as management will perceive men as more productive and pay them more than
women. A negotiation ban may similarly backfire if management is biased against women
and the negotiation serves to temper such biases.

GLV use a lab experiment to study the effect of a negotiation ban. They investigate
manager-selected compensation in a between-subject design. In one treatment workers may
negotiate with management and in another there is no negotiation option. Participants are
matched in triads, with each triad consisting of one manager and two workers. The triad
interacts for five rounds. Personal characteristics like age, gender, and area of study are
revealed to the manager. The two workers must in each round perform a task, and their
performance generates a profit for the manager and a surplus that the manager must
distribute between the two workers. One worker is given a high productivity task and the
other a low productivity task. Uncertainty over the relative productivity ensures variation
in subjective assessment of worker effort and allows for negotiations to signal productivity.

GLV's negotiation treatment replicates the finding that men negotiate more than women.
Further, negotiating only improves compensation for workers who are assigned the more
productive task and it does so only for men. Hence, negotiations increase inequality both
between and within task and between men and women.

The negotiation ban is, however, shown to reduce inequality and the relative pay advantage
of men on the high-productivity task. In contrast to the theoretical example and potentially
biased management, GLV shows, consistent with the recent push to ban negotiation, that
the ban gives rise to equal compensation for men and women.

It may be questioned whether a negotiation ban is sustainable when other firms engage in
negotiation; whether it is advisable in the long run, when high quality employees may
secure attractive outside offers and require retention packages; or whether a ban will only
be adhered to by female workers. With these caveats in mind, the GLV evidence suggests
that corporations who wish to compensate for ability rather than negotiation skill may
benefit from eliminating negotiation with initial recruits of unknown ability.
3.b. Salary History Ban

A popular fix-the-institution initiative is to ban salary history requests, and thereby allow
employees to break the path dependency of wages.11 Such policies may, however, fail if
employers statistically discriminate against women in the same way that they discriminate
against Black and Hispanic men as a result of ban-the-box initiatives (see e.g., Agan and
Starr 2018; Doleac and Hansen, 2018). Further, it may become practice for workers to
voluntarily disclose their salary histories, thus eliminating the impact of the policy.

Agan et al. (2020a) provides a theoretical examination of Salary History Ban (SHB)
policies that incorporates workers' decision to voluntarily disclose salary information and
examines the implications this has for different types of policy interventions. Using a
survey they find that workers can be classified into three types: always disclosers (25%),
never disclosers (17%), and policy compliers (58%); that men are more likely to always
disclose and less likely to comply than women; and consistent with a contagion story, that
willingness to disclose increases with the proportion of others who do.

Despite SHB concerns, empirical estimates point to the policy reducing the gender wage
gap.12 Exploiting variation in US states that have adopted SHB policies, Hansen and
McNichols (2020) and Sinha (2019) find a 3-4% point reduction in the gender-pay gap and
no impact on labor-force participation or turnover rates.

Experiments have also been used to study the impact of SHBs. Agan et al. (2020b) conduct
a field experiment where recruiters evaluate job applications under randomly assigned
salary-disclosure conditions. They find that recruiters offer candidates lower salaries when
disclosure is banned. This is driven by lower beliefs about outside offers, lower candidate
reservation wages, and lower candidate quality. Although the ban increases equality across
candidates, gender results are mixed. Disclosure increases the salaries of men more than
women, but it also improves the callback rates of women without affecting those of men.13

3.c. Transparency

Another class of interventions instead aims to increase pay transparency to reduce gender
differences in negotiation. This includes permission to discuss salary information,

                                   
11
   US estimates suggest that 25 to 50% of potential employees are asked to disclose past salary (Hall and
Krueger 2012, Barach and Horton 2020, Agan et al. 2020a).
12
   By April 2019 some form of SHB was implemented in 12 states, 9 cities, and 3 counties in the US (Sinha
2019).
13
   See also Barach and Horton (2020) which in an online labor-market finds that removing salary history
causes employers to search more and evaluate more candidates. As a result, candidates with lower past
average wages are more frequently evaluated and hired.
disclosing pay ranges, reporting pay statistics by occupation and gender, and letting
candidates know if and when compensation is negotiable. Transparency allows individuals
to set similar negotiation expectations, and the hope that this reduces gender differences in
negotiation has in part motivated public transparency policies.14

Indeed, Bowles et al. (2005) shows that gender differences in negotiated outcomes increase
with the negotiation's level of ambiguity. They find, in a survey of MBAs, that the gender
gap in starting salaries is larger in industries with higher ambiguity in compensation.
Similar results are seen in an experiment they conduct where participants negotiate the
price of a good in a buyer-seller environment. Buyers are given the bargaining range in
both a high- and a low-ambiguity treatment, with the latter adding a negotiation target.
Results show gender differences in negotiation in the high- but not in the low-ambiguity
environment.

Leibbrandt and List (2015) studies the effect of ambiguity on job applications and salary
negotiation decisions. In a field experiment with 2,422 job seekers, they compare the
response to low- and high-ambiguity job postings. One treatment states that wages are
negotiable and the other has no such statement. Results show higher application rates for
men than women in both treatments. However, the reduction of ambiguity decreases
applications from men, while it increases applications from women. Job applicants are
classified into those that initiate negotiations for higher pay, signal willingness to work for
lower pay, and those who do not initiate negotiations. When negation is ambiguous, men
are more likely to initiate negotiations for higher pay and less likely to signal willingness
to accept lower wages than women. However, these gender differences disappear when it
is clear that wages are negotiable.

Further evidence on the effect of transparency is seen in work examining the impact of
information on the compensation obtained by others. Major et al. (1984) conducts an
experiment where participants choose their compensation after completing survey work for
20 minutes. Participants are given $4 and decide how much to keep as pay. Participants
record their pay and gender on a form which may or may not contain information on
compensation of others. A baseline treatment keeps the form blank, while three social
information treatments pre-fill the form making it seem as though the information reflects
the compensation chosen by 8 previous participants. One treatment shows that 4 men and
4 women paid themselves $2 on average, while the two others show the average pay as
$2.50 for one gender and $1.50 for the other. Results reveal that men pay themselves nearly
                                    
14
   Laws requiring firms to disclose salary statistics by gender and occupation are now in place in numerous
countries, including Australia, Austria, Denmark, Finland, Germany, and the UK. The US has also seen a
push for increased transparency, e.g., executive orders were signed to prohibit federal contractors from
retaliating against employees who discuss their compensation (2014), and to require firms with government
contracts to report average salaries by gender (2016).
twice as much as women when no information is provided; however, the social-information
treatments cause men to decrease their pay, eliminating the gender gap.15

While Major et al. (1984) finds a differential response to `transparency,' it does not
examine the effect on negotiation outcomes. Rigdon (2012) fills this gap in the literature
by conducting an experiment where participants play a modified ultimatum game where
roles as proposers and responders are earned at the beginning of the experiment. The game
is as follows: responders first make a cheap-talk pay request, proposers then make a
responder offer, and responders accept or reject the offer. Treatments vary whether
participants receive information about the outcomes of previous sessions. A baseline
treatment provides no social information, another treatment shows participants the
distribution of pay requests made by male responders in the baseline treatment, a third
treatment additionally shows the average offer received per pay request. Participants do
not know that they only see male-responder choices. The baseline treatment shows that
women demand less, are given lower offers, and ultimately earn less than men. As in Major
et al., these differences disappear when social-information is provided.

The studies above suggest that transparency may help eliminate gender differences in
negotiation initiation, salary requests, and negotiation outcomes. However, transparency
policies may also affect the morale of workers, the productivity of firms, and the choices
of employers.16 Recent work uses legislation on transparency to estimate the effect on
labor-market outcomes. Bennedsen et al. (2019) studies the impact of a Danish law passed
in 2006 requiring firms with 35 or more employees to report average salaries by occupation
code and gender. They compare firms with 10 to 34 employees, which did not have to
report salaries, to those with 35 to 50 employees who did. Results show that the
transparency law reduced the gender pay gap by decreasing the wage growth for men
relative to women. More women were hired and promoted as a result of the policy.
Productivity, however, decreased as did costs, generating no overall impact on firm profits.

Baker et al. (2019) studies the impact of public-sector salary-disclosure laws in Canada.
The authors exploit variation in when and where the law took effect and find that the policy
decreased the gender pay gap by 2% points (30%). Cullen and Pakzad-Hurson (2019)
examine the effect of pay transparency using data from an online labor-market platform
for low-skill work, TaskRabbit. Results show that employers are more likely to equalize
pay when workers complete tasks that allow them to learn of the compensation of others,
and this is further confirmed in an online experiment. Although the study is not centered
around gender differences in negotiation, the authors provide insights for policies seeking
                                
15
   A second experiment pays participants $4 and asks them to decide how much time they want to work.
Consistent with women asking for lower pay, they find that women work longer than men and complete more
and higher quality work.
16
   See also Card et al. (2012), Breza et al. (2018), and Mas (2017). 
to reduce the gender pay gap. They find that partial transparency policies which allow
workers to endogenously choose whether to discuss salary information may backfire and
cause the gender pay gap to increase because men and women have differential
communication patterns.

4. Conclusion

Men more than women succeed when negotiating over labor-market outcomes, and gender
differences in negotiation likely contribute to the gender wage gap and to horizontal and
vertical segregation in the labor market. Numerous initiatives have been put in place to
reduce the effect of gender differences in negotiation. Our paper reviews recent advances
in the literature to evaluate the potential impact of these policies.

Our review makes clear that the literature is still at its infancy and that many questions
remain. The evidence points to serious challenges of `fix-the-women' policies.
Encouraging women to negotiate more may backfire, because women correctly opt out of
costly negotiations. Caution is also warranted when training women to negotiate, as such
training, absent other interventions, may cause backlash or lower chances of employment.
Women do not appear to be `broken' and policies to fix them may fail.

The evidence on the `fix-the-institution' initiatives suggests that these are more effective
in reducing gender disparities in the labor market. Concerns of adverse effects of banning
negotiations or salary history requests have not materialized, and the empirical evidence
points to reductions in the gender differences in negotiation outcomes. However, the
evidence is limited. A full assessment requires an understanding of how these initiatives
fare in the long run. The strongest and most consistent evidence to date is seen for increased
transparency. Numerous studies confirm that gender differences in negotiation diminish
when it is clear what to expect from the negotiation. While wage transparency should not
be expected to eliminate all gender differences, the literature points to it as an an effective
first step organizations and governments can take if they wish to reduce gender differences
in labor-market outcomes.
References
Agan, A., & Starr, S. (2018). Ban the box, criminal records, and racial discrimination: A field experiment.
          The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(1), 191­235.
Agan, A. Y., Cowgill, B., & Gee, L. (2020a). Do Workers Comply with Salary History Bans? A Survey on
          Voluntary Disclosure, Adverse Selection, and Unraveling. AEA Papers & Proceedings.
Agan, A. Y., Cowgill, B., & Gee, L. (2020b). Salary Disclosure and Hiring: Field Experimental Evidence
          from a Two-Sided Audit Study.
Amanatullah, E. T., & Morris, M. W. (2010). Negotiating gender roles: Gender differences in assertive
          negotiating are mediated by women's fear of backlash and attenuated when negotiating on behalf
          of others. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 98(2), 256.
Amanatullah, E. T., & Tinsley, C. H. (2013). Punishing female negotiators for asserting too much... or not
          enough: Exploring why advocacy moderates backlash against assertive female negotiators.
          Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 120(1), 110­122.
Andersen, S., Ertac, S., Gneezy, U., List, J. A., & Maximiano, S. (2018a). On the cultural basis of gender
          differences in negotiation. Experimental Economics, 21(4), 757­778.
Andersen, S., Marx, J., Nielsen, K. M., & Vesterlund, L. (2018b). Gender Differences in Negotiation:
          Evidence from Real Estate Transactions.
Ashraf, N., Bau, N., Low, C., & McGinn, K. (Forthcoming). Negotiating a better future: How interpersonal
          skills facilitate inter-generational investment. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Ayres, I. (1991). Fair driving: Gender and race discrimination in retail car negotiations. Harvard Law Review,
          817­872.
Ayres, I. (1995). Further evidence of discrimination in new car negotiations and estimates of its cause.
          Michigan Law Review, 94(1), 109­147.
Ayres, I., & Siegelman, P. (1995). Race and gender discrimination in bargaining for a new car. The American
          Economic Review, 304­321.
Azmat, G., & Petrongolo, B. (2014). Gender and the labor market: What have we learned from field and lab
          experiments? Labour Economics, 30, 32­40.
Babcock, L., & Laschever, S. (2003). Women Don't Ask: Negotiation and the Gender Divide. NJ Princeton
          University Press.
Baker, M., Halberstam, Y., Kroft, K., Mas, A., & Messacar, D. (2019). Pay Transparency and the Gender
          Gap. NBER.
Barach, M. A., & Horton, J. J. (2020). How do employers use compensation history?: Evidence from a field
          experiment. NBER.
Barron, L. A. (2003). Ask and you shall receive? Gender differences in negotiators' beliefs about requests
          for a higher salary. Human Relations, 56(6), 635­662.
Bear, J. B., & Babcock, L. (2017). Negotiating femininity: Gender-relevant primes improve women's
          economic performance in gender role incongruent negotiations. Psychology of Women Quarterly,
          41(2), 163­174.
Bennedsen, M., Simintzi, E., Tsoutsoura, M., & Wolfenzon, D. (2019). Do firms respond to gender pay gap
          transparency? NBER.
Bertrand, M. (2011). New perspectives on gender. In Handbook of labor economics (Vol. 4, pp. 1543­1590).
          Elsevier.
Bertrand, M. (2018). Coase Lecture­The Glass Ceiling. Economica, 85(338), 205­231.
Blau, F. D., & Kahn, L. M. (2017). The gender wage gap: Extent, trends, and explanations. Journal of
          Economic Literature, 55(3), 789­865.
Bowles, H. R. (2013). Psychological perspectives on gender in negotiation. The Sage Handbook of Gender
          and Psychology, 465­483.
Bowles, H. R., & Babcock, L. (2013). How can women escape the compensation negotiation dilemma?
          Relational accounts are one answer. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 37(1), 80­96.
Bowles, H. R., Babcock, L., & Lai, L. (2007). Social incentives for gender differences in the propensity to
          initiate negotiations: Sometimes it does hurt to ask. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
          Processes, 103(1), 84­103.
Bowles, H. R., Babcock, L., & McGinn, K. L. (2005). Constraints and triggers: Situational mechanics of
          gender in negotiation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 89(6), 951.
Bowles, H. R., & McGinn, K. L. (2008). Gender in job negotiations: A twolevel game. Negotiation Journal,
          24(4), 393­410.
Breza, E., Kaur, S., & Shamdasani, Y. (2018). The morale effects of pay inequality. The Quarterly Journal
          of Economics, 133(2), 611­663.
Bursztyn, L., Fujiwara, T., & Pallais, A. (2017). "Acting Wife": Marriage Market Incentives and Labor
          Market Investments. American Economic Review, 107(11), 3288­3319.
Busse, M. R., Israeli, A., & Zettelmeyer, F. (2017). Repairing the damage: The effect of price knowledge
          and gender on auto repair price quotes. Journal of Marketing Research, 54(1), 75­95.
Card, D., Cardoso, A. R., & Kline, P. (2016). Bargaining, sorting, and the gender wage gap: Quantifying the
          impact of firms on the relative pay of women. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(2), 633­
          686.
Card, D., Mas, A., Moretti, E., & Saez, E. (2012). Inequality at work: The effect of peer salaries on job
          satisfaction. American Economic Review, 102(6), 2981­3003.
Castillo, M., Petrie, R., Torero, M., & Vesterlund, L. (2013). Gender differences in bargaining outcomes: A
          field experiment on discrimination. Journal of Public Economics, 99, 35­48.
Croson, R., & Gneezy, U. (2009). Gender differences in preferences. Journal of Economic Literature, 47(2),
          448­474.
Cullen, Z. B., & Pakzad-Hurson, B. (2019). Equilibrium Effects of Pay Transparency in a Simple Labor
          Market.
Dittrich, M., Knabe, A., & Leipold, K. (2014). Gender differences in experimental wage negotiations.
          Economic Inquiry, 52(2), 862­873.
Doleac, J. L., & Hansen, B. (2017). Moving to Job Opportunities? The Effect of" Ban the Box" on the
          Composition of Cities. American Economic Review, 107(5), 556­559.
Eckel, C. C., & Grossman, P. J. (2001). Chivalry and solidarity in ultimatum games. Economic Inquiry,
          39(2), 171­188.
Eckel, C., De Oliveira, A. C., & Grossman, P. J. (2008). Gender and negotiation in the small: Are women
          (perceived to be) more cooperative than men? Negotiation Journal, 24(4), 429­445.
Exley, C. L., Niederle, M., & Vesterlund, L. (2020). Knowing when to ask: The cost of leaning-in. Journal
          of Political Economy, 128(3), 816-854.
Gihleb, R., Landsman, R., & Vesterlund, L. (2020). The Effect of Negotiation on Securing Equal Pay for
          Equal Work.
Gneezy, U., Niederle, M., & Rustichini, A. (2003). Performance in competitive environments: Gender
          differences. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3), 1049­1074.
Greig, F. (2008). Propensity to negotiate and career advancement: Evidence from an investment bank that
          women are on a "slow elevator." Negotiation Journal, 24(4), 495­508.
Hall, R. E., & Krueger, A. B. (2012). Evidence on the incidence of wage posting, wage bargaining, and on-
          the-job search. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 4(4), 56­67.
Hansen, B. & McNichols, D. (2020). Information and the Persistence of the Gender Wage Gap: Early
          Evidence from California's Salary History Ban.
Hernandez-Arenaz, I., & Iriberri, N. (2018). Women ask for less (only from men): Evidence from bargaining
          in the field. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 152, 192­214.
Hernandez-Arenaz, I., & Iriberri, N. (2019a). A Review of Gender Differences in Negotiation. In Oxford
          Research Encyclopedia of Economics and Finance.
Hernandez-Arenaz, I., & Iriberri, N. (2019b). Gender Differences in Alternating-Offer Bargaining: An
          Experimental Study.
Kray, L. J. (2015, May 21). The best way to eliminate the gender pay gap? Ban salary negotiations. The
          Washington Post. https://www.washingtonpost.com/posteverything/wp/2015/05/21/the-best-way-
          to-way-to-eliminate-the-gender-pay-gap-ban-salary-negotiations/
Kray, L. J., Galinsky, A. D., & Thompson, L. (2002). Reversing the gender gap in negotiations: An
          exploration of stereotype regeneration. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
          87(2), 386­409.
Kray, L. J., & Gelfand, M. J. (2009). Relief versus regret: The effect of gender and negotiating norm
          ambiguity on reactions to having one's first offer accepted. Social Cognition, 27(3), 418­436.
Kugler, K. G., Reif, J. A., Kaschner, T., & Brodbeck, F. C. (2018). Gender differences in the initiation of
          negotiations: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 144(2), 198.
Leibbrandt, A., & List, J. A. (2015). Do women avoid salary negotiations? Evidence from a large-scale
          natural field experiment. Management Science, 61(9), 2016­2024.
List, J. A. (2004). The nature and extent of discrimination in the marketplace: Evidence from the field. The
          Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1), 49­89.
Major, B., McFarlin, D. B., & Gagnon, D. (1984). Overworked and underpaid: On the nature of gender
          differences in personal entitlement. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 47(6), 1399.
Mas, A. (2017). Does transparency lead to pay compression? Journal of Political Economy, 125(5), 1683­
          1721.
Mazei, J., Hüffmeier, J., Freund, P. A., Stuhlmacher, A. F., Bilke, L., & Hertel, G. (2015). A meta-analysis
          on gender differences in negotiation outcomes and their moderators. Psychological Bulletin, 141(1),
          85.
McKelway, M. (2019). Vicious and Virtuous Cycles: Self-Efficacy and Employment of Women in India.
Movius, H. (2008). The effectiveness of negotiation training. Negotiation Journal, 24(4), 509­531.
Niederle, M. (2015). Gender. In The Handbook of Experimental Economics (Vol. 2). Princeton university
          press.
Niederle, M., & Vesterlund, L. (2007). Do women shy away from competition? Do men compete too much?
          The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(3), 1067­1101.
Niederle, M., & Vesterlund, L. (2008). Gender differences in competition. Negotiation Journal, 24(4), 447­
          463.
Niederle, M., & Vesterlund, L. (2011). Gender and competition. Annual Review of Economics, 3(1), 601­
          630.
Pradel, D. W., Bowles, H. R., & McGinn, K. L. (2005). When does gender matter in negotiations.
          Negotiation, 8(11).
Rigdon, M. L. (2012). An experimental investigation of gender differences in wage negotiations.
Sandberg, S. (2013). Lean In: Women, Work, and the Will to Lead. Random House.
Säve-Söderbergh, J. (2019). Gender gaps in salary negotiations: Salary requests and starting salaries in the
          field. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 161, 35­51.
Sinha, S. (2019). Salary History Ban: Gender Pay Gap and Spillover Effects.
Small, D. A., Gelfand, M., Babcock, L., & Gettman, H. (2007). Who goes to the bargaining table? The
          influence of gender and framing on the initiation of negotiation. Journal of Personality and Social
          Psychology, 93(4), 600.
Solnick, S. J. (2001). Gender differences in the ultimatum game. Economic Inquiry, 39(2), 189­200.
Stevens, C. K., Bavetta, A. G., & Gist, M. E. (1993). Gender differences in the acquisition of salary
          negotiation skills: The role of goals, self-efficacy, and perceived control. Journal of Applied
          Psychology, 78(5), 723.
Stuhlmacher, A. F., & Walters, A. E. (1999). Gender differences in negotiation outcome: A metaanalysis.
          Personnel Psychology, 52(3), 653­677.
Sutter, M., Bosman, R., Kocher, M. G., & van Winden, F. (2009). Gender pairing and bargaining--Beware
         the same sex! Experimental Economics, 12(3), 318­331.
Tinsley, C. H., Cheldelin, S. I., Schneider, A. K., & Amanatullah, E. T. (2009). Women at the bargaining
         table: Pitfalls and prospects. Negotiation Journal, 25(2), 233­248.
