                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          A THEORY OF THE NOMINAL CHARACTER OF STOCK SECURITIES

                                         Bernard Dumas
                                         Marcel Savioz

                                      Working Paper 28186
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28186


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020


Dumas's research has been supported by the Swiss National Bank, the AXA chair of the
University of Torino and by the INSEAD research fund. He is thankful for the hospitality of the
Collegio Carlo Alberto (Torino) and of BI Norwegian Business School (Oslo). Without
implicating them, we thank for helpful discussions Guido Ascari, Francesco Bianchi, Edouard
Challe, Pierrick Clerc, Tobias Cwik, Antonia Diaz, Alexander Gümbel, Harrison Hong, Christian
Julliard, Sylvia Kaufmann, Robert Kollmann, Keith Küster, Monika Merz, Cyril Monnet, Dirk
Niepelt, Mariana Rojas-Breu, Lars Svensson, Hugo Van Buggenum, Venky Venkateshwaran,
Christopher Waller, Michael Weber, Mirko Wiederholt, Raf Wouters, staff members of the Swiss
National Bank -- especially Barbara Rudolf, Alain Gabler, Samuel Reynard --, participants in
two brown bag seminars at INSEAD, especially Adrian Buss, Federico Gavazzoni, Sergei
Glebkin and Naveen Gondhi, and participants in two brown bag seminars at BI, in the 7th
International Moscow Finance and Economics Conference, in a Zurich meeting of a Standing
Field Committee of the Verein for Socialpolitik, in a seminar at the Belgian National Bank, in the
Marrakech Macroeconomics workshop and in a seminar at the Swiss National Bank. The
opinions expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of
the Swiss National Bank. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Bernard Dumas and Marcel Savioz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
A Theory of the Nominal Character of Stock Securities
Bernard Dumas and Marcel Savioz
NBER Working Paper No. 28186
December 2020
JEL No. G12,G18

                                          ABSTRACT

We construct recursive solutions for, and study the properties of the dynamic equilibrium of an
economy with three types of agents: (i) house- hold/investors who supply labor with a finite
elasticity, consume a large variety of goods that are not perfect substitutes and trade government
bonds; (ii) firms that produce those varieties of goods, receive productivity shocks and set prices
in a Calvo manner; (iii) a government that collects an exogenous fiscal surplus and acts
mechanically, buying and selling bonds in accordance with a Taylor policy rule based on
expected inflation. In this setting we show that stock market returns are much less than one-for-
one related to inflation over a one-year holding period, which means that stock securities have a
strong nominal character. We also show that their nominal character diminishes as the length of
the stock-holding period increases, in accordance with empirical evidence.


Bernard Dumas
INSEAD
boulevard de Constance
77305 Fontainebleau Cedex
FRANCE
and NBER
bernard.dumas@insead.edu

Marcel Savioz
Swiss National Bank
Boersenstrasse 15
Zurich, Switzerland
marcel.savioz@bluewin.ch
          Fama and Schwert (1977) found that expected stock returns did
      not increase one-for-one with in   ation. They interpreted this result
      to say that expected returns are higher in bad economic times, since
      people are less willing to hold risky assets, and are lower in good
      times. In   ation is lower in bad times and higher in good times, so
      lower expected returns in times of high in   ation are not a result of
      in  ation, but a coincidence.
          Cochrane (2005b)


    Traders in the stock market take monetary policy very much into account.
Yet, the literature in monetary economics by and large ignores the stock market
and, given the complementary focus on ...scal policy, is only interested in pric-
ing government bonds, a task which is accomplished by means of the private
sector' s Euler condition of portfolio choice (known in this context as the Fisher
equation). There have been several exceptions (Marshall (1992), Challe and
Giannitsarou (2014), Swanson (2014)),1 and a few attempts to relate monetary
economics to ...nancial economics. Several papers going in that direction are:
Svensson (1989), Benhabib, Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2001, 2002), Nakajima
and Polemarchakis (2005) and Magill and Quinzii (2009, 2012). We draw in-
spiration from these papers, our purpose being to describe the key features of
the relation between monetary and ...scal policy on the one hand and the stock
market on the other.
    The main and most useful result of the model will be the manner in which
the stochastic process of equilibrium securities prices corresponds to a given
monetary-policy process.2 It will indicate how any multi-period government be-
havior is transmitted dynamically to ...nancial markets. Investors are interested
in that transmission because, among other things, they would very much like to
know how shares of stock can serve as a hedge against in      ation.3
    The empirical evidence most cogently related to the present paper pertains to
the relations between stock returns and in    ation. Lintner (1975), Bodie (1976),
Ja¤ee and Mandelker (1976), Nelson (1976), Fama and Schwert (1977), Fama
(1981), Gultekin (1983), Boudoukh and Richardson (1993), Goto and Valkanov
(2000) all document a negative correlation between nominal stock returns and
in  ation at monthly or annual frequency.
    To explain the correlation, Fama (1981) suggested a "proxy hypothesis"       .
When money demand is stable and money supply is ...xed so that no monetary
   1 Some more recent theoretical contributions that deal with asset prices in New Keynesian

settings include Nístico (2005), De Paoli, Scott and Weeken (2007), Milani (2008), Li and
Palomino (2009), Wei (2009), Castelnuovo and Nístico (2010) and Challe and Giannitsarou
(2014), who focus on the response of the stock market to a monetary policy shock, whereas
we focus exclusively on a productivity shock. And Rudebusch and Swanson (2008) provide a
calibration and apply it to bond prices.
   2 See Asness (2003).
   3 Conversely, the knowledge of that transmission can guide central bankers in their at-

tempt to utilize information from ...nancial markets to gauge anticipations of monetary policy
(Bernanke and Gertler (1999, 2001), Bernanke and Kuttner (2004)).



                                              2
e¤ect is at play, a positive real shock both increases real stock returns and
reduces in    ation. The negative correlation is then just due to the existence of real
shocks. The model to be outlined below does not satisfy Fama'         s money-supply
assumptions; yet the negative correlation between real returns and in            ation
that we ...nd will also be attributable to real productivity shocks, in the way
mentioned in the epigraph of our article, the directions of the two contributing
e¤ects being, however, reversed. To the opposite of Fama, Geske and Roll (1983)
suggested that the negative response is due to counter-cyclical monetary policy
and the monetization of government debt.
     Boudoukh and Richardson (BR), whose dataset covers close to two hundred
years of annual data, introduce an important distinction between the ex ante
and the ex post forms of the correlation of stock returns with in           ation. To
capture the ex post correlation, BR simply regress one-year holding-period re-
alized nominal stock returns on one-year realized in        ation. They do the same
for ...ve-year holding-period realized nominal stock returns and ...ve-year realized
in   ation. In both cases the slope coe¢ cient is found to be signi...cantly positive
but, more importantly, signi...cantly less than 1: stocks are very much "nomi-
nal"   , as opposed to "real" assets. And the slope is many times larger for the
...ve-year data: stocks are less nominal for a ...ve-year holding period than for a
one-year holding period.4
     The ex ante relation, otherwise called the "Fisher" hypothesis (applied to
stocks as opposed to bonds or Treasury Bills), relates conditionally expected
nominal stock returns to conditionally expected in         ation. Under the null hy-
pothesis, the regression slope is expected to be equal to 1, re     ecting a constant
real rate of return. When anticipating in        ation, agents have available an in-
formation set, which the econometrician treats as instrumental variables. BR
use past in    ation and past interest rates as instrumental variables. They do not
reject the null hypothesis on ...ve-year data but reject it on one-year data.
     Katz and Lustig (2017) using a panel of countries con...rm that stock markets
are slow to incorporate news about future in       ation, so that they do not qualify
to be called "real" assets, whereas bond markets are not. Gorodnichenko and
Weber (2016) show empirically that, after monetary policy announcements, the
conditional volatility of stock market returns rises more for ...rms with stickier
prices than for ...rms with more    exible prices and that sticky prices are, indeed,
costly for ...rms.
     The chief goal of this paper is to explain these stylized facts, especially
those brought out by Boudoukh and Richardson concerning the slope of the
relationship, using for the purpose well-recognized economic models, which have
been shown in the past to be empirically relevant.
     Before we begin, it is important to note that our purpose is analytical in
nature. To that aim, we take the analytical derivations as far as they go, after
which numerical solutions will take over. The use of numbers in this paper
does not mean that we undertake the quantitative exercise of calibrating a
   4 Goto and Valkanov (2002) and Hagmann and Lenz (2005), using a vector autoregression,

show an attenuation of the negative relationship following the Volcker reform of monetary
policy.


                                           3
DSGE model to a real-world economy. We want to illustrate a mechanism. For
the same purpose, we make simplifying assumptions. For instance, we consider
a bare-bone form of monetary policy (a Taylor rule; see Section 1), with no
monetary shock. There is only one shock in our model, namely the productivity
or supply shock.
     With this single shock, the conditional correlation between all stochastic
variables is equal to 1 and their unconditional correlation is also high. For that
reason, the R2 of the relation between stock return and in      ation will be very
high, which is not true in the data. When we succeed in obtaining a slope very
much smaller than 1, it will follow mechanically that the volatility of stock
returns will be smaller than the volatility of in  ation, which is counterfactual.
Our purpose is singlemindedly to explain the slope, not the R2 .
     The article is organized as follows. In Section 1, we discuss our modelling
choices in relation to the existing literature. In Section 2, we set up a purely
...nancial economy in which income is given exogenously, thus obtaining the
aggregate-demand schule. In Section 3, we turn to aggregate supply, adding
to the ...nancial side of the economy a productive sector in which oligopolistic
...rms can set prices in a fully  exible way. In Section 4, the productive sector
functions along the lines of the New Keynesian model with Calvo pricing. Section
5 provides the main result of the paper as it derives the connection between
stock returns and in   ation; extensive simulations are performed and the degree
to which the model matches the evidence is discussed. In Section 6, we add a
demand for cash in the form of a Baumol-Tobin inventory demand and perform
new simulations. Finally, in Section 7 we consider the pricing of long-term bonds
and discuss the `  Fed model'of price comparison between bonds and stocks, as
spelled out in Asness (2003).


1     Modelling choices and related literature
A ...nancial economist, building on monetary and ...scal policy research, cannot
treat the government as just any other trader that seeks to optimize his/her life-
time utility function under some budget constraint. Indeed, most of the existing
work in that area attributes no explicit objective function to the government.5
Issues of feasibility, stability and determinacy are discussed at length, but the
objective functions of the government and the central bank are not stated explic-
itly. Instead, a behavior rule is postulated as a quasi-mechanical intervention
formula. Today, the majority of central banks follows a policy called "in       a-
tion targeting"epitomized by the famous Taylor (1993) or Henderson-McKibbin
(1993) rule.
    5 Three strands of monetary economics provide exceptions. First, ad hoc mean-variance

objective functions are used to justify the linear Taylor rule (Woodford (2003), pages 535¤).
Second, in the context of incomplete markets where nominal assets are traded, some re-
searchers (e.g., Chari et al. (1993), Allen et al. (2012)) ask: can monetary policy maximize
welfare by serving to render the market more complete. The optimal policy involves unreal-
istically volatile ination rate and nominal interest rate. Third, Ramsey-optimal inationary
taxes have been derived by e.g., Persson et al. (1987).


                                             4
    Following Sargent and Wallace (1975), the literature has stressed the un-
avoidable ...nancial linkage between monetary and ...scal policies when the cen-
tral bank intervenes in the money market, including the Treasury-bill market,
to set the nominal interest rate.6 Indeed, another distinction between the gov-
ernment and regular investors arises in the speci...cation of its income. In an
exchange economy, regular investors receive an income, which is exogenous. Or,
in a production economy, they may draw some income from their labor and
that income is dictated by the production function, which is speci...ed ab initio.
The government is di¤erent in that it draws income from taxes. A major dis-
tinction must be drawn between a speci...cation in which the budget surplus of
the government is exogenous ­ a so-called "non Ricardian" ...scal policy ­ and
one in which it will at some point or the other have to raise enough taxes to
repay its debt ­ a "Ricardian" policy. The distinction between Ricardian and
non-Ricardian ...scal regimes can be traced back to Aiyagari and Gertler (1985),
Leeper (1991) and Canzoneri et al. (2011). In this paper, we assume that ...scal
policy is non Ricardian (or "active"in the vocabulary of Leeper (1991)). Under
a non Ricardian policy, it is conceivable for the government in some sense to
default but we do not model that event. More importantly for our purposes, in
a non Ricardian regime, some of the debt may be monetized.
    When setting the nominal rate of interest, the principal aim of the central
bank is to anchor in    ationary expectations. In most models of monetary eco-
nomics, the Taylor rule is backward looking in that it captures the central bank'  s
reaction to realized ination. Realized in     ation is really a proxy for rationally
expected in   ation, a proxy that a central bank would rely on when it has access
to incomplete information. In this paper, we make the assumption that the
central bank has access to the same full information as the private sector. For
that reason, we write the Taylor rule as a forward-looking formula relating the
nominal rate of interest to the rationally-expected rate of ination, as in Clarida
et al. (2000), Bernanke and Bovin (2000) and Svensson and Woodford (2009)
                                                                        7
who refer to this implementation as "In     ation-Forecast Targeting."
    In most work in Monetary Economics, an initial price level of goods is picked
and the model is left to run its way forward into the inde...nite future; one then
checks, often with the help of a linearized version of the model, whether the path
of the price level is stable or explosive.8 Instead, we postulate a ...nite terminal
date for the economy although, stepping backward, we are able to postpone it
inde...nitely until we reach an unchanging solution. The private agents' utility
functions do not extend beyond the terminal date and the prices of all securities,
including the agents'...nancial wealth, after ...nal payments have been made, are
set equal to zero, both in real and in nominal terms. In this way, the enforcement
   6 A recent, elaborately argued exposition of that view is to be found in Leeper and Leith

(2016).
   7 The literature has studied at length issues of stability of ination over time, which arise

from the lag that the proxy introduces in the backward-looking Taylor rule. References to
that enormous literature and a convincing opinion on the matter can be found in Cochrane
(2005a, 2011).
   8 Recently, Kollman (2019) has illustrated the fact that commonly used criteria for stability

are not valid for non linear models. Linearizing them is not a proper way out.


                                               5
of terminal conditions is ensured.9 The price level of goods at the terminal date
is endogenous, as it is at any other date, including the initial one; it is always
...nite. In our speci...cation, the issue of stability over time does not arise. It
is replaced by an issue of uniqueness of the equilibrium, which we examine.
Provided one assumes as we do here, that the price level of goods is forward
looking ­as is done in the Fiscal Theory of the Price Level ­as opposed to being
predetermined, it makes no di¤erence whether one solves by means of forward
shooting or by backward induction.
     Finally, we do not resort to the customary technique of approximation (by
linearization or Taylor expansion) around the deterministic steady state.10 We
handle explicitly the non linearities of the model and obtain an exact solution.
We even sometimes discover two viable equilibria. We are able to do that because
we reach explicit solutions for the aggregate-demand curve (inclusive of the
policy rule) and, in this way, can enumerate and locate solution points exactly.
     The empirical estimation of the money-demand curve has become a harder
and harder exercise to perform, so much so that, in recent years, many central
bankers have stopped paying attention to monetary aggregates and focused
exclusively on realized in    ation and interest rates. The di¢ culty, of course, is
that money demand and money supply shift simultaneously so that there is an
identi...cation problem. We adopt successively two speci...cations of household
monetary behavior, which are standard.11 The ...rst is the "cashless economy"
of Woodford (2003). Our second speci...cation will be the "square-root"model of
money demand developed some sixty years ago by Allais (1947, pages 238-241),
Baumol (1952) and Tobin (1956). In that simple, inventory-theoretic model,
households incur a ...xed cost every time they go to the bank to turn securities
into cash. They regulate their stock of money to minimize the average cost so
incurred while making sure that they can always have enough money to meet a
...xed, exogenous   ow of consumption needs.12
     As mentioned, the closest antecedents to the present paper are the articles
by Benhabib, Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2001a, 2001b, 2002), Nakajima and
Polemarchaskis (2005) and Magill and Quinzii (2009, 2012). They study issues
of indeterminacy (unrelateded to issues of stability) of the price level and of the
     9 See Michel (1982) for the interpretation of "transversality conditions," which are used in

in...nite-horizon models.
  1 0 Recently, some authors have superimposed on the policy rule a zero lower bound on the

nominal rate of interest. They were thus lead to worry about non linearities and multiple
solutions of the resulting system of equations (which previously was linearized without a
qualm). See Fernandez-Villaverde et al. (2012), Mertens and Ravn (2012), Aruoba and
Schorfeide (2013), Christiano and Eichenbaum (2013) and Braun et al. (2013).
  1 1 See Tin (2000).
  1 2 While several attempts have been made at developing general-equilibrium versions of the

Baumol-Tobin model (see, e.g., Romer (1986), Smith (1986), Heathcote (1998), Schwartz
(2006), Leo (2006), Bai (2005), Silva (2011) etc..), most of them tend to simplify the model by
postulating, e.g., an overlapping-generation model, for the sole purpose of cutting down to size
the dynamic program to be solved. Danthine and Donaldson (1986) assume a money demand
resulting from money in the utility function and an exogenous supply of money. In that
context, they establish the conditions under which stock returns and ination are negatively
correlated.



                                               6
rate in ation, and their potential solutions by means of Taylor-like intervention
rules. The same issues arise here.


2    The aggregate-
     demand side of the model
We begin our investigation with an economy in which economic agents need no
money to transact and in which prices of goods and services are fully      exible.
    We consider a ...nancial market populated with one (or a continuum of iden-
tical) household(s), for which we use a subscript 1, and one central bank, sub-
scripted 2, and a set of exogenous time sequences of individual income (or out-
put) received by households fyt 2 R++ ; t = 0; :::T g, which are placed on a tree
or lattice. These are received by the households only. For simplicity, we consider
a binomial tree so that a given node at time t is followed by two nodes fu; dg at
time t + 1 at which the two values of income are denoted fyt+1;u ; yt+1;d g : The
transition probabilities are equal to 1=2. Notice that the tree accommodates
the exogenous state variables only.
    In the ...nancial market, there are several securities with at least one nomi-
nally riskless security, viz. a one-period nominal bond. The household trades
all securities to maximize some lifetime utility.

Assumption 1 The central bank only trades the one-period nominal bond in a
mechanical way described by a Taylor policy rule:
                                  0    1          1
                                                             1
                                       2 Pt+1;u + 2 Pt+1;d
                                  @              Pt          A ;
              1 + it = (1 + {)                                     0;   6= 1    (1)
                                            1+

    The Taylor rule aims to set expected ination. It does not respond to realized
in ation, so that it should have little e¤ect on its conditional volatility. We
would call monetary shock a deviation from the exact rule. Throughout this
paper we assume zero monetary shock.
    The government'     s primary surplus (taxes in excess of expenditures) is de-
noted st in real terms, St in nominal terms. The number of units (measured
by the nominal amount of the future payo¤) of the one-period bond with which
the private sector exits time t is denoted 1;t and its exiting ...nancial wealth
F1;t , 1;t = (1 + it ) is the present value of the nominally riskless bond holdings.
We handle the stock market separately as the central bank does not trade it
anyway.
    We assume that the utility function of the private sector is time-additive
and isoelastic. Let the relative risk aversion of the household be 1       and their
impatience factor be < 1. The private sector (agent carrying a subscript 1)
maximizes:
                                          X T
                                   sup E0      u (ct ; t)
                                 fc;   1g    t=0


                                             7
subject to:

      terminal conditions:
                                                      1;T   = 0;                         (2)

      a sequence of ow budget constraints:

                                         1;t
                       Pt     ct +              + st        Pt =     1;t 1   + Pt   yt   (3)
                                     1 + it

      and given initial holdings:
                                                  1; 1      =    1                       (4)

    The initial condition at t = 0 is given in terms of a nominal outstanding
claim 1 =      2 of the public on the government. Please, bear in mind that 2;t
is a negative number, except in very unusual and temporary ...scal situations.
    The government (agent carrying a subscript 2) acts mechanically according
to the constraints:
                              2;t
                                     =    2;t 1   + st          Pt ; j = u; d            (5)
                            1 + it
and to the Taylor rule (1) with initial holdings:

                                               2; 1    =    2

and terminal condition:
                                                2;T    =0
    Citing Nakajima and Polemarchakis (2005), "a ...scal policy is called ` Ricar-
dian' if it guarantees that the public debt vanishes at each terminal node for
all possible, equilibrium or non-equilibrium, values of price levels and other en-
dogenous variables " [Emphasis added]. In that case, the ...scal surplus cannot
be exogenous throughout. Nakajima and Polemarchakis (2005) demonstrates
that, as long as ...scal policy is Ricardian in a cashless economy, the value of
government debt is indeterminate.13
    For that reason, in the balance of this paper, we maintain the following

Assumption 2 The government pursues a non Ricardian ...scal policy.

   Therefore, let government surplus st be exogenously ...xed in real terms. As
explained earlier, the government's debt is managed mechanically according to
a Taylor rule (1), which aims to anchor in  ationary expectations.14
  1 3 This is in conformity with Woodford (2003, page 125) and Cochrane (2011). And this

indeterminacy induces an indeterminacy of the entire future path of ination. When later we
introduce a production side of the economy, the indeterminacy would also be physical.
  1 4 It is asserted in Canzoneri et al. (2011) that the backward looking Taylor rule based

on realized ination is incompatible with non Ricardian ...scal policy. With a forward looking
Taylor rule involving expected ination, there is no incompatibility as we show now.


                                                  8
De...nition 1 An equilibrium is de...ned as a joint process for the allocation of
consumption ct , the price level Pt , the amount of government bonds outstanding
  2;t and the nominal rate of interest it such that the supremum of the private
sector' s objective function (31) is reached for all t; the government abides by
its period budget constraints (5) and follows the mechanical rule (1), and the
market-clearing conditions:
                                     1;t + 2;t = 0                            (6)
are also satis...ed with probability 1 at all times t = 0; :::T .

2.1        Equation system
It is shown in Appendix A that, for a utility function u (c; t) = t c = ; < 1, a
recursive (backward-induction) equilibrium can be obtained by solving, at each
node (the exogenous state variable here being yt ),15 the following system of
equations:16

               Flow budget constraints of private sector at time t + 1
Pt+1;u      ct+1;u + F1;t+1;u + st+1;u            Pt+1;u =           1;t   + Pt+1;u       yt+1;u ; F1;T;u = 0
Pt+1;d      ct+1;d + F1;t+1;d + st+1;d            Pt+1;d =           1;t   + Pt+1;d       yt+1;d ; F1;T;d = 0
                Flow budget constraints of government at time t + 1
                     F2;t+1;u =       2;t   + st+1;u          Pt+1;u ; F2;T;u = 0
                      F2;t+1;d =      2;t   + st+1;d          Pt+1;d ; F2;T;d = 0
              Portfolio-choice, or Euler, or Fisher condition at time t                                   (7)
                               1                  1       1           1               1     1
                 1 1           2   (ct+1;u )          Pt+1;u     +    2 (ct+1;d )         Pt+1;d
                         =                                             1
               1 + it Pt                          (ct )
                                     Taylor rule at time t
                                              01         1
                                                                                1
                                                          2 Pt+1;u + 2 Pt+1;d
                                                  @                  Pt         A
                        1 + it = (1 + {)
                                                                 1+

                                   Market clearing at time t
                                            1;t   +   2;t     =0

The functions carried backward in the backward-induction procedure are F1;t
(= F2;t ):
                                                           1;t
                                            F1;t ,               :
                                                      1 + it
The unknowns are fit ; ct+1;u ; ct+1;d ; 1;t ; 2;t ; Pt+1;u ; Pt+1;d g. The only endoge-
nous state variable is the current price level Pt , which is determined at time
zero from the outstanding nominal amount of government debt, as in the Fiscal
  1 5 In
      later sections, yt is endogenized and productivity is exogenous.
  1 6 In
      principle, there is also an endogenous state variable (here being Pt ) but, in the absence
of nominal illusion, it can be factored out on grounds of homogeneity.


                                                      9
Theory of the Price Level.17 At time zero, the initial condition to be solved for
the unknown initial price P0 is

                                     F2;0 =   2; 1   + s0      P0                              (8)

where 2; 1 is a given (negative) amount of nominal claim outstanding and s0
a given time-0 surplus.
    Since the government does not trade the equity and private agents are ho-
mogeneous, it is not traded at all and its price is virtual. If the equity security
is de...ned ­ for the time being ­as paying the total income, its price xt is equal
to
               1               1                             1             1
               2   (ct+1;u )       (yt+1;u + xt+1;u ) +      2 (ct+1;d )       (yt+1;d + xt+1;d )
xt    =                                                       1                                     ;
                                                     (yt )
xT    =    0                                                                                   (9)

    Since the government consumes no goods, there exists an obvious analytical
solution for which
                        ct+1;u = yt+1;u ; ct+1;d = yt+1;d
and for which, for that reason, the market clears. Once consumption is known,
and given that the government surplus is exogenous, the real value of government
debt f2;t = F2;t =Pt follows as a discounted present value. All the endogenous
quantities (in  ation, interest rate, government debt etc.) that prevail under
that solution are derived in Appendix B. The formula for the real price xt of
the stockmarket (9) owes nothing to the price level but the real rate of return on
it is conditionally correlated with in ation since yt+1 ; st+1 ; f2;t+1 are correlated
with each other. We now turn to a special case, which will occupy us for the
rest of the article. The derivations for it are identical to those contained in the
appendix.

2.2       The case of IID growth and proportional taxes
In case growth is stochastic and identically and independently distributed (IID)
over time,
                     yt+1;u          yt+1;d
                            = 1 + u;         = 1 + d; u > d
                       yt              yt
the output shock is, by construction, permanent or in...nitely persistent,18 and
there is scale invariance in the sense that the quantity f2;t does not depend on
the level of income yt at time t once the surplus process fst g is given.
    If, however, the exogenous surplus is speci...ed to be at all times and in all
states proportional to income, st =      yt , where can interpreted as a constant
  1 7 See Cochrane (2005a) and Niepelt (2004). A recent, comprehensive survey is Leeper and

Leith (2016).
  1 8 The IID growth example will su¢ ce for our purposes. But a somewhat more realistic

mean-reverting growth could just as easily be handled by means of a Markov chain.




                                               10
tax rate, then the real discounted value of government debt f2;t is proportional
to the level of income yt at time t:
                                           ^
                                    f2;t = f 2;t       yt                    (10)

where f ^2;t approaches zero deterministically as one approaches the terminal
date. Indeed:
                       ^
                       f2;t
                                     =         ^
                                            k; f2;T = 0
                       +f^2;t+1

                            ^                      k        1 + kT   t
                            f 2;t    =                                       (11)
                                                            1+k
where we de...ne:
                                    1          1
                       k,             (1 + u) + (1 + d)                      (12)
                                    2          2
k < 1 being assumed for now, so that for an in...nite horizon, we get the Gordon
formula and a constant real debt factor:

                                  ^                 k
                                  f 2;t =
                                                   1+k
   The realized inverse real gross rates of return on government debt are:
                          f2;t                      k
                                             =         in a u state
                    st+1;u + f2;t+1;u              1+u
                          f2;t                      k
                                             =         in a d state
                    st+1;d + f2;t+1;d              1+d

The quantity:
                                    1 1   1 1
                            k           +
                                    21+u 21+d
can be viewed as the expected inverse gross real rate of interest on nominally
riskless claims,
             h which is not equal to the
                                      i inverse gross real rate on really riskless
                      1             1
claims (      (1 + u)   + (1 + d)      =2).

Proposition 1 Under the IID growth assumption, the realized rates of ination
are:
                            Pt+1;u    k
                                   =                   (1 + it )
                              Pt     1+u
                            Pt+1;d    k
                                   =                   (1 + it )
                              Pt     1+d
independent of the tax rate. Ination is lower in the u state than in the d state.




                                             11
   The result goes the same way as in the traditional quantity theory of money
but for completely di¤erent, in this case ...scal, reasons. A high output shock
today implies higher real ...scal surpluses into the inde...nite future. For a given
outstanding nominal debt, the price level is lower. In the remarks that follow
Proposition 6 below, we comment on the empirical validity of a generalized
version of Proposition 1.

Proposition 2 Under the IID growth assumption, the nominal rate of interest
is constant:
                          !11
                     1+{                1 1        1 1      1
          1 + it =                 k            +                      (13)
                   (1 + )               21+u 21+d

   The price level at time 0, according to the Fiscal theory, solves the initial
condition (8):

                      k       1 + kT
                                             y0             P0 =        2; 1   +       y0   P0
                             1+k
so that it is equal to

                           P0 =                     h 2;            1
                                                                                   i
                                                                    k ( 1+kT )
                                           y0        1+                 1+k


   The stock-market price (excluding current output) is proportionnal to out-
put:
                            xt = x
                                 ^ t yt ; xT = 0
      ^t (a form of dividend-price ratio) is deterministic :19
where x

                            x
                            ^t    = k           (1 + x
                                                     ^t+1 ) ; x
                                                              ^T = 0
                                       k            1 + kT              t
                            x
                            ^t    =
                                                    1+k
and, when the horizon is in...nite:
                                                            k
                                           x
                                           ^t =
                                                        1       k
  1 9 Not
        surprisingly, because of the proportional tax, there exists a systematic relation be-
tween the real stock market price per unit of output x
                                                     ^t (the price-dividend ratio) and the real
discounted value of government debt per unit of output f  ^2;t :

                                                ^
                                                f 2;t
                                                        =x
                                                         ^t

Over time, they both decline deterministically.




                                                   12
Proposition 3 Under the IID growth assumption, the real gross rates of return
on the stock market are:
                                   1+u
                                       in a u state
                                    k
                                   1+d
                                       in a d state
                                    k
    On a u node, in   ation is lower than in the d node with the same predecessor
while the real stock market return is higher but that is just a "proxy"result of a
common cause, namely the output shock, which acts both on the stock market
and on tax collection. The real rate of return on equity being low in a state
in which in   ation is high, it is conditonally negatively correlated with the rate
of in ation and the stock market is not a one-for-one hedge against in       ation.
In fact, for their product, which is the realized gross nominal rate of return on
stocks, we have:
Proposition 4 Under the IID growth assumption, the realized gross nominal
rate of return on stocks is equal to the gross nominal interest rate, which is
constant.
    In that sense, stock market returns are 100% nominal. In later sections, we
introduce additional features ­including endogenous output ­that will produce
more realistic results. More importantly, these features will explain the fact that
the link between in    ation and nominal stock returns varies depending on the
length of the holding period.
    In the current section, the output growth rates u and d are given parameters,
which cannot be varied. To prepare for the situation in which output is endoge-
nous, however, we derive for the two states the aggregate-demand schedules (or
IS curves) that relate the future prices Pu , Pd to the future outputs yu , yd . We
draw Figure 1 which shows these relations in the two states at time t + 1 for
the two output shocks at time t + 1 for a ...xed level of output and a ...xed price
level at time t. Proposition 1 shows that, for a given rate of interest, in ation is
decreasing in output. However, the relationships displayed in the ...gure incorpo-
rate the in uence of future output on the current rate of interest as per Equation
(13). In that way, the two schedules are interdependent (in a symmetric way,
in the sense that Pu (yu ; yd ) and Pd (yd ; yu ) are the same function).
Proposition 5 As long as         < 1 + (1 + d) = (1 + u), the aggregate demand
schedules (inclusive of policy rule) are increasing functions of income or output
y when > 1 and decreasing functions when < 1.
    The proof is in Appendix C.


3     Flexible-price aggregate supply
The model we have built in Section 2 combines the policy rule with the aggregate-
demand or "IS" side of the economy. The solution we calculated is complete


                                        13
   Pu                                                Pd

1.15                                              1.20

1.10                                              1.15

1.05                                              1.10
                                                  1.05
1.00
                                                  1.00
0.95
                                                  0.95
0.90
                                        yu                                           yd
        0.8       1.0     1.2     1.4                     0.8   1.0   1.2      1.4

   Pu                                                Pd

 1.4                                               1.4

 1.2                                               1.2

 1.0                                               1.0

 0.8                                               0.8

 0.6                                               0.6
                                        yu                                           yd
        0.8       1.0     1.2     1.4                     0.8   1.0   1.2      1.4



Figure 1: Aggregate-demand curve (inclusive of policy rule) with ...xed
outputs, = 1:5 (top panels) and = 0:5 (bottom panels). In each row,
the left-hand panel shows Pt+1;u plotted against yt+1;u for the ...xed value of
yt+1;d . The ...xed value of yt+1;u is shown as a vertical line. Right-hand panel:
Pt+1;d plotted against yt+1;d for the ...xed value of yt+1;u . The ...xed value of
yt+1;d is shown as a vertical line. Parameter values are as in Table 1. T = 6.
The current price level is set at 1. The current level of output yt is set at 0:9011.



              Parameter                       Value
                                              0:99
                                              2%=year
              { (in ...gures)                 1=    1+
              or { (in simulations)           "neutral" as per De...nition 2
              1                               1
              tax rate                        1=3
                                              4
                                              2
              volatility of z growth          1%=year
              expected value of z growth      0
              probability u and d             1=2
              ! (price stickiness)            0:6

   Table 1: Parameter values for the numerical illustration; one-year periods



                                             14
when income or output is exogenous. We now introduce ...rms and endogenize
output. We use that part of the model to obtain future (time-t + 1) output.
We develop the aggregate-supply side, productivity z being now the exogenous
state variable, which is assigned to the nodes of the tree. In this section, we
assume that ...rms are free to adjust their prices, this being only a transition to
the next section in which prices are sticky.
    Households: There exists a continuum 2 [0; 1] of di¤erentiated varieties
of the good.20 The argument ct of the households'utility is a composite de...ned
as
                                    Z 1     1       1

                              ct ,      c ;t d
                                                   0

where > 1 is the elasticity of substitution between the separate varieties. As
a result, their demand for each separate variety is

                                                           P ;t
                                          c ;t =                           ct
                                                           Pt

where P ;t is the nominal price of variety                          and Pt is the general price index,
which is de...ned generally as
                                               Z       1                    1
                                                                                1


                                     Pt ,                  P1
                                                            ;t     d                                        (14)
                                                   0

but will be particularized below. In addition, the utility function of households
now contains a separate, additive term for the dis-utility of labor. The full utility
function that households optimize is
                                              T
                                              X
                                  sup E0               u (ct ; t)          v (lt ; t)
                                 fc;l;   1g   t=0

subject to terminal conditions (2), a sequence of ow budget constraints:

               1;t
Pt ct +               +   X;t   Pt xt + st Pt =                   1;t 1 + X;t 1         Pt (   t   + xt )+ Wt lt
             1 + it
and given initial holdings:

                                              1; 1           =         1

                                              X; 1           =      1

where Wt is the nominal wage rate, lt the number of hours worked, X;t equity
holdings, xt the real price of equity and t real dividends distributed. Since
households alone hold the stock, it will be the case at equilibrium that X;t =
 X;t 1 = 1. We have in mind, however, that the ...rst-order condition for equity
holdings will serve to price the equity.
 2 0 Here,   we follow Chapter 8 in Walsh (2010) and Challe (2005).


                                                           15
   We assume an isoelastic dis-utility of work: v (l; t) = t l = ;                    > 1. The
households'...rst-order condition for hours worked is obviously
                                           1
                                      lt            Wt
                                           1   =                                          (15)
                                      ct            Pt

   Firms: The production function for variety                    of the good is

                                  y ;t = zt          l ;t                                 (16)

where zt is a productivity shock, the same for all ...rms and l ;t is the amount of
labor utilized for the production of good .
    Firms are free to adjust their prices at will. Firms producing variety that
choose price P ;t sell an amount of goods equal to (P ;t =Pt ) ct , for which they
will have to hire an amount of labor equal to (P ;t =Pt ) ct =zt : Their pro...ts
are:
                           P ;t                    P ;t     ct
                     P ;t             ct Wt
                           Pt                       Pt      zt
Optimizing the selling price:
                                                                          1
                      P ;t                 Wt                    P ;t         ct
            (1    )              ct                 (        )                   =0
                      Pt                   Pt                    Pt           zt

so that:
                                 P ;t
                                      =                 't
                                 Pt                 1
where
                                                 Wt
                                  't ,                                                    (17)
                                               zt Pt
We interpret 't as the real marginal cost of labor. Pro...ts are maximized by
setting a mark up and an optimal price P related to the price-elasticity of
demand, the same Pt for all varieties.
    In the aggregate, ...rms produce (Pt =Pt )  yt . Total labor employed is:

                                      Pt                yt
                                      Pt                zt

Letting lt stand for the labor supplied by households, the clearing of the labor
market requires:
                                     Pt        yt
                               lt =                                         (18)
                                      Pt       zt
    Equilibrium: By Walras'law, the equilibrium in the ...nancial market and
the equilibrium in the labor market imply the equilibrium in the goods market:
ct = yt : Furthermore, since all the ...rms behave the same way, (14) implies that




                                               16
Pt = Pt . Equations (17), (15) and (18) imply that the exible-price level of
output is:
                                             1
                                       1
                           yf;t =        zt                            (19)

and that the supply price is indeterminate. The determination of the price level
is then left entirely to the aggregate demand side (inclusive of the policy rule)
exactly as in Section 2. Since > 1 and < 1, output is an increasing function
of productivity.
    The special IID-growth case described in Section 2.2 can be recast in terms
of productivity shocks. From this point on, we assume that

Assumption 3 The growth rate of productivity z is IID.

   Equation (19) shows that, since > 1 and < 1, the resulting equilibrium
diagrams remain identical to Figure 1, reinterpreted as showing endogenous
values of the output y .21

Proposition 6 Under Assumption 3, proportional taxes and exible prices, the
equilibrium is unique and Propositions 1 to 4 remain true with 1 + u replaced
by 1 + u^ , (1 + u)                           ^ , (1 + d)
                      , 1 + d replaced by 1 + d            and k replaced by

                           ^,          1           1   ^
                           k             (1 + u
                                              ^) +   1+d                                    (20)
                                       2           2

 ^ < 1 being now assumed anew). In particular, the gross nominal rate of return
(k
on stocks remains equal to the gross nominal interest rate, which is constant.

     The empirical evidence is very much in line with this generalization of Propo-
sition 1.22 Smets and Wouters (2011) ...t both a DSGE model and a VAR spec-
i...cation, both producing very similar results, to seven US macroeconomic time
series with a highly persistent total factor productivity (TFP) shock. Their Fig-
ure 7 indicates clearly that the DSGE model produces a negative response on
impact of in   ation to a positive TFP shock. Altig et al. (2011) after performing
a VAR analysis on US data comment their Figure 2 saying that: "Finally notice
that a neutral technology shock leads to an initial sharp fall in the in      ation
rate." Furthermore, the VAR ...t performed by Alves (2004, Figure 2) on six
OECD countries leads uniformly to the same conclusion.
     Our productivity shock, being a (geometric) random walk, is highly persis-
tent. For that reason the shock is also news about future productivity. The
empirical literature con...rms a negative impact of news shocks about TFP on
  2 1 In each row, the left-hand panel shows P
                                               t+1;u plotted against yt+1;u for the exible-price
value of yt+1;d . The exible-price value of yt+1;u is shown as a vertical line. Right-hand panel:
Pt+1;d plotted against yt+1;d for the exible-price value of yt+1;u . The exible-price value of
yt+1;d is shown as a vertical line. Additional parameter values are as in Table 1. The current
level of output yt is set at its exible-price level equal to 0:9011.
  2 2 We are very grateful to Rafael Wouters for these references.




                                               17
prices and in   ation. See, for instance, Kurmann and Sims (2017), Barsky and
Sims (2011) and Miranda-Agrippino et al. (2019).
    Dividends and stock prices: As the ...rms enjoy market power, they
generate positive pro...ts. We now re-de...ne the aggregate stock security as paying
corporate pro...ts (as opposed to paying output, which it was in Section 2). The
real, future pro...ts, assumed to be distributed as dividends, are:
                      "                                  #
                             1
                          Pt        Wt       Pt       1           1
                 t =                                        yt = yt
                          Pt         Pt       Pt      zt

The value of the stock market, in real terms, not including current pro...ts, is:
                                2
                                                    1 !    1
                     1          4 1       1
 xt =                         1             zt+1;u
                1
                       1
                                  2
                  zt
                                  1          !
              1        1
                         zt+1;u     + xt+1;u

                                        1   !       1                                   1          !3
            1          1                                      1            1
          +                zt+1;d                                              zt+1;d       + xt+1;d 5 ;
            2
xT   =    0

The stock-market price (not including current pro...ts) is proportionnal to pro-
ductivity to a power:
                                                                  1
                                                    1
                        xt = x
                             ^t                         zt            ; xT = 0

where x
      ^t is deterministic :
                                    1       ^
                      x
                      ^t      =             k       (1 + x
                                                         ^t+1 ) ; x
                                                                  ^T = 0
                                            ^
                                            k                  ^T
                                                             1+k       t
                                    1
                      x
                      ^t      =
                                                               ^
                                                             1+k
          ^ is as de...ned in (20). When the horizon is in...nite:
and where k

                                                1             ^
                                                              k
                                        x
                                        ^t =
                                                         1        ^
                                                                  k
    In the next section, we introduce sticky prices. They will explain the main
fact that we are trying to understand, i.e., that the link between in ation and
nominal stock returns varies depending on the length of the holding period.



                                                18
4      Sticky-price aggregate supply
We now develop in standard New Keynesian fashion (see, for instance, Galí
(2008), Walsh (2010) or Challe (2005)), the case in which ...rms are not free
to set their prices, thus generating the Phillips curve, which endogenizes total
income. The Phillips curve relates the price level to output or total income
contemporaneously. Taking a cue from Dumas and Lyaso¤ (2012), we later shift
it to time t + 1, so that, in our rendition, it will relate the future price level
to future income. Here again, productivity growth is IID but income growth,
in  ation and stock returns are no longer IID as they depend on an endogenous
state variable re  ecting path dependence.
    Firms: Firms are not free to adjust their prices at will. Instead, as in Calvo
(1983), each ...rm at each point in time has a probability 1 ! of being allowed
to adjust its price to an optimal level Pt (which will be the same for all ...rms).
By the Law of Large Numbers, a fraction 1 ! do so, so that the price index,
or general price level, Pt particularizes to:23
                          h                                                                                    i11
                      Pt , (1
                                                                 1                                   1
                                           !)           ( Pt )               +!       (Pt          1)                        (21)

Firms maximize their market value on the equity market. With regard to setting
the current price P ;t of variety , the part of each ...rm'
                                                          s objective function that
depends on it is:24
               T  t
                      "                                                  #
               X            i (ct+i )
                                        1
                                          P ;t             P ;t
          sup       Et ( ! )          1          't+i               yt+i
          P ;t i=0             (ct )      Pt+i             Pt+i

                     R1      1             1
(where: yt ,          0
                          y ;t d                   ), with a solution P ;t = Pt which is:25

                                           PT         t              i                1                         Pt+i
                  Pt                  Et           i=0       ( ! ) (ct+i )                    yt+i 't+i          Pt
                     =                         PT                                                                        1   (22)
                  Pt              1                    t                 i                1               Pt+i
                                      Et            i=0       ( ! ) (ct+i )                    yt+i        Pt

a function of yt for which the numerator and the denominator will be computed
  2 3 This   equation should really be:
                                       Z       1                                  Z       1                          1
                                                                                                                         1
                                                             1
                  Pt , (1        !)                 P   ;t           d +!                     (P   ;t   1)
                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                 d
                                           0                                          0

We are going to ...nd that P ;t is the same for all but that is not true for P ;t 1 . The index
of price dispersion across ...rms should really be present in the derivations below. We ignore
it, as does most of the literature. For more details on this, see the appendix of Challe and
Giannitsarou (2014). We thank Edouard Challe for con...rmation.
   2 4 The overall objective function is the maximization of equity value, which includes addi-

tional terms not dependent on P ;t . See the value of the stock market (25) and (26) below.
   2 5 The proof is standard and is reproduced in Appendix D.




                                                                     19
by backward induction. To that aim, we restate Equation (22) in recursive form:

                Pt             ct 1 yt 't + A (t; yt )
                        =                                                              (23)
                Pt            1 ct 1 yt + B (t; yt )
                                Pt+1      h                                          i
                        , Et !
                                                      1
        A (t; yt )                         (ct+1 )      yt+1 't+1 + A (t + 1; yt+1 )
                                 Pt
      A (T; yT )        = 0
                                           1h                                      i
                                Pt+1
                        , Et !
                                                         1
       B (t; yt )                             (ct+1 )      yt+1 + B (t + 1; yt+1 )
                                 Pt
      B (T; yT )        = 0

    Equilibrium: As a result of their choice of price, a proportion ! of ...rms
produce (Pt 1 =Pt )      yt on an average and employ (Pt 1 =Pt )     yt =zt units
of labor and a proportion 1 ! of ...rms produce (Pt =Pt )        yt and employ
(Pt =Pt )    yt =zt units of labor.26 Total labor employed is:
                 "                                       #
                         Pt 1                     Pt          yt
                  !                 + (1 ! )
                           Pt                      Pt         zt

Letting lt stand for the labor supplied by households, the clearing of the labor
market requires:
                   "                                      #
                           Pt 1                   Pt           yt
               lt = !                + (1 ! )                               (24)
                            Pt                     Pt          zt

    Substitution of Equations (17), (15), (24) and (21) into (23) gives the equi-
  2 6 Because   of (21):
                8       "                   #   1               "             #   1   9   1
                <           Pt 1                                    Pt                =
         yt         !                  yt           + (1   !)            yt
                :            Pt                                     Pt                ;

i.e., the amounts produced by the two categories of ...rms add up to yt .




                                                    20
librium Phillips curve Pt =Pt         1   = P hillt (yt ) in implicit form:27 ; 28
                 0                         1
                                                 111
                                 Pt 1
                 B1      !        Pt             C                              1
                 @                               A            =
                             1    !                                      1 yt + B (t; yt )
     8          2                                             0                              1       3   1
     >
     >                                                                           Pt 1
                                                                                         1       1
     < yt       6
                6!       Pt 1                                 B1         !        Pt         C       7
                                                                                                     7
                4                         + (1      !)        @                              A       5
     >
     > z                  Pt                                                 1   !
     : t
                                                              9
                                                              >
                                                              >
                                                              =
                                               +A (t; yt )
                                                              >
                                                              >
                                                              ;

where:
                                                                  Pt+1
                                 A (t; yt ) = ! Et
                                                                   Pt
   8             "                                                               #                         9
                                                                                     1
   < y                     Pt                                      Pt+1                                    =
       t+1
                     !                    + (1       !)                                  + A (t + 1; yt+1 )
   : zt+1                 Pt+1                                     Pt+1                                    ;

and:
                                                          1
                                          Pt+1
                B (t; yt ) = ! Et                             yt+1 + B (t + 1; yt+1 )
                                           Pt
     The shapes of the Phillips curves are illustrated in Figures 2 and 3, along
with the accompanying aggregate-demand curves derived according to Section
3.
     The time t + 1 Phillips curves and the system to be solved: Because
the time-t aggregate-demand relations established in Section 3 relate time-t + 1
prices to time-t + 1 output, it is convenient to shift the Phillips curves to time
t + 1, separately and independently for states u and d. In this way, we are left
with a system of four equations in four unknowns: fPt+1;u ; Pt+1;d ; yt+1;u ; yt+1;d g
which must be solved numerically for each node of the tree (each capturing
exogenous state variable zt ) and for each value of the endogenous state variable
yt , recursively for t = T 1; :::; 0. Equivalently, since productivity is exogenous,
the output gap ­de...ned as the ratio of the actual, sticky-price output yt to the
  exible-price output (19) minus 1 ­can be recognized as the endogenous state
  2 7 Aswe saw in the previous section, in the case of full price exibility (! = 0), the Phillips
                                                                             1=(   )
curve is vertical at the exible-price level of output: yt = (       1) zt =           and, on its
own, leaves the price indeterminate.
  2 8 There exists an explicit, approximate form for the Phillips function, as suggested in Galí

(2008).




                                                     21
  Pu                                             Pd
1.2                                            1.2
1.1                                            1.1
1.0                                            1.0
0.9                                            0.9
0.8
                                               0.8
0.7
                                               0.7
0.6
                                     yu                                        yd
       0.8    1.0     1.2     1.4                     0.8   1.0   1.2   1.4

  Pu                                             Pd

1.2                                            1.2
                                               1.1
1.0
                                               1.0
                                               0.9
0.8
                                               0.8
                                               0.7
0.6
                                     yu                                        yd
       0.8    1.0     1.2     1.4                     0.8   1.0   1.2   1.4



Figure 2: Aggregate-demand (inclusive of policy rule) and aggregate-
supply curves with sticky-price output and = 1:5. Top panels: low-
output equilibrium. Bottom panels: high-output equilibrium (left-
most intersection). In each row, left-hand panel: Pt+1;u plotted against yt+1;u
for the equilibrium sticky-price value of yt+1;d . Right-hand panel: Pt+1;d plot-
ted against yt+1;d for the equilibrium sticky-price value of yt+1;u . The lighter
solid line is the Phillips or aggregate-supply curve; the darker solid line is the
aggregate-demand (inclusive of policy rule) curve. Parameter values are as in
Table 1. T = 6. The time-t price level is set at 1. The time-t level of output yt
is set at 3.5% above the    exible-price level.




                                          22
  Pu                                                    Pd
1.6                                                   1.6
1.4                                                   1.4
1.2                                                   1.2
1.0                                                   1.0
0.8
                                                      0.8
0.6
                                                      0.6
                                            yu                                                yd
       0.8      1.0       1.2       1.4                      0.8   1.0       1.2      1.4




Figure 3: Aggregate-demand (inclusive of policy rule) and aggregate-
supply curves with sticky-price output and = 0:5; single equilibrium.
Left-hand panel: Pt+1;u plotted against yt+1;u for the equilibrium sticky-price
value of yt+1;d . Right-hand panel: Pt+1;d plotted against yt+1;d for the equi-
librium sticky-price value of yt+1;u . The lighter solid line is the Phillips or
aggregate-supply curve; the darker solid line is the aggregate-demand (inclusive
of policy rule) curve. T = 6: Additonal parameter values are as in Table 1. The
time-t price level is set at 1. The time-t level of output yt is set at 3.5% above
the   exible-price level.


variable.29 ,30
    By Walras'law, the equilibrium in the ...nancial market and the equilibrium
in the labor marlet imply the equilibrium in the goods market: ct+1;u = yt+1;u
and ct+1;d = yt+1;d .31
    The shapes of the aggregate-demand and Phillips curves are such that there
may not exist solutions, that there may be multiple solutions and that gradient-
based solvers do not ...nd them easily. We may ...nd our way towards one of the
solution by starting with the    exible-price solution (! = 0) and by gradually
increasing ! in small increments, or by starting at no price adjustment (! = 1)
and by gradually decreasing ! .
    When > 1; there can be two solutions,32 which are shown in the two panels
of Figure 2, for the point in time t = T 1. In such a case, it is impossible to
pursue the recursion to earlier points in time. This di¢ culty would not have even
been spotted by the large number of researchers who work not with the exact
system of equations but with a system that is linearized around the    exible-price
  2 9 The current general price level P is also an endogenous state variable but, in the absence
                                       t
of nominal illusion, it can be factored out on grounds of homogeneity, as noted before.
  3 0 In addition, when household utility is isoelastic and the production function satis...es the

property of constant returns ot scale, a scale-invariance property can be exploited: we need
not do the calculation for every node of each point in time t; which di¤er only in the level of
productivity zt : For the several nodes of time t; the functions that are carried backward (f1
or f2 , A and B ) can be deduced from a single one of them.
  3 1 In Appendix E, we verify that clearing of the ...nancial market and of the labor market do

imply clearing of the goods market.
  3 2 And, for low enough values of current output y there are no solutions.
                                                       t




                                                 23
solution.
    When < 1; the equilibrium is surely unique as shown in Figure 3. The
reason is that, in that case, as we have seen under Proposition 8, the aggregate-
demand functions (inclusive of the policy rule) are decreasing, while the Phillips
curve, of course, is increasing. In what follows, we assume that < 1 so that
we can obtain a unique solution at any point in time. In other words, we make
the following assumption:

Assumption 4 Monetary policy is "passive,"in the terminology of Leeper (1991).

    In association with the active ...scal policy already assumed, we are consid-
ering Regime F in the vocabulary of Leeper and Leith (2018).


Figure 4: Relation between output gap at time t (on the x axis) and at
time t + 1 conditional on a u productivity shock (lower line) and a d
shock (upper line), across 10,000 paths at a ...xed date. The 45 line is also
shown. Parameters are as in Table 1 with { set at a neutral level (see De...nition
2). The 45 line is also drawn.

                                  time-t+1 gap

                                  0.010



                                  0.005



                                                                          time-t gap
        -0.010        -0.005                        0.005         0.010


                                 -0.005



                                 -0.010




    Under the set of assumptions made so far, the behavior of the output gap is
illustrated in Figure 4 and formulated in the following

Observation 1


  1. A u productivity shock at time t + 1 decreases the output gap relative to
     its value at t. A d shock increases it.


                                          24
    2. The lower the time-t output gap, the smaller the decrease. A d shock
       increases the output gap. The higher the time-t output gap, the smaller
       the increase. In other words:
                                  yu;t+1          yt     yd;t+1
                                            <         <
                                 yf;u;t+1        yf;t   yf;d;t+1
                                  yu;t+1                    yd;t+1
                         d       yf;u;t+1          d       yf;d ;t+1
                                            < 1;                       <1
                                    yt                        yt
                             d     yf ;t               d     yf;t


    3. The gap is bounded above and below. When it is at its lower bound, a u
       productivity shock leaves it unchanged. When it is at its upper bound, a d
       productivity shock leaves it unchanged.

    When prices are    exible, a u productivity shock induces ...rms to increase
equilibrium output. When prices are sticky they are not able to increase it as
much as they would with      exible prices. Therefore, the output gap decreases.
The upper and the lower bounds are temporary "anchor points" for d and u
shocks, respectively.
    Initial conditions: At time zero, given the initial productivity z0 , the
initial conditions to be solved for the unknown initial price P0 and the initial
income y0 are
                            f2;0 P0 = 2; 1 + s0 P0
                                 P0
                                P 1 = P hill (0; y0 )

where the ...rst condition is identical to the initial condition of Section 2 and
the second one is just the Phillips curve at time 0, and where 2; 1 is a given
(negative) amount of nominal claim outstanding and s0 a given time-0 surplus.
The solution for P0 is unique as long as the backward recursion provided a
unique function P hill.
    Stationary solution: As mentioned, we solve the system for each node of
the tree (each node capturing exogenous state variable zt ) and for each value
of the endogenous state variable, recursively for t = T 1; :::; 0. With the im-
patience parameter set at = 0:99, the value T = 270 years is su¢ ciently large
for functions carried backward to be unchanging by the time we get to time 0.
The stationary functions capture the equilibrium of an economy with an horizon
that has been increased inde...nitely.


5     Stock returns and ination
As the ...rms enjoy market power, they generate pro...ts. We now re-de...ne the ag-
gregate stock security as paying corporate pro...ts (as opposed to paying output,
which it was in Section 2)). The real, future pro...ts, assumed to be distributed




                                            25
as dividends, are:33
                          "
                                    Pt                     Pt
              t+1   ,         !               't+1                                            (25)
                                   Pt+1                   Pt+1
                                                                            #
                                              Pt+1                Pt+1
                          + (1     !)                 't+1                       yt+1
                                              Pt+1                Pt+1

The value of the stock market, in real terms, current pro...ts not included, is:
                             "                            #
                                          1
                                 ct+1
                     xt = Et                ( t+1 + xt+1 )                    (26)
                                  ct

Numerical illustrations will indicate the correlation between the rate of return
on the stock market and in    ation.
    After solving all the equations of all times in a backward sequence, we use
the stationary functions to simulate the economy, drawing at random the event
of a u or a d productivity shock z over 200 time steps of one year each. Ten
thousand paths are drawn. For this and the next simulations, we assume again
IID growth of productivity and we now set { to be equal to the neutral rate of
interest, where we de...ne "neutral" as follows:

De...nition 2 Under IID growth of productivity, the neutral rate of interest of
an economy is the interest rate that would prevail in a exible-price economy
when { is equal to the equilibrium interest rate (13) (with 1 + u, 1 + d and k
replaced as in Proposition 6).

    The value of the neutral rate is34
                                                     1+
                                  1+i=
                                          ^
                                          k      1 1
                                                          +   1 1
                                                 2 1+^
                                                     u            ^
                                                              2 1+d

Assumption 5 The Taylor-rule parameter { is equal to the neutral rate of in-
terest.

5.1     Impulse responses to a productivity shock
To obtain impulse response functions, we segregate the paths that experience
an a u productivity shock at t = 45 from those that experience a d productiv-
ity shock at that time. We then compute conditional average paths for each
of the two subsets of paths. We call "impulse-response function" the di¤erence
  3 3 Current pro...t
                      t di¤ers from one ...rm to the other, depending on which ...rm is allowed
currently to change its price. For future pro...ts, we ignore current price dispersion, as explained
in footnote 23.
  3 4 With the parameter values of Table 1, the neutral rate is equal to 3.02%. With that value

of {, the rate of interest that prevails in the sticky-price economy at an output gap equal to
zero is equal to 3.109%.


                                                26
between the two conditional averages, normalized (thereby detrended) by the
unconditional average path. Figure 5 shows the responses of output, the real
stock market return index and the price level to a +1% productivity shock com-
pared to a 1% shock. Output and the price level take several years to reach
new levels, increased by 2% and reduced by 3% respectively, while, because
of isoelastic utility, the real stock market return index reacts exactly like out-
put.35 The output gap is reduced by more than 0:8% on impulse and returns
to approximately zero in ...ve to six years.

                Output (real)                                       Output gap
  0.025
  0.020                                                       50       100     150      200
                                                   -0.002
  0.015
                                                   -0.004
  0.010
  0.005                                            -0.006
                                                   -0.008
               50      100    150     200

                    Price Level                              Stock Market (real)
                                                     0.025
-0.005         50      100      150     200
                                                     0.020
-0.010
                                                     0.015
-0.015
-0.020                                               0.010
-0.025                                               0.005
-0.030
-0.035                                                         50      100   150     200



Figure 5: Impulse responses: average path conditional on a u produc-
tivity shock occurring at t = 45 minus average path conditional on a d
productivity shock occurring at that time. Top left-hand panel: response
of output (t in years on the x-axis). Top right-hand panel: response of the op-
utput gap. Bottom left panel: response of the price level. Bottom right panel:
response of the stock market (in real terms). Bottom panel:All responses are
scaled by the corresponding unconditional average. Parameter values are as in
Table 1 with { set at a neutral level (see De...nition 2). The ...gure is obtained
from 10,000 paths drawing at random the event of a u or a d productivity shock
z over 200 time steps of one year each.

  3 5 The long-run reaction is equal to the one that prevails under exible prices (with = 0,
as in our numerical example, a 2% increase in productivity leads to a 2% increase in output
when prices are exible; see formula (19)).




                                              27
5.2     The role of productivity shocks over one vs. several
        periods
As we saw in Sections 2 and 3, if prices set by ...rms were fully    exible, there
would be zero relation whatever between the nominal return on stocks and the
rate of in  ation.
    When the prices set by ...rms are sticky, however, the output depends on the
previous-period output gap, thus generating richer dynamics for stock returns
and in   ation. There can occur many values for in     ation and many values for
nominal stock returns depending on the value of the preexisting output gap.
Over a single time-step, productivity can be increased by a factor u or d. Figure
6, left-hand panel, displays the two variables in a cross-section of paths.36 The
cloud of simulated points is highly structured.

Observation 2


   1. For the same time-t value of the output gap, when productivity is increased
      by a factor u, ination is lower and the nominal stock return is higher than
      when the factor is d.
   2. Conditional upon productivity growth being u or d at time t + 1, the time-
      t +1 realized ination and realized nominal stock returns are near-linearly,
      positively related across di¤ erent values of the time-t output gap. Upon a u
      move, the lowest values of ination and nominal stock return are reached
      when the gap is at its upper bound. Upon a d move, the highest values of
      ination and nominal stock return are reached when the gap is at its lower
      bound.

    In accordance with Observation 2, the two radii that appear are increasing
near-straight lines. Of the two radii, the upper (lower) one portrays the relation
conditional upon productivity growth being u (d). On a given radius, the points
that plot farther from the origin correspond to higher values of the output gap
prior to the shock, as the labelling of some points indicates. And, as we have
seen, for any given value of the output gap at time t, a u productivity shock
causes the output gap to be down at time t + 1, the more so as the time-t
gap is higher.37 Observation 2 invites empirical tests that would be conducted
conditional on observed productivity shocks.
    Not conditioning on the productivity growth, i.e., across the entire cloud
of points, the slope coe¢ cient of a regression of the nominal stock return on
in ation is equal to 0:0966.
    When measuring returns over a longer holding period, the relationship is
similar but more combinations of u and d productivity moves are possible. For
  3 6 When drawn along one path, the picture is nearly identical, as it should be under a

stationary-growth equilibrium.
  3 7 These are e¤ects opposite to those of the epigraph of this article, but they leave unchanged

the conclusion about the sign of the correlation.



                                               28
      stock return                                                      stock return/yr


     0.036
                                                                        0.034
     0.034                    -0.004
                             -0.005
                                                                        0.032
     0.032
                        -0.008
                                            0.003
     0.030                                                              0.030
                   -0.01                  0.001
                 -0.012




29
     0.028                          -0.001
                                                                        0.028
                                 -0.004
     0.026
                                                        inflation                                                          inflation/yr
                 0.01            0.02        0.03                       0.026        0.01        0.02          0.03




     Figure 6: Relation between one-period nominal stock return and one-period in                     ation (left-hand panel) and
     relation between the same two variables measured over ...ve periods (right-hand panel), across 10,000 paths at a
     ...xed date. Parameters are as in Table 1 with { set at a neutral level (see De...nition 2). In the left-hand panel, the labelling
     of some of the points indicates the level of the output gap. The arrows show examples of transitions of the gap between two
     successive points in time.
instance, over ...ve periods, six combinations are possible. The six corresponding
radii are shown in Figure 6, right-hand panel: the highest-slope radius re      ects
realizations in which all ...ve productivity moves are u; the line supporting that
radius is identical to that of a single u move on the left-hand panel The radius
second from the top contains realizations for which four moves where u and one
d in any order etc.38 The lowest-slope radius re      ects realizations in which all
...ve productivity moves are d; the line supporting that radius is identical to that
of a single d move in the left-hand panel.
     Across all the paths, i.e., not conditioning on the productivity growth com-
binations, the slope coe¢ cient of an across-paths regression of the nominal stock
return on in   ation is equal to 0:2348.39 This result about the slope is motivated
by the following:

Observation 3


   1. For the same time-t value of the output gap, when productivity is increased
      ...ve times by a factor u, ination per period and the nominal stock return
      per period are lower than they would be with a single u productivity move
      over one period, and are closer to the anchor point of the lower bound ot
      the gap. In the limit, when the gap is at its lower bound, ination per
      annum and the stock return per annum are equal to what they would be
      with a single u move.40
   2. For the same time-t value of the output gap, when productivity is changed
      ...ve times by a factor d, ination per period and the nominal stock return
      per period are higher than they would be with a single d productivity move
      over one period, and are closer to the anchor point of the upper bound ot
      the gap. In the limit, when the gap is at its upper bound, ination per
      annum and the stock return per annum are equal to what they would be
      with a single d move.41
   3. Hybrid combinations of productivity moves have an intermediate e¤ ect,
      over a wider range of values for ination and the nominal stock return.

   The observation implies that the unconditional regression slope is higher
over ...ve periods than it is over one. The observation follows from Observation
1 above, which says that increases in the gap decrease with the starting value
  3 8 Except for the highest-slope and lowest-slope radii, all other radii are actually a bundle

of radii that are partially superimposed and overlapping, each depending on the order (or
permutation) in which the productivity shocks occur. In the (ination, stock return, starting
output gap) space, they would be separate radii.
  3 9 For a ten-year holding period, the slope would be only slightly larger: 0:2639.
  4 0 Because of the anchor e¤ect, the point of the highest-slope radius closest to the origin on

the right-hand panel is identical to the point of the higher-slope radius closest to the origin
on the left-hand panel of Figure 6.
  4 1 Because of the anchor e¤ect, the point of the lowest-slope radius farthest from the origin

on the right-hand panel is identical to the point of the lower-slope radius farthest from the
origin on the left-hand panel of Figure 6.


                                               30
of the gap; ...ve moves in the same direction have less e¤ect per period than a
single move over one period. One can also imagine on the basis of the same
observation and Figure 4 that hybrid combinations of moves impart the gap
with more volatility.
    We stress that the direction of the increase in the regression slope is not
just the mechanical result of frictions slowly working themselves out over time.
Indeed, the increase is a move away from the frictionless outcome, which, as the
reader will recall, was a zero slope.

5.3     Ex post regression result
We ask whether the message conveyed by Figure 6 is con...rmed by time-series
regressions. Can the model ...t the facts listed in the introduction? Having
simulated 10,000, 200-period long paths of the economy of Section 4, we run
on each an ex post regression in the manner of Boudoukh Richardson (1993)
(BR).42
   The ex post regression being run is quite simply:43
                            Rt!t+j =         j   +       j   t!t+j   + "t;j                 (27)
where R is the nominal rate of return on the equity and is the rate of in    ation,
with j = 1 for the one-year time interval and j = 5 for the ...ve-year time
interval. If the real rate of return on stock were constant, one would expect
  j = 0 and j = 1. Because the ...ve-year rates of return are calculated every
year, there is overlap in the data and the Generalized Method of Moments is
used to compute heteroskedasticity- (and autocorrelation-) consistent standard
errors. The results are shown in Table 2.
    The results are exactly in conformity with the intuition conveyed above, in
that the ...ve-year regression slope is higher than the one-year slope. The results
are also in close conformity with the empirical results of BR. Recall that both
their slope coe¢ cients were positive, with the exact same disparity between
them.44
    Basically, therefore, we have discovered the reason for which BR found dif-
ferent slopes for di¤erent lengths of close holding-period.

5.4     Ex ante regression result
We test the moment conditions:
                      E    Rt!t+j        j           j       t!t+j     Zt = 0               (28)
  4 2 We drop the ...rst ten periods of the paths to ensure that statistical results do not depend

on the initial condition, which is just the nominal amount 2 of government debt outstanding
at t = 0.
  4 3 The exercise is descriptive. We are not testing a hypothesis and do not assume that

ination is an exogenous variable. Furthermore, if one wanted to hedge ination risk using
equities, one should calculate the hedge ratio (i.e., the number of units of stock to buy) by
regressing ination on stock returns.
  4 4 Had we included in our model a monetary shock, we could also have increased both our

simulated slope coe¢ cients at will.


                                                     31
                                        1            1    5       5
                 Statistic
                 Median             0:029        0:091   0:14    0:233
                 Upper quintile     0:03         0:127   0:142   0:242
                 Lower quintile     0:028        0:048   0:139   0:22
                 Std error
                 Median             0:00         0:013   0:001   0:012
                 Upper quintile     0:00         0:016   0:002   0:014
                 Lower quintile     0:00         0:011   0:001   0:01

Table 2: Stock Returns and Contemporaneous In            ation: the regressions
are those of Equation (27). Parameters are as in Table 1 with { set at a neutral
level (see De...nition 2). The table is obtained from 10,000 paths drawn at
random.

                                    1            1        5       5
               Statistic
               Median             0:027      0:2         0:139   0:247
               Upper quintile     0:051      1:327       0:214   0:972
               Lower quintile     0:004        1:011     0:064     0:484
               Std error
               Median             0:000      0:407       0:023   0:225
               Upper quintile     0:646      32:673      1:641   15:714
               Lower quintile     0:002      0:1         0:006   0:057

Table 3: Stock Returns and Expected In        ation: the Instrumental Vari-
able Approach as in Equation (28). Past output is the instrument. Pa-
rameters are as in Table 1 with { set at a neutral level (see De...nition 2). The
table is obtained from 10,000 paths drawn at random.


where Zt is some set of instrumental variables known to investors at time t.
    The exact ex ante formula that would correspond to the model is the CAPM
(26) that applies to the equity. That CAPM in no way implies that the con-
ditionally expected real rate of return on equity is constant. It is obviously a
function of the state variable yt , the current level of output. For that reason,
we try one of the ex ante speci...cations of BR that involves the current level of
output as the instrumental variable.
    The results are shown in Table 3.
    Recall that BR found one-year slope coe¢ cients that were markedly smaller
than the ...ve-year coe¢ cients. To the degree that the moments are conditional
on the previous year' s level of output, one may understand that the relationship
between stock returns and in      ation has become more positive for the one-year
holding period. However, the comparative magnitudes of our simulated results
for 1 and 5 in the ex ante speci...cations are not in conformity with BR.
    In our model, the previous year'   s level of output is a strong instrument. It is


                                            32
conceivable that, in the data, the instruments used by BR were not as strong.


6     Money demand and the zero lower bound
We now investigate the behavior of money demand and supply in the equilibrium
of the last section. To do that, we build an equilibrium model of money demand
along the lines of Baumol (1952) and Tobin (1956). We must observe at the
outset that, when the nominal rate of interest approaches zero, money demand
grows steadily thereby creating a natural lower bound on the rate of interest.
Meanwhile, the demand of the private sector for the government bond drops
steadily. Eventually the demands for money and bonds become indeterminate
while their sum remains determinate and ...nite. The government cum central
bank, as noted by J. M. Keynes, falls into a "liquidity-trap"regime that is akin
to Quantitative Easing.45
    Now there is cash explicitly in the economy, side by side with government
bonds. Calling M monetary claims, money supply at time t is: M2;t (a negative
number because, like 2;t ; it is a liability of the government cum central bank);
money demand is M1;t ; the seignorage, an indirect tax, collected at time t and
measured in nominal terms of that date is: M1;t (1 1= (1 + it )). Households
receive an income of a single good and no income in cash. At time t, the ...nancial
wealth available for consumption is:

                        Pt     yt +   1;t 1   + M1;t   1        F1;t     St

The proceeds Pt yt from the sale of the physical income are in the form of a
deposit at a bank. Cash on hand M1;t 1 and the other terms are assumed to be
readily available in cash. Cash can be withdrawn by taking trips to the bank.
Each trip costs a ...xed real amount . The smaller the number of trips N1;t the
household decides to take to the bank, the more cash the household holds on
an average over the time period [t; t + 1):46

                                                Pt yt
                                      M1;t =
                                                2 N1;t
  4 5 On the zero lower bound, a very active topic of research during the Great Recession, see

the following papers, which have implications for Finance: McCallum (2000), Krippner (2012),
Wright (2012), Gavin et al. (2013), Priebsch (2013), Greenwood et al. (2014), Swanson and
Williams (2014).
  4 6 We could have assumed that all the ...nancial wealth except cash on hand is deposited

with a bank. Then,
                                      Pt yt + 1;t 1 F1;t        St
                              M1;t =
                                                 2 N1;t
so that the cost of the trips at current prices is:
                                               Pt   yt +       1;t 1    F1;t   St
                   k   Pt    N1;t =     Pt
                                                           2     M1;t
The derivation of the nodal system under that assumption is available in Appendix G.




                                               33
so that the cost of the trips at current prices is:
                                                                                   Pt yt
                                     Pt       N1;t =                     Pt
                                                                                  2 M1;t
That cost is truly a deadweight loss; no one gets the bene...t of it. But, for the
sake of computational simplicity we imagine that it is refunded to the private
sector in the form of a transfer 1;t = Pt yt       Pt = (2 M1;t ), thus keeping in
our equation system only the distortionary e¤ect of the cost but not its wealth
e¤ect.47 ; 48 At the terminal point T , however, money is not "refunded." Even
without a refund, the private sector holds it till the end because it has to. We
set 1= (1 + iT ) = 0:
    In Appendix F, we derive the set of equations (41) to be solved at each node
of the tree. Eliminating the money terms from it and taking (40) into account:
                            Flow budget constraints of private sector
                                                  r
                                                     1
                                         Pt+1;j      2 yt+1;j  1      1
                                                                                                1+it+1;j
           Pt+1;j     ct+1;j + F1;t+1;j +                                                                  + St+1;j
                                                                          1 + it+1;j
                                     s
                                        1
                      = 1;t + Pt          yt                          1        + Pt+1;j         yt+1;j ;
                                        2                     1      1+it

                                             F1;T;j = 0; j = u; d
                Flow budget constraints of government cum central bank
                                           r
                                             1
                                 Pt+1;j      2 yt+1;j 1   1
                                                                                        1+it+1;j
                          F2;t+1;j
                                                                   1 + it+1;j
                               s
                                     1
               =    2;t   Pt           yt                  1         + St+1;j ; F2;T;j = 0; j = u; d
                                     2          1         1+it

                               Portfolio-choice or Euler conditions
                                     1                        1     1             1               1     1
                      1 1            2   (ct+1;u )                Pt+1;u      +   2 (ct+1;d )         Pt+1;d
                              =                                                    1
                    1 + it Pt                            (ct )
                                               Market clearing
                                                    1;t   +        2;t   =0
    Initial conditions are:
                                                               P0
                                                                              = P hill0 (y0 )
                                                              Pt 1
                                         q
                                             1
                               P0            2 y0         1        1
                                                                  1+i0
               F2;0 (y0 )                                                     =      2; 1   + M2;      1   + S0       (29)
                                            1 + i0
  4 7 Withoutthat assumption, the trips to the bank being deadweight losses ct 6= yt .
  4 8 In
       addition, to preserve scale invariance (see footnote 30), we do not take        to be a
constant; we assume it proportional to output.


                                                              34
   A change of unknown variables :
                  s                                                        s
  ^1;t , 1;t + Pt   1                            ^2;t ,                        1
                      yt        1 ;                        2;t    Pt             yt           1
                    2     1 1+   it
                                                                               2        1    1+it

along with a change of backward iterates:49
                     q                                                     q
                        1                                                      1
                  Pt    2 yt      1
                               1 1+
                                                                   Pt          2 yt     1    1

   F^1;t , F1;t +                  it
                                      ; F^2;t , F2;t                                        1+it

                        1 + it                                                 1 + it
transforms the system of equations into one that is identical to the system
(7), which we solved in the absence of money. We thus demonstrate that, for a
given value of the endogenous variable yt , money is simply added to government
bonds and is otherwise irrelevant. The government surplus being exogenous
anyway,50 seignorage being refunded and in    ation targeting being an in...nitely
elastic central-bank reaction function, money demand only serves to determine
money supply, as has been pointed out by many authors.
    This is true with two caveats. Firstly, the change of variables is valid only
for strictly positive nominal interest rates. If we implemented it blindly, the
nominal rate of interest could become negative, despite the natural lower bound.
To prevent that error in the computation, we superimpose on the Taylor rule
an arti...cial zero lower bound on the nominal rate of interest:51
                              2             0                1 3
                                                     1          1
                                                     2 Pt+1;u + 2 Pt+1;d
                             6                   @           Pt            A 7
                1 + it = max 41; (1 + {)                                     5                     (30)
                                                          1+

    Secondly, since we have assumed that money is not refunded, the termi-
nal conditions, which were q originally F1;T;j = F2;T;j = 0 must be replaced by:
 ^          ^
F1;T;j = F2;T;j = PT         1
                             2 yT    . We intend to study the paths of the econ-
omy in a stationary situation. For that, the change of terminal condition is not
very important except for the fact that it modi...es the solution to the initial
conditions (29), so that the initial price level P0 and the initial output y0 are
a¤ ected by the presence of money. The initial point being modi...ed, every path
of the economy will also be modi...ed but the dynamics of the system will not,
unless the nominal rate of interest approaches the zero lower bound. We point
out that, with M2; 1 > 0, the initial level of government debt 2; 1 could be
set equal to zero. In the cashless economy, the initial condition of the Fiscal
theory with zero debt would leave the price level of goods indeterminate at all
times. But, in the economy with money, the initial condition does determine the
initial price level even then, the present value of future government surpluses
being compared to the outstanding stock of money M2; 1 . This shows that our
results are not predicated on the validity of the strict, debt-based Fiscal theory.
 4 9 Note: ^1;t = (1 + it ) = F
                              ^1;t
 5 0 But see below the caveat concerning the terminal condition.
 5 1 We actually implement a smooth variant of that relation.




                                            35
    We amend the "aggregate demand" subsystem of equations of Section 2
to re ect the modi...ed policy rule (30), leaving intact the "aggregate supply"
subsystem of Section 4 and we solve by backward induction exactly as we did
before (with the additional parameter = 1% of output). Under the parameter
and state variable combinations considered so far, the result is identical to that
of Figure 3, simply because the cashless economy itself never produced a negative
value for the rate of interest. In order to make liquidity-trap episodes possible,
we replace Assumption 5 with the following:

Assumption 6 The Taylor-rule interest parameter { is set 1:5% below the neu-
tral rate of the exible-price economy as de...ned in De...nition 2.

    We now discuss the outcome of that experiment.
    The new version of Figure 6 is Figure 7, which shows that the lower bound
on the rate of interest introduces a support from below for realized nominal
stock returns. For that reason, the relation between in    ation and stock returns
described above in section 5.2 is no longer near linear but is still positive, con-
tingent on a given sequence of productivity shocks. Not conditioning on the
productivity growth, the coe¢ cient of an across-paths regression of the nominal
stock return on in    ation between the two variables is equal to 0:0743 over one
period while it is equal to 0:1950 over ...ve periods. Once again the slope is quite
a bit larger over ...ve periods than it is over one.


                     stock return                               stock return/yr



                    0.006                                      0.005

                    0.005
                                                               0.004

                    0.004
                                                               0.003
                    0.003
                                                               0.002
                    0.002

                                                               0.001
                    0.001

                                    inflation                                     inflation/yr
          - 0.01                                     - 0.01




Figure 7: Relation, in the presence of money, between one-period nom-
inal stock return and one-period in        ation (left-hand panel) and re-
lation between the same two variables measured over ...ve periods
(right-hand panel), across 10,000 paths at a ...xed date. Parameters are as in
Table 1 with { set 1:5% below the neutral level (see De...nition 2).



                                                36
                                        1           1         5       5
                  Statistic
                  Median              0:003        0:02      0:02    0:117
                  Upper quintile      0:004        0:045     0:02    0:13
                  Lower quintile      0:003          0:006   0:019   0:104
                  Std error
                  Median              0:00         0:009     0:00    0:008
                  Upper quintile      0:00         0:011     0:001   0:011
                  Lower quintile      0:00         0:008     0:00    0:006

Table 4: Stock Returns and Contemporaneous In             ation in the presence
of money: the regressions are those of Equation (27). Parameters are as in
Table 1 with { set at a neutral level (see De...nition 2). The table is obtained
from 10,000 paths drawn at random.


   The new version of Table 2, which contained the results of ex post regressions
across simulated paths, is Table 4.
   The results are again in conformity with the empirical results of BR. We do
not display the ex ante regression results, which are once again ambiguous.


7     Bonds and the `
                    Fed model'
7.1     Bond returns and ination
As mentioned in the introduction, Katz and Lustig (2017) using a panel of
countries have con...rmed empirically that stock markets are slow to incorporate
news about future in    ation so that they do not qualify to be called "real"
assets, but that the same is not true at all of bond markets. We now check
whether our model can explain that fact. For that we draw ...gure 8, which
relates the one-year and ...ve-year nominal rates of return on a ten-year pure-
discount nominal bond, across paths at a given point in time. The slope of an
unconditional regression line of one-year returns on ination is is equal to 0:7202
(as opposed to 0:0966 for stocks) while the slope for ...ve-year returns is equal
to 1:1028 (as opposed to 0:2348 for stocks). The di¤erence between long-term
bonds and stocks is in the payo¤. In our model with sticky prices but        exible
wages, dividends on stocks (Equation (25)) are adversely a¤ected by in      ation.

7.2     The `
            Fed model'
Asness (2003) criticizes a heuristic approach of professional circles who compare
yields on stock securities to yields on bonds, and expect the two to revert to
each other, which, empirically speaking, they do, both yields being high when
in  ation is high.52 He refers to this approach as the "Fed model"     . He points
  5 2 Maio (2013) shows empirically that the yield gap forecasts excess market returns, both

at short and long forecasting horizons, and for both value- and equal-weighted stock indexes,


                                              37
 bond return                                                              bond return/yr


0.065                                                                     0.065

0.060                                                                     0.060
                                  -0.004
0.055                            -0.005
                                                                          0.055
                                                 0.003

0.050                                       0.001                         0.050
                        -0.008
0.045                                   -0.001                            0.045
                 -0.01
                                  -0.004
0.040          -0.012                                                     0.040

                                                         inflation                                         inflation/yr
           0.01                  0.02             0.03                                0.01   0.02   0.03




Figure 8: Relation between one-period nominal 10-year bond return
and one-period in        ation (left-hand panel) and relation between the
same two variables measured over ...ve years (right-hand panel), across
10,000 paths at a ...xed date. Parameters are as in Table 1 with { set at a
neutral level (see De...nition 2). In the left-hand panel, the labelling of the points
indicates the level of the output gap. The arrows show examples of increments
of the output gap between two successive points in time.




                                                                     38
out correctly that the two yields are not comparable; the coupon payments on a
bond are constant in current euros while the dividends on a share of stock will
grow with in    ation.
    This attitude of professional circles may be a form of money illusion, reminis-
cent of Modigliani and Cohn (1979), unless one of two rational explanations of
the fact that the "Fed model"works well empirically holds. One is the hypothe-
sis that says that high current in    ation is associated with low expected long-run
nominal dividend growth in excess of the riskless rate, justi...ably driving up the
equity dividend yield. The other is that high in       ation drives up the risk of the
economy and thus the nominal equity risk premium. Campbell and Vuolteenaho
(2004) (CV) ran an empirical investigation to determine which of the three possi-
bilities transpires in the behavior of stock prices. They decompose the dividend
yield on equity into three components: a constant, expected long-run future
nominal equity excess returns and expected long-run nominal dividend growth
in excess of the riskless rate. They ...nd that high current in    ation is associated
with high expected long-run nominal dividend growth in excess of the riskless
rate, and that in   ation is not related to the anticipated nominal equity premium,
thus leaving money illusion as the surviving hypothesis.
    Indirect empirical evidence of the e¤ect of monetary policy on the stock
market is also provided by a recent paper of David and Veronesi (2013) relating
stock returns to returns on bonds. The model allows for money illusion on the
part of investors. The authors argue that realized in        ation is interpreted very
di¤erently by investors depending on whether they fear stag           ation (as in the
1980' s) ­a fear that leads to a high correlation ­or de      ation, which would lead
to a lower correlation.
    To examine these issues, we now revert to the cashless economy set up (with
the parameter values of Table 1) and introduce a ten-year zero-coupon bond that
pays one current monetary unit at maturity, just like the stock pays dividends
forever. We ...nd (Figure 9) that there exists a near-straight line negatively
sloped relationship between dividend yield and bond yield. The labelling of a
few of the simulated points tell the dynamic story: as negative productivity
shocks accumulate, in      ation becomes higher and higher, driving up the bond
yield while the dividend yield is brought down by the d productivity shocks.
Dividend yield and bond yield do not move in tango and should, therefore, not
be compared.
    The theoretical result is not consistent with the empirical evidence mentioned
in the opening paragraphs of this section. This evidence, however, is entirely
based on post-World War II data, which feature a long upward swing of yields
to a peak in the early 80s followed by a long downward swing of both yields.
The up and down swings are probably caused by the change of monetary policy
regime that took place around 1980. If one extends the sample to the nineteenth
century, one ...nds that the empirical relationship between yields no longer holds.
and that it also outperforms competing predictors commonly used in the literature.




                                            39
Dividend Yield

         {48, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1}




0.0110                  {47, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1}


                                  {49, 0, 1, 1, 1, 0}



                                                {46, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1}
0.0105
                                                   {50, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0}

                                  {40, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0}

                                                                    {41, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0}


0.0100
                                                        {42, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0}

                                                             {43, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0}
                                                                {44, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0}
                                                                   {45, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0}
                                                                                             BondYield
         0.0230            0.0235             0.0240             0.0245             0.0250



Figure 9: Relation between nominal (or real) dividend yield on eq-
uity and nominal annualized yield on a ten-year nominal bond, across
10,000 paths at a ...xed date. The labeling of the points of dates 40 to 50 along
one example path contains the following information: {date (year t), u or d
productivity shock (coded 1 and 0) two years ago, one year ago and contem-
poraneously, and the contemporaneous rate of in       ation}. Parameters are as in
Table 1 with { set at a neutral level (see De...nition 2).




                                                 40
8    Conclusion
Adopting a method that has been used to calculate dynamic ...nancial-market
equilibria, we have constructed the equilibrium of a cashless production economy
with productivity shocks and with three types of agents: (i) household/investors
who supply labor with a ...nite elasticity, consume a large variety of goods that
are not perfect substitutes and trade government bonds; (ii) ...rms that produce
those varieties of goods, setting prices in a Calvo manner; (iii) a government
that collects an exogenous ...scal surplus and acts mechanically, buying and sell-
ing bonds in accordance with a Taylor policy rule based on expected in        ation.
Merging the consumption-...nancial behavior of households with the policy rule,
under IID productivity growth and no monetary shock, we have derived ex-
plicitly at each point in time and in each state of nature, aggregate-demand
schedules (inclusive of policy rule) relating, at the next point in time and in
each successor state, the price level to the level of output. We have shown that
these schedules are decreasing if and only if the exponent of the Taylor rule that
falls on expected in   ation is less than 1. The aggregate supply schedules (or
Phillips curve) that also apply to the next point in time are always increasing.
The equilibrium is unique if the exponent is less than 1. Otherwise, because of
the non linearities of the two types of schedules, two equilibria can exist.
    In this equilibrium, we have priced the stock market, de...ned as the present
discounted value of ...rms' pro...ts and demonstrated that, in a        exible price
version of our economy, the equilibrium nominal return on stocks is just equal
to the riskless interest rate, which is constant, whereas in   ation is higher when
productivity growth is low. That explains a zero-slope relation between these
rates and gives stocks a nominal character.
    Moving to a sticky-price version of the economy, we have simulated the joint
behavior of stock returns and in      ation. That has allowed us to discover the
reason for which Boudoukh Richardson (1993) found di¤erent slopes for di¤erent
holding-period lengths. The reason lies in the succession of productivity shocks
that take place over several periods, which is a newfangled version of Fama
(1981)' s "proxy hypothesis" explained in the introduction.
    The equilibrium has then been expanded to incorporate an explicit money
demand à la Baumol and Tobin. The only e¤ect of the zero lower bound thus
created as been to support stock returns when they are low.
    Finally, we turned to long-term bonds to observe that their behavior vis-à-
vis in  ation is more "real" than that of stocks, which explains the surprising
empirical ...ndings of Katz and Lustig (2017). We examined the validity of the
`Fed model'in the context of our model. The model invalidates completely the
suggestion that one might compare dividend yields to bond yields to assess the
direction of the stock market. Under IID productivity-growth, the relationship
between them is in fact negative: when in     ation is high, the bond yield is high
while the dividend yield is low.
    All the results of this paper invite empirical tests that would be conducted
conditional on observed productivity shocks, as opposed to being conducted
across possible realizations of these shocks.


                                        41
    Appendixes
A     The backward equation system for the non-
      Ricardian, real-surplus case of subsection 2.1
The dynamic programming formulation of the investor's problem is:

             J1 (     1;t 1 ;   ; t) =        sup           u (ct ; t) + Et J1 (            1;t ;   ; t + 1)   (31)
                                         ct; f    1;t;i g


subject to the ow budget constraint written at time t only.
   The Lagrangian for problem (31) is:

                           L1 (       1;t 1;i ;    ; t) = sup inf u (ct ; t)
                                                              ct ;   1;t      1;t

                                        1 X
                                      +     J1 (                 1;t ;   ; t + 1)
                                        2
                                             j =u;d

                                                                                      1;t
            +   1;t         1;t 1     + Pt          yt        Pt         ct                         st   Pt
                                                                                    1 + it

where 1;t is the Lagrange multiplier attached to the ow budget constraint (3).
The ...rst-order conditions are:

                                         u0 (ct ; t) =            1;t         Pt
                                                                           1;t
                 1;t 1     + Pt         yt        Pt        ct                         st      Pt = 0
                                                                     1 + it
                                 1 X @J1;t+1;j
                                               (                     1;t ;    ; t + 1)                         (32)
                                 2    @ 1;t;i
                                   j =u;d
                                                                   1
                                              =      1;t
                                                                 1 + it
   In order to eliminate the value function from the ...rst-order conditions, we
di¤erentiate the Lagrangian with respect to 1;t 1;i :

                                       @J1                    @ L1
                                                    =                         =      1;t
                                  @    1;t 1;i           @    1;t 1;i

so that the ...rst-order conditions can also be written:

                                         u0 (ct ; t) =            1;t         Pt
                                                                           1;t
                 1;t 1     + Pt         yt        Pt        ct                         st      Pt = 0          (33)
                                                                     1 + it
                                1 X                                                1
                                                 1;t+1;j     =       1;t
                                2                                                1 + it
                                  j =u;d



                                                            42
    As has been noted by Dumas and Lyaso¤ (2012) in a di¤erent context,
the system made of (33) and (6) above has a drawback. It must be solved
simultaneously (or globally) for all nodes of all times. As written, it cannot be
solved recursively in the backward way because the unknowns at time t include
consumptions at time t; ct ; whereas the third subset of equations in (33) if
rewritten as:
                        1 X u0 (ct+1;j ; t)            1
                                            = 1;t
                        2        Pt+1;j              1 + it
                              j =u;d

can be seen to be a restriction on consumptions at time t + 1, which at time t
would already be solved for.
     In order to "synchronize" the solution algorithm of the equations and allow
recursivity, we ...rst shift all ...rst-order conditions, except the third one, forward
in time and, second, we no longer make explicit use of the investor'             s position
 1;t 1  held when   entering  time    t , focusing instead on the ...nancial wealth: F1;t ,
  1;t
1+it held when exiting time t + 1; which are carried backward. Regrouping
equations in that way leads to the equation system of subsection 2.1.


B      Analytical solution
Assume homogeneity with respect to the price level (with notation: 1;t
#1;t Pt ; 2;t #2;t Pt ; F1;t+1;u f1;t+1;u Pt+1;u ; F2;t f2;t Pt ; F2;t+1;u
f2;t+1;u Pt+1;u ) and assume: f1;t+1;u = f2;t+1;u ; f1;t+1;d = f2;t+1;d . The
system of equations simpli...es to
                     Flow budget constraints of private sector
                    f2;t+1;u        Pt+1;u + st+1;u          Pt+1;u = #1;t         Pt
                    f2;t+1;d        Pt+1;d + st+1;d          Pt+1;d = #1;t         Pt
                      Flow budget constraints of government
                  f2;t+1;u       Pt+1;u = #2;t         Pt + st+1;u         Pt+1;u           (34)
                   f2;t+1;d         Pt+1;d = #2;t      Pt + st+1;d         Pt+1;d           (35)
                   Portfolio-choice, or Euler, or Fisher condition
                                1               1     1          1             1     1
                1 1             2   (yt+1;u )       Pt+1;u   +   2 (yt+1;d )       Pt+1;d
                        =                                         1
              1 + it Pt                            (yt )
                                           Taylor rule
                                              01                1
                                                                           1
                                                     2 Pt+1;u + 2 Pt+1;d
                                                @             Pt           A
                       1 + it = (1 + {)
                                                             1+

                                         Market clearing
                                         #1;t + #2;t = 0
  Government debt: Government debt is nominal and can be priced by
means of the Fisher equation, which means that the ...nancial wealth of the


                                                43
government can be obtained by the following backward induction:
                                             F2;t   1 2;t
                                                  ,                                                      (36)
                                             Pt     Pt 1 + i t
        1                  1                 F2;t+1;u         1              1                F2;t+1;d
        2   (ct+1;u )             st+1;u +    Pt+1;u     +    2 (ct+1;d )          st+1;d +    Pt+1;d
   =                                                           1
                                                    (yt )
From (36), the backward dynamics of real government ...nancial liabilities are
provided by:
                  1               1                                  1             1
                  2   (yt+1;u )       ( st+1;u + f2;t+1;u ) +        2 (yt+1;d )       ( st+1;d + f2;t+1;d )
f2;t   =                                                              1                                         ;
                                                             (yt )
f2;T   =      0                                                                                            (37)

   The current real discounted value f2;t of government debt depends only on
future income and future surpluses. It does not depend on interest-rate policy.53
   But the real face value #2;t , which is the government'
                                                         s equilibrium portfolio
choice or issuance decision, depends on the nominal rate of interest, which we
now determine.
   In   ation: Solving for in ation from the government   ow budget constraints
(34), (35):
                                      Pt+1;u              #2;t
                                             =
                                        Pt          st+1;u + f2;t+1;u
                                      Pt+1;d              #2;t
                                             =
                                        Pt          st+1;d + f2;t+1;d
so that the realized rates of ination are:
                                      Pt+1;u        f2;t (1 + it )
                                             =                                                           (38)
                                        Pt          st+1;u + f2;t+1;u
                                      Pt+1;d        f2;t (1 + it )
                                             =
                                        Pt          st+1;d + f2;t+1;d

These relate the two levels of future in  ation (Pt+1;u =Pt ; Pt+1;d =Pt ) to calendar
time t, to the two levels of future real government debt
( st+1;u + f2;t+1;u ; st+1;d + f2;t+1;d ) and to the current level of real govern-
ment debt f2;t . We call f2;t = ( st+1 + f2;t+1 ) the "ex post inverse real gross
rates of return on government debt"     . It is also the ex post inverse real gross
rates of return on any nominally riskless debt.

Proposition 7 The ex post levels of ination in the two states of nature are
separately
  5 3 This result is, of course, a statement of the Fiscal Theory of the Price Level. In an

overlapping-generations model, the real value of government debt may be larger than the
present value of future government surpluses; for an extension of the Fiscal theory to overlap-
ping generations, see Farmer and Zabczyk (2019).


                                                        44
      increasing functions of the ex post inverse real gross rates of return on
      nominally riskless debt
      increasing functions of the (ex ante) nominal gross rate of interest.
   To illustrate, assuming that debt returns more in a u state than in a d state,
which is
                       st+1;u + f2;t+1;u        st+1;d + f2;t+1;d
                                          >
                             f2;t                     f2;t
then
                                   Pt+1;u     Pt+1;d
                                          <
                                     Pt         Pt
In ation is lower in the u state than in the d state.
   Relations between the rate of in     ation and the nominal rate of interest are
commonly known as the "aggregate-demand"schedules.54 We now merge them
with the policy rule.
   Interest rate: Substituting into the Taylor rule:
                              0                                           1
                                 1       #2;t          1      #2;t
                                 2 st+1;u +f2;t+1;u +  2 st+1;d +f2;t+1;d
          1 + it = (1 + {) @                                              A
                                                  1+

so that (using #2;t = (1 + it ) = f2;t ):
                              0                                                     11
                                  1        f2;t              1        f2;t
                          1       2   st+1;u +f2;t+1;u   +   2   st+1;d +f2;t+1;d
     1 + it = (1 + {) 1       @                                                     A    (39)
                                                    1+

The nominal rate of interest depends on future ...scal surpluses and output, as
well as on the parameters of the Taylor rule. It is not generally equal to {.
Proposition 8 The (ex ante) nominal gross rate of interest is an increasing
(decreasing) function of the expected inverse real gross rate of return on nomi-
nally riskless debt if < 1 ( > 1).
    In total, a higher ex post inverse real gross rates of return on government
debt has a double e¤ect, one direct and increasing (Proposition 7), and one
indirect because it a¤ects the expected value of the inverse real gross rates of
return. The sign of the second e¤ect depends on whether is smaller or greater
then 1. When < 1; the direction of the e¤ect is clear: a higher expected real
rate of return on government debt implies a lower rate of in    ation in both future
states.
    Finally, since (37) provides a unique value for the time-0 present value of the
government debt, and since 2; 1 is a given (negative) amount of nominal claim
outstanding and s0 a given time-0 surplus, the solution of the initial condition
(8) for P0 is unique. Cochrane (2011, page 579) says that we have determinacy
in this case and, indeed, we do, irrespective of the value of the Taylor parameter
so long as 6= 1.
  5 4 The next two sections derive the "aggregate-supply" schedule. Here aggregate supply is

exogenous and completely inelastic.


                                              45
C            Proof of Proposition 5
Combining (38) with (39), we get

                                                                 0                                                             11
                                                                      1            f2;t                 1        f2;t
Pt+1;u                   f2;t                  1                      2       st+1;u +f2;t+1;u      +   2   st+1;d +f2;t+1;d
       =                             (1 + {) 1                   @                                                             A
  Pt               st+1;u + f2;t+1;u                                                            1+

and, therefore
                                                       0                                                             11        2
           Pt+1;u                                          1          f2;t                  1         f2;t
         @    Pt                             1             2     st+1;u +f2;t+1;u      +    2    st+1;d +f2;t+1;d
                            =    (1 + {) 1             @                                                             A         41
             f2;t                                                                    1+
@       st+1;u +f2;t+1;u
                                                              1
                                                                                                            #
                                                       st+1;u +f2;t+1;u
                                  +           1                              1
                                       st+1;u +f2;t+1;u          +    st+1;d +f2;t+1;d
                                                                                                    1

In view of (10),
                                                       0                                                             11        2
           Pt+1;u                                          1          f2;t                  1         f2;t
         @    Pt                             1             2     st+1;u +f2;t+1;u      +    2    st+1;d +f2;t+1;d
                            =    (1 + {) 1             @                                                             A         41
             f2;t                                                                    1+
@       st+1;u +f2;t+1;u
                                            1
                                                                          #
                                           1+u
                                  +    1          1
                                      1+u   +    1+d
                                                             1

        And, from (37), (11) and (12)
              f2;t
    @    st+1;u +f2;t+1;u         1                      1
                                                          (1 + d)                               1                1
                                                         2
                            =                                     + (                      1)     (1 + u)            <0
             @yt+1;u            yt+1;u                   1+u                                    2
                            Pt+1;u
This shows that @             Pt =@yt+1;u        is positive if and only if
                                                1
                                               1+u
                                      1+     1     1                            >0
                                            1+u + 1+d
                                                                      1

The proposition follows.


D            Proof of equation (22)
The ...rst-order condition is:
       T   t
               "                                                                                    !       #
       X              i (ct+i )
                                  1
                                                               P ;t                  P ;t       1
             Et ( ! )           1            (1          )                + 't+i                        yt+i = 0
        i=0              (ct )                               Pt1
                                                               +i                      Pt+i


                                                           46
Divide by P ;t :

             T t
                         "                                                                                    !           #
             X                   i   (ct+i )
                                                      1
                                                                                 1                    P ;t1
                   Et ( ! )                       1           (1         )               + 't+i                   yt+i = 0
             i=0                      (ct )                                  Pt1
                                                                               +i                     Pt+i

Split:
             T t
                         "                                                   #                 T t
                                                                                                        "                                                     #
             X                   i   (ct+i )
                                                      1
                                                              1                                X                  i   (ct+i )
                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                           1
(1       )         Et ( ! )                       1                    yt+i + P          ;t          Et ( ! )                           't+i             yt+i = 0
             i=0                      (ct )               Pt1
                                                            +i                                 i=0                      (ct )
                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                  Pt+i

Multiply by Pt1 :
        T  t
               "                                                   #           T  t
                                                                                      "                                                                       #
        X             i (ct+i )
                                                      1
                                                          Pt1                  X            i (ct+i )
                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                                     Pt
                                                                             1
(1    )      Et ( ! )                             1         1  yt+i + Pt P ;t       Et ( ! )                                            1       't+i      yt+i = 0
        i=0              (ct )                            Pt+i                 i=0             (ct )                                                 Pt+i

Solving for Pt P ;t1 gives (22).


E        Walras'law in the sticky-price system
Aggregating the budget constraints in each state (j = u; d):

                     Pt+1;j           ct+1;j + F1;t+1;j + F2;t+1;j + st+1;j                                   Pt+1;j
 =     1;t   +     2;t   + st+1;j        Pt+1;j + Pt+1;j                          t+1;j    + Wt+1;j           lt+1;j ; F1;T;j = 0
                         Pt+1;j         ct+1;j = Pt+1;j                          t+1;j   + Wt+1;j           lt+1;j
                                                  "
                                                                                  Pt                               Pt
             Pt+1;j          ct+1;j = Pt+1;j                       !                           't+1;j
                                                                             Pt+1;j                           Pt+1;j
                                                                                                               #
                                                              Pt+1                              Pt+1;j
                              + (1        !)                                 't+1;j                                       yt+1;j + Wt+1;j                 lt+1;j
                                                              Pt+1;j                            Pt+1;j
                                                      "
                                                                        Pt                 Wt+1;j                          Pt
     Pt+1;j        ct+1;j = Pt+1;j                        !
                                                                       Pt+1;j          zt+1;j Pt+1;j                    Pt+1;j
                                                                                                                             #
                                                          Pt+1                   Wt+1;j                       Pt+1;j
                              + (1       !)                                                                                                 yt+1;j + Wt+1;j            lt+1;j
                                                          Pt+1;j             zt+1;j Pt+1;j                    Pt+1;j
                                              "                                                                                                           #
                                                               Pt                Pt                                    Pt+1             Pt+1;j
Pt+1;j        ct+1;j = Pt+1;j                     !                                             + (1        !)                                                    yt+1;j
                                                           Pt+1;j            Pt+1;j                                    Pt+1;j           Pt+1;j
                             "                                                                                 #
         Wt+1;j                               Pt                                               Pt+1;j
+                              !                                   + (1           !)                                    yt+1;j + Wt+1;j                  lt+1;j
         zt+1;j                          Pt+1;j                                                Pt+1;j




                                                                        47
Cancellation produced by (24) gives:
                         "                                                                                                                            #
                                 Pt     Pt                                                                                Pt+1          Pt+1;j
Pt+1;j ct+1;j = Pt+1;j     !                                                                 + (1        !)                                               yt+1;j
                               Pt+1;j Pt+1;j                                                                              Pt+1;j        Pt+1;j
                "                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                  #
                              1
                         Pt                                                                 Pt+1;j
       ct+1;j = !                  + (1 ! )                                                                                   yt+1;j
                       Pt+1;j                                                               Pt+1;j
                                                 ct+1;j = yt+1;j
Therefore, all accounts are straight: clearing of the ...nancial market and of the
labor market do imply clearing of the goods market.


F          Backward equation system for the Baumol-
           Tobin case
In the entire paper, Wt is the nominal wage rate. In this appendix only, the
symbol W stands for entering (or pre-trade) wealth.
                                  L1 (W1;t ; ; t) = sup inf u1 (ct ; t)
                                                            ct ;      1;t      1;t

                                      1 X
                                    +     J1 (              1;t ; M1;t ;             ; t + 1)
                                      2
                                          j =u;d

                          1;t                                                                Pt
+    1;t      W1;t                  St + Pt            yt             1                                      Pt           ct       M1;t +       1;t
                        1 + it                                                  2           M1;t

where: W1;t , M1;t          1   +    1;t 1 :    First-order condition with respect to                                               1;t :

                        1 X  @                                                                     1;t
                                  J1 (               1;t ; M1;t ;         ; t + 1)                           =0
                        2   @W1;t                                                              1 + it
                         j =u;d

First-order condition with respect to M1;t :
                                                                               "                                                       #
 1 X  @                                                                                                               Pt
           J1 (            1;t ; M1;t ;     ; t + 1) +              1;t            Pt        yt                                2    1 =0
 2   @W1;t                                                                                           2       (M1;t )
     j =u;d

Envelope condition:
                                  @
                                              J1 (   1;t 1 ; M1;t 1 ;                  ; t) =      1;t
                                @W1;t     1

The Euler conditions are:
 1 X                1;t
              1;t+1;j                   =      0; t = 0; :::; T                    1
 2                        1 + it
     j =u;d
                                                            "                                                             #
              1 X                                                                                            Pt
                          1;t+1;j       =        1;t            1         Pt           yt                             2       ; t = 0; :::; T
              2                                                                               2      (M1;t )
                j =u;d


                                                            48
The latter is simply:
                                                     1                                                          Pt
                                                                     =          1   Pt        yt                     2
                                                   1 + it                                           2       (M1;t )
                                                        Pt                             1
                 Pt     yt                                    2      =          1                                                   (40)
                                         2     (M1;t )                               1 + it
                                                  Pt                                           2
                       Pt           yt             1                 =          2   (M1;t )
                                              1 1+   it
                                                                                      s
                                                                                          1
                                                        M1;t         = Pt                   yt               1
                                                                                          2         1       1+it

except at time t = T where:
                                                                     PT
                   1        PT               yT                             2       =     0
                                                        2      (M1;T )
                                                                                                   r
                                                                                                         1
                                                                     M1;T           = PT                   yT
                                                                                                         2
Summing up, the set of equations to be solved at each node of the tree is:

                            Flow budget constraints of private sector
                        Pt+1;j                ct+1;j + F1;t+1;j + M1;t+1;j + St+1;j
                                =      1;t    + M1;t + Pt+1;j                       yt+1;j +       1;t+1;j ;
                                                        F1;T;j = 0; j = u; d
               Flow budget constraints of government cum central bank
    F2;t+1;j + M2;t+1;j =                         2;t   + M2;t + St+1;j                    1;t+1;j ; F2;T;j        = 0; j = u; d
                                     Portfolio-choice or Euler conditions                                                           (41)
                            1                           1      1            1                  1     1
      1 1                   2   (ct+1;u )                   Pt+1;u    +     2 (ct+1;d )            Pt+1;d
              =                                                              1                              ; t = 0; :::; T     1
    1 + it Pt                                                      (ct )
                       s                                                                                             r
                                1                                                                                        1
    M1;t = Pt                     yt                     1        ; t = 0; :::; T         1; M1;T = PT                     yT
                                2             1         1+it
                                                                                                                         2
                                                             Market clearing
 1;t +   2;t   = 0; M1;t+1;u + M2;t+1;u = 0; M1;t+1;d + M2;t+1;d = 0; M1;t + M2;t = 0




                                                                           49
G          Backward equation system for the Baumol-
           Tobin case under alternative speci...cation

                               L1 (        1;t 1;i ; M1;t 1 ;      ; t) = sup inf u1 (ct ; t)
                                                                                  ct ;   1;t    1;t

                                               1 X
                                             +     J1 (            1;t ; M1;t ;           ; t + 1)
                                               2
                                                   j =u;d

                                                                            1;t                                            Pt
+    1;t       M1;t        1   + Pt             yt +   1;t 1                              St               1                                Pt       ct       M1;t +     1;t
                                                                     1 + it                                         2     M1;t

First-order condition with respect to                               1;t :

             1 X @                                                                  1;t                                  Pt
                      J1 (                  1;t ; M1;t ;    ; t + 1)                                  1                             =0
             2  @ 1;t                                                         1 + it                            2       M1;t
              j =u;d

First-order condition with respect to M1;t :
                                              (                                                                                                                                )
1 X       @                                                                                                                   1;t                               Pt
              J1 ( 1;t ; M1;t ; ; t + 1)+ 1;t   Pt                                             yt +        1;t 1                           St                        2    1        =0
2       @M1;t                                                                                                            1 + it                      2        (M1;t )
    j =u;d

Envelope conditions:

                       @                                                                                                 Pt
                                   J1 (    1;t 1 ; M1;t 1 ;       ; t)      =            1;t           1
                @   1;t 1                                                                                       2       M1;t
                 @
                                   J1 (    1;t 1 ; M1;t 1 ;       ; t)      =            1;t
               @M1;t           1

so that the Euler conditions are:
                    1 X                                                Pt+1;j                             1;t                           Pt
                                         1;t+1;j       1                                                                 1                                =     0
                    2                                         2       M1;t+1;j                        1 + it                    2      M1;t
                        j =u;d
                                            (                                                                                                    )
1 X                                                                                       1;t                                   Pt
              1;t+1;j      +       1;t           Pt    yt +       1;t 1                                St                              2        1         =     0
2                                                                                   1 + it                          2        (M1;t )
    j =u;d

The nodal system follows.




                                                                   50
    References:
    Allais, M., 1947, Economie et Intérêt, Paris: Imprimerie Nationale.
    Allen, F., E. Carletti and D. Gale, 2012, "Money, Financial Stability and
E¢ ciency," working paper, Wharton School.
    Alves, N., 2004, "A Flexible View on Prices," working paper, Banco de
Portugal.
    Aiyagari, S. R. and M. Gertler, 1985, "The Backing of Government Bonds
and Monetarism," Journal of Monetary Economics, 16, 19-44.
    Altig D., L. J. Christiano, M. Eichenbaum and J. Lindé, 2011, "Firm-Speci...c
Capital, Nominal Rigidities and the Business Cycle," Review of Economic Dy-
namics, 14, 225-247.
    Aruoba, S. B. and F. Schorfheide, 2013, "Macroeconomic Dynamics near the
ZLB: a Tale of Two Equilibria," NBER Working Paper 19248.
    Asness, C., 2003, "Fight the Fed Model," The Journal of Portfolio Manage-
ment, Fall, 11-24.
    Bai, J. H., 2005, "Stationary Monetary Equilibrium in a Baumol-Tobin Ex-
change Economy: Theory and Computation,"working paper, Georgetown Uni-
versity.
    Barsky, R. and E. Sims, 2011, "News shocks and business cycles," Journal
of Monetary Economics, 58, 273­     289.
    Basak, S. and H. Yan, 2010, "Equilibrium Asset Prices and Investor Behavior
in the Presence of Money Illusion," Review of Economic Studies, 77, 914-936.
    Baumol, W. J., 1952, "The Transactions Demand for Cash: an Inventory-
theoretic Approach," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 66, 545-556.
    Baumol, W. J. and J. Tobin, 1989, "The Optimal Cash Balance Proposition:
Maurice Allais´ Priority," Journal of Economic Literature, September.
    Bekaert, G. and E. Engstrom, 2010, "In    ation and the Stock Market: Un-
derstanding the `  Fed Model' ," Journal of Monetary Economics, 57, 278-294.
    Benhabib, J., S. Schmitt-Grohe, and M. Uribe, 2001a, "The Perils of Taylor
Rules," Journal of Economic Theory, 96, 40-69.
    Benhabib, J, S. Schmitt-Grohe, and M. Uribe, 2001b, "MonetaryP olicy and
Multiple Equilibria," American Economic Review, 91, 167-186.
    Benhabib, J, S. Schmitt-Grohe, and M. Uribe, 2002, "Avoiding Liquidity
Traps," Journal of Political Economy, 110, 535-563.
    Bernanke, B. and M. Gertler, 1999, "Monetary Policy and Asset Price
Volatility," Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Review, Fourth
Quarter, 17-51.
    Bernanke, B. and M. Gertler, 2001, "Should Central Banks Respond to
Movements in Asset Prices?" American Economic Review Papers and Proceed-
ings, 91, 253-257.
    Bernanke, B. and K. N. Kuttner, 2004. "What Explains the Stock Market'      s
Reaction to Federal Reserve Policy?," NBER Working Papers 10402, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
    Boudoukh, J. and M. Richardson, 1993, "Stock Returns and In        ation: a
Long-Horizon Perspective," The American Economic Review, 83, 1346-1355.



                                       51
    Bodie, Z., 1976, "Common Stocks as a Hedge Against In     ation,"The Journal
of Finance, 31, 459-70.
    Braun, R. A., M. Körber and Y. Waki, 2013, "Small and Orthodox Fiscal
Multipliers at the Zero Lower Bound,"Working Paper 2013-13, Federal Reserve
Bank of Atlanta.
    Calvo, G. A., 1983, "Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Model," Jour-
nal of Monetary Economics, 12, 983-998.
    Campbell, J. Y. and T. Vuolteenaho, 2004, "In       ation Illusion and Stock
Prices," The American Economic Review, 94, 19-23.
    Canzoneri, M., R. Cumby and B. Diba, 2011, "The Interaction between Mon-
etary and Fiscal Policy,"in Handbook of Monetary Economics, 3B, B. Friedman
and M. Woodford eds., 935-999.
    Castelnuovo, E. and S. Nístico, 2010, "Stock Market Conditions and Mon-
etary Policy in a DSGE Model for the U.S.," Journal of Economic Dynamics
and Control, 34, 1700-1731.
    Challe, E., 2005, "New Keynesian Macroeconomics," course notes at Cam-
bridge University, https://sites.google.com/site/edouardchalle/lecture-notes
    Challe, E. and C. Giannitsarou, 2014, "Stock Prices and Monetary Policy
Shocks: a General Equilibrium Approach," Journal of Economic Dynamics and
Control, 40, 46­ 66.
    Chari, V., Christiano, L., Kehoe, P., 1991, "Optimal ...scal and monetary
policy: Some recent results," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 23, 519­
539.
    Christiano, L. J. and M. Eichenbaum, 2012, "Notes on Linear Approxima-
tions, Equilibrium Multiplicity and E-learnability in the Analysis of the Zero
Lower Bound," working paper Northwestern University.
    Clarida, R., J. Gali and M. Gertler, 2000, "Monetary Policy Rules and
Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory," The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 115, No. 1, 147-180.
    Cochrane, J. H., 2005a, "Money as stock," Journal of Monetary Economics,
52, 501­ 528.
    Cochrane, J. H., 2005b, , "Financial Markets and the Real Economy," Foun-
dations and Trends in Finance, 1, 1-101.
    Cochrane, J. H., 2011, "Determinacy and Identi...cation with Taylor Rules,"
Journal of Political Economy, 119, 565-615.
    Danthine, J. P. and J. Donaldson, 1986, "In     ation and Asset Prices in an
Exchange Economy," Econometrica, 54, 585-605.
    David, A. and P. Veronesi, 2013, "What Ties Returns Volatilities to Price
Valuations and Fundamentals?" Journal of Political Economy, 121, 682 ­746.
    De Paoli, B., A. Scott and O. Weeken, 2009, "Asset pricing implications of
a New Keynesian model," Bank of England Working Paper No 326.
    Dumas, B. and A. Lyaso¤, 2012, "Incomplete-Market Equilibria Solved Re-
cursively on a Binomial Tree or a Lattice," The Journal of Finance, LXVII,
1887-1931.
    Fama, E., 1981, "Stock Returns, Real Activity, In   ation and Money," Amer-
ican Economic Review, 71, 545­   65.


                                      52
    Fama, E. F., and G. W. Schwert, 1977, "Asset Returns and In      ation," Jour-
nal of Financial Economics, 5: 115­  146.
    Farmer, R. E. A. and P. Zabczyk, 2019, "The Fiscal Theory of the Price Level
in Overlapping Generations Models," working paper, University of Warwick.
    Fernández-Villaverde, J., G. Gordon and P. A. Guerrón-Quintana, 2012,
"Nonlinear Adventures at the Zero Lower Bound,"NBER Working Paper 18058.
    Galí, J., 2008, Monetary Policy, Ination, and the Business Cycle: an In-
troduction to the New Keynesian Framework, Princeton University Press.
    Gavin, W., B. Keen, A. Richter, and N. Throckmorton, 2013, "Global dy-
namics at the zero lower bound," Working Paper.
    Geske, R., and Roll, R., 1983, "The Fiscal and Monetary Linkage Between
Stock Returns and In    ation," The Journal of Finance, 38, 1­  33.
    Gorodnichenko, Y. and M. Weber, 2016, "Are Sticky Prices Costly? Evi-
dence From The Stock Market," American Economic Review, 106, 165-199.
    Goto, S., and R. Valkanov, 2000, "The Fed'   s E¤ect on Excess Returns and
In  ation is Much Bigger than you Think," mimeo, University of California Los
Angeles.
    Greenwood, R., S. G. Hanson, J. S. Rudolph, and L. Summers, 2014, "Gov-
ernment Debt Management at the Zero Lower Bound,"Hutchins Center Work-
ing Paper.
    Gultekin, N. B., 1983, "Stock market returns and in     ation: evidence from
other countries," The Journal of Finance, 38, 49­  65.
    Hagmann, M. and C. Lenz, 2005. "Real Asset Returns and Components of
In  ation: A Structural VAR Analysis," Working papers, Faculty of Business
and Economics - University of Basel.
    Heaton, J. and D. Lucas, 1996, "Evaluating the E¤ects of Incomplete Mar-
kets on Risk Sharing and Asset Pricing," Journal of Political Economy, 104,
443-487.
    Heathcote, J., 1998, "Interest Rates in a General Equilibrium Baumol-Tobin
Model," working paper, University of Pennsylvania.
    Henderson D. W. and W. McKibbin, 1993, "A Comparison of Some Ba-
sic Monetary Policy Regimes for Open Economies: Implications of Di¤erent
Degrees of Instrument Adjustment and Wage Persistence," Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, 39, 221-318.
    Ja¤e, J. and G. Mandelker, G., 1976, "The `    Fisher e¤ect' for risky assets:
an empirical investigation," The Journal of Finance, 31, 447­   458.
    Katz, M., H. Lustig and L. Nielsen, 2017, "Are Stocks Real Assets? Sticky
Discount Rates in Stock Markets," Review of Financial Studies, 30, 539-587.
    Kollmann, R., 2019, "Stationary Rational Bubbles in Non-Linear Business
Cycle Models," working paper, Université Libre de Bruxelles.
    Krippner, L., 2012, "Modifying Gaussian term structure models when inter-
est rates are near the zero lower bound," Working Paper.
    Kurmann, A. and E. Sims, 2017, "Revisions in Utilization-Adjjusted TFP
and Robust Identi...caiton of News Shocks," National Bureau of Economic Re-
search, working paper #23142.



                                       53
     Leo, C. L., 2006, "A General Equilibrium Model of Baumol-Tobin Money
Demand," working paper, The University of British Columbia.
     Leeper, E. M., 1991, "Equilibria under `  active'and ` passive'monetary and
...scal policies," Journal of Monetary Economics, 27, 129-147.
     Leeper, E. M. and C. Leith, 2016, "Understanding In          ation as a Joint
Monetary-Fiscal Phenomenon," in Handbook of Macroeconomics vol. 2, J. B.
Taylor, H. Uhlig eds, North Hoalland.
     Li, E. X. N. and F. Palomino, 2009, "Monetary policy risk and the cross-
section of stock returns," Mimeograph.
     Lintner, J., 1975, "In  ation and Security Returns," The Journal of Finance,
1975, 30, 259-80.
     Lucas, R. E. and N. L. Stokey, 1987, "Money and Interest Rates in a Cash-
in-Advance Economy," Econometrica, 55, 491-513.
     Magill, M. and M. Quinzii, 2009, "Anchoring Expectations of In        ation,"
working paper, University of Southern California and U.C. Davis.
     Magill, M. and M. Quinzii, 2012, "Interest Policy and Expectations of In    a-
tion," working paper, University of Southern California and U.C. Davis.
     Maio, P., 2013, "The `  Fed Model'and the Predictability of Stock Returns,"
Review of Finance, 17, 1489­     1533.
     McCallum, B. T., 1981, "Price Level Determinacy with an Interest Rate
Policy Rule and Rational Expectations," Journal of Monetary Economics, 8,
319­  29.
     McCallum, B., 2000, "Theoretical analysis regarding a zero lower bound on
nominal interest rates," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 32, 870­     904.
     Mertens, K. and M. O. Ravn, 2012, "Fiscal Policy in an Expectations Driven
Liquidity Trap," CEPR Discussion Paper.
     Michel, P., 1982, "On the Transversality Condition in In...nite Horizon Op-
timal Problems," Econometrica, 50, 975-985
     Milani, F., 2008, "Learning About the Interdependence Between the Macro-
economy and the Stock Market," Mimeograph.
     Miranda-Agrippino, S., Hacio¨ glu Hoke S. and K. Bluwstein, 2019, "When
Creativity Strikes: News Shocks and Business Cycle Fluctuations,        " working
paper, Northwestern University.
     Nakajima, T., and H. M. Polemarchakis (2005), "Money and Prices under
Uncertainty," Review of Economic Studies, 72, 223-246.
     Nelson, C. R., 1976, "In   ation and rates of return on common stocks," The
Journal of Finance, 31, 471­    483.
     Niepelt, D., 2004, "The Fiscal Myth of the Price Level," Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 119, 277-300.
     Nístico, S., 2007, "Monetary Policy and Stock-Price Dynamics in a DSGE
Framework," Mimeograph.
     Persson, M., Persson, T., Svensson, L. E. O., 1987, "Time consistency of
...scal and monetary policy," Econometrica, 55, 1419­    1431.
     Priebsch, M., 2013, "Computing Arbitrage-Free Yields in Multi-Factor Gaussian
Shadow-Rate Term Structure Models," Working Paper.



                                      54
    Romer, D., 1986, "A Simple General Equilibrium Version of the Baumol-
Tobin Model," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 101, 663-686.
    Rudebusch, G. D. and E. T. Swanson, 2008, "The Bond Premium in a DSGE
model with long-run real and nominal risks," working paper, Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco.
    Sargent, T. J. and N. Wallace (1975), "Rational Expectations, the Opti-
mal Monetary Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule," Journal of
Political Economy, 83, 241-254.
    Schwartz, I., 2006, "Monetary Equilibria in a Baumol-Tobin Economy,"Max
Planck Institute of Research on Collective Goods.
    Silva, A. C., 2011, "Individual and Aggregate Money Demands," working
paper, Nova School of Business and Economics.
    Smets, F. and R. Wouters, 2007, "Shocks and Frictions in US Business
Cycles: A Bayesian DSGE Approach," American Economic Review, 97, 586-
606.
    Smith, G. W., 1986, "A Dynamic Baumol-Tobin Model of Money Demand,"
Review of Economic Studies, 53, 3, 465-69.
    Svensson, L. E. O., 1989, "Trade in nominal assets: Monetary policy, and
price level and exchange rate risk," Journal of International Economics, 26,
1­28.
    Svensson, L. E. O. and M. Woodford, 2005, "Implementing Optimal Policy
through In   ation-Forecast Targeting,"in Bernanke, Ben S., and Michael Wood-
ford, eds. (2005), The Ination-Targeting Debate, University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, 19-83.
    Swanson, E. and J. Williams, 2014, "Measuring the e¤ect of the zero lower
bound on medium and longer-term interest rates," American Economic Review,
104, 3154-3185.
    Tin, J. S., 2000, "Transactions demand for money: The micro evidence,"
Quarterly Journal of Business and Economics, Summer.
    Taylor, J. B., 1993, "Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice," Carnegie-
Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 39, 195-214.
    Tobin, J., 1956, "The Interest Elasticity of the Transactions Demand for
Cash," Review of Economics and Statistics, 88, 241-247.
    Walsh, C. E., 2010, Monetary Theory and Policy, third edition, MIT Press.
    Wei, C., 2009, "A Quartet of Asset Pricing Models in Nominal and Real
Economies," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 33, 154-165.
    Woodford, M., 2003, Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Mon-
etary Policy, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
    Wright, J., 2012, "What does monetary policy do to long-term interest rates
at the zero lower bound?," Economic Journal, 122, F447­    F466.




                                      55
