                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




ZOMBIES AT LARGE? CORPORATE DEBT OVERHANG AND THE MACROECONOMY

                                         Òscar Jordà
                                       Martin Kornejew
                                       Moritz Schularick
                                        Alan M. Taylor

                                      Working Paper 28197
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28197


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020




We thank Karsten Mu ller for generously sharing his data on corporate bank credit, and Nina
Boryachenko, Fernando Duarte, Anna Kovner, and John Williams for helpful comments and
suggestions. Dean Parker provided research assistance. All errors are our own. Òscar Jordà,
Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor gratefully acknowledge support from the Institute for
New Economic Thinking. Moritz Schularick gratefully acknowledges support from the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) under Germany's Excellence Strategy ­ EXC 2126/1 ­
39083886, as well as a Fellowship from the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of
Chicago. Martin Kornejew gratefully acknowledges support from RTG 2281 funded by the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG). The views expressed herein are solely the
responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Òscar Jordà, Martin Kornejew, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Zombies at Large? Corporate Debt Overhang and the Macroeconomy
Òscar Jordà, Martin Kornejew, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 28197
December 2020
JEL No. E44,G32,G33,N20

                                        ABSTRACT

With business leverage at record levels, the effects of corporate debt overhang on growth and
investment have become a prominent concern. In this paper, we study the effects of corporate
debt overhang based on long-run cross-country data covering the near- universe of modern
business cycles. We show that business credit booms typically do not leave a lasting imprint on
the macroeconomy. Quantile local projections indicate that business credit booms do not affect
the economy's tail risks either. Yet in line with theory, we find that the economic costs of
corporate debt booms rise when inefficient debt restructuring and liquidation impede the
resolution of corporate financial distress and make it more likely that corporate zombies creep
along.

Òscar Jordà                                    Moritz Schularick
Economic Research, MS 1130                     University of Bonn
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco          Department of Economics
San Francisco, CA 94105                        Adenauerallee 24-42
and University of California, Davis            53113 Bonn
oscar.jorda@gmail.com                          Germany
                                               and CEPR
Martin Kornejew                                moritz.schularick@uni-bonn.de
University of Bonn
Department of Economics                        Alan M. Taylor
Adenauerallee 24-42                            Department of Economics and
53113 Bonn                                     Graduate School of Management
Germany                                        University of California
m.kornejew@uni-bonn.de                         One Shields Ave
                                               Davis, CA 95616-8578
                                               and CEPR
                                               and also NBER
                                               amtaylor@ucdavis.edu
                                          1. Introduction

In a seminal departure from the classic Modigliani and Miller (1958) theorem on the
irrelevance of the firm's capital structure, Myers (1977) showed that default risk undermines
the incentives to invest for indebted firms. Some projects with positive net present value
will not be realized as equity holders do not benefit in case of default. Debt overhang
may depress any expenditure with delayed returns, such as hiring, training, advertising,
or maintenance (Hennessey, 2004). If these concerns had wide application, then it would
be reasonable to expect that, at the aggregate level, firm debt overhang could propagate,
amplify, and prolong the effects of adverse business cycle shocks (Lamont, 1995; Occhino
and Pescatori, 2015).
    Over the last decade, since the Global Financial Crisis, concerns about the buildup
in corporate debt around the world have grown louder.1 The debt level of the U.S. non-
financial business sector increased by about 20 percentage points relative to GDP and now
stands at a historical high of 130% of GDP (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, 2020). On a global level, corporate debt has also risen strongly, especially in
emerging markets (Abraham, Cortina, and Schmukler, 2020). Many fear that the COVID-19
pandemic has aggravated the situation as emergency lending facilities have pushed business
debt ratios up even higher while earnings have fallen, potentially amplifying the risks from
debt overhang. Consequently, the macroeconomic effects of corporate debt are receiving
greater attention (Brunnermeier and Krishnamurthy, 2020).
    The lessons from the Global Financial Crisis are not easily transferable. Back then,
weakly capitalized banks and stressed household balance sheets were key reasons for
the depth of the recession and the slow recovery after 2008 (Mian and Sufi, 2010; Jord`
                                                                                      a,
Schularick, and Taylor, 2013). Households saddled with mortgage debt needed time to
repair their balance sheets following the housing crash. This time the risks are on the
corporate side, raising a different set of questions about the macroeconomic effects of past
debt accumulation. Does the evidence from the past provide any useful lessons?
    We ask in this paper if large build-ups of corporate debt foreshadow deeper and more
protracted recessions, similar to what happens after household debt booms (Mian, Sufi, and
Verner, 2017). In order to answer this question, we assemble a new long-run dataset covering
business lending by banks and financial markets in 17 advanced economies since the 19th
century. For the pre-WW2 period we mainly have data for bank lending to the business
sector, although, where possible, we have been able to augment this with corporate bond
   1 Throughout this paper, we will use "business debt" and "corporate debt" interchangeably to refer to total
debt of the non-financial corporate and non-corporate sectors.



                                                      1
market data.2 For the post-WW2 period, we rely on bank lending from the Macrohistory
Database (Jord`
              a, Schularick, and Taylor, 2017), hand-collected data from Muller
                                                                          ¨     (2018),
as well as financial accounts and BIS data that capture the growing importance of non-
bank lending channels. 3 Using this data set and modern local projection methods, we
investigate how past corporate credit growth booms, in contrast to household debt booms,
shape cyclical outcomes.
   The empirical literature on corporate debt overhang is mixed. Recent studies with
                                                ¨
European firm-level micro data such as Kalemli-Ozcan, Laeven, and Moreno (2020) and
Popov, Barbiero, and Wolski (2018) find conflicting evidence with respect to the investment
level and efficiency effects of high debt. Inevitably, post-2008 data are tinted by the financial
crisis (Giroud and Mueller, 2017; Kuchler, 2020; Botta, 2020). During this period, investment
may have fallen, not due to overhang, but because impaired banks and other intermediaries
constricted the supply of credit to preserve capital (Chodorow-Reich, 2014). Lang, Ofek, and
Stulz (1996) make a direct empirical link to debt overhang, arguing that lenders cautiously
reduce credit supply if they perceive investment opportunities of levered firms to be bleak.
This can curb firm growth together with, but in principle independent of, shareholders'
incentive to underinvest.
    Our empirical analysis paints a consistent picture instead: in aggregate, there is no
evidence that corporate debt booms result in deeper declines in investment or output, nor
that the economy takes longer to recover than at other times. The growth of corporate
credit during the expansion, the level, and their interaction provide no information about
how the recession and the recovery will turn out to be.
    Our findings echo a venerable theoretical literature. In some models, high levels of debt
may also have positive effects on recession trajectories. For example, under limited liability,
indebted firms might also have an incentive to gamble on otherwise unrealized risky
projects (Admati, Demarzo, Hellwig, and Pfleiderer, 2018). Moreover, when equity holders
have superior information about the economic value of assets, high-value firms are less
likely to issue new equity as the market tends to underprice it. However, under-investment
can then be prevented by debt issuance (Myers and Majluf, 1984). That is, high debt levels
indicate prudent past investment whose after-effects might counteract the adverse effects of
debt overhang at the macro level.
    If corporate credit booms have little effect on the recovery, do they make the economy
more fragile, subject to infrequent but large loses? Like Adrian, Boyarchenko, and Giannone
(2019); Adrian, Grinberg, Liang, and Malik (2018), we investigate how corporate debt
   2 Ourdata cover, if available, debt liabilities of all businesses. In most countries, the share of non-corporate
business debt is a small fraction of corporate debt. See the data section below.
  3 The historical data are available at www.macrohistory.net/data.



                                                        2
buildups affect an economy's tail risk. We measure tail risk using quantile local projections
(see, e.g., Linnemann and Winkler, 2016; Loria, Matthes, and Zhang, 2019; Stolbov and
Shchepeleva, 2020). Again, we find no evidence that this is the case in contrast to non-
corporate, non-financial credit booms, as Adrian, Boyarchenko, and Giannone (2019) and
Adrian, Grinberg, Liang, and Malik (2018) also report. Though striking, these results are
consistent with the earlier work of Giesecke, Longstaff, Schaefer, and Strebulaev (2014),
which focused more narrowly on corporate bonds, and found that default events were only
weakly correlated with business downturns over 150 years of U.S. history.
    On the household side, recent research points to the prolonged economic drag after
household lending booms (Mian, Sufi, and Verner, 2017), and the potentially large effects of
household bankruptcy and debt restructuring (Auclert, Dobbie, and Goldsmith-Pinkham,
2019). So why do corporate debt build-ups have negligible consequences for the macroe-
conomy, and what makes them different from household debt booms?
    On the corporate side, the situation is generally more favorable to a swift resolution of
financial distress for two reasons. First, if the going concern value of the firm is greater than
the market value of assets, both owners and creditors gain from successful restructuring
or reorganization (Fama, 1978; Aivazian and Callen, 1980). There are clear incentives for
both to restructure the debt.4 Yet coordination frictions among many dispersed creditors,
hold-out problems, asymmetric information, weak contract enforcement and other frictions
can make such renegotiation difficult or even prevent it (Gertner and Scharfstein, 1991;
Philippon, 2010). The larger such frictions are, the more sand in the wheels of the process
and the greater the economic cost.
    Second, firm liabilities are ultimately limited by firm assets. When the going concern
value of a firm drops below the market value of assets, liquidation of the firm will ensue,
the excess debt will be erased, and the assets freed up for other productive ends. Yet the
liquidation process too can be more or less inefficient. Poor creditor rights protection, or
costly legal procedures can discourage or delay liquidation. These costs will affect the
behavior of lenders at the margin, making them more likely to avoid the losses and keep
insolvent zombie firms afloat (Caballero, Hoshi, and Kashyap, 2008). Inefficient liquidation
increases the survival probability of zombie firms and their importance at the macro level.
   4 The  possibility of underinvestment provides an incentive for owners and creditors to restructure debt.
Underinvestment pushes the value of the firm below its potential, so that both sides could in principle buy
out the other party and gain from implementing the efficient investment policy (Fama, 1978). Bergman and
Callen (1991) argue that "running down assets" through underinvestment constitutes a credible and effective
threat to bring creditors to the negotiation table. Other theoretical work has qualified underinvestment effects.
Berkovitch and Kim (1990) discuss a range of contractual options for credit agreements to address problems of
underinvestment. Diamond and He (2014) emphasize maturity structure. Repeated interaction with creditors
may provide firms with an incentive to invest prudently even under debt overhang, since a reputation for
maximizing firm value and minimizing default risk will lower risk premia (John and Nachman, 1985).


                                                       3
   Ultimately, corporate financial stress will inflict economic costs to the extent that
restructuring or liquidation frictions lead to deviations from the canonical Modigliani and
Miller (1958) model. Our empirical results indicate that these frictions are less prevalent on
the corporate side than the factors preventing balance sheet reorganization after household
debt booms. As noted by Auclert, Dobbie, and Goldsmith-Pinkham (2019), individual banks
have no interest in restructuring household debt as such policies are beneficial only on the
macro level. For corporate debt, incentives for owners and creditors are often aligned, and
the question is if frictions impede efficient restructuring or liquidation. We can therefore go
one step further and look for evidence in the data that differences in such frictions affect
economic outcomes. The more we move away from a frictionless Modigliani and Miller
(1958) world, the more pronounced the debt overhang problem can be expected to become.
   To confront this question, we build on Djankov, McLiesh, and Shleifer (2007) and
Djankov, Hart, McLiesh, and Shleifer (2010) to quantify institutional frictions to corporate
debt reorganization or liquidation for a subset of business cycles and corporate credit booms
since the 1970s. Moreover, to boost the case that the effects of these institutional differences
by themselves matter, we turn to a local projection instrument variable strategy (LP-IV).
Specifically, we appeal to the exogenous variation of legal origins in the spirit of La Porta,
Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1997, 1998) and La Porta, Lopez-De-Silanes, and
Shleifer (2008) as an instrument for the reorganization frictions. The IV strategy delivers an
answer--it depends. Where institutions encourage efficient restructuring and liquidation,
the drag from business debt booms is small; but in high-friction regimes, the pace of
recovery can be dragged down significantly.
   One can summarize the policy implications of our analysis as follows. Frameworks that
efficiently facilitate the restructuring of debt or liquidation reduce the macroeconomic fall-
out of corporate debt booms. In contrast, more frictions lead to more underinvestment and
survival of zombie firms, which can impair aggregate productivity growth and slow down
the recovery after recessions (Caballero, Hoshi, and Kashyap, 2008; McGowan, Andrews,
Millot, and Beck, 2018).
   We begin the paper by first introducing the dataset. Based on the new data, we then
study how corporate credit booms affect business cycle dynamics. We complement this
analysis by studying how corporate debt booms affect the economy's tail risks. To find
out what explains our results to that point, we then analyze how restructuring costs affect
corporate debt overhang. We conclude by summarizing our findings and providing some
policy relevant observations.




                                               4
                                    2. Data description

The basis for the analysis is a novel long-run dataset on business credit, including bond
market debt and credit from non-bank intermediaries, covering 17 advanced economies
since the nineteenth century.5
   Specifically, for the pre-WW2 period we have been able to construct separate series for
business debt for 9 countries. Data for the U.S. start in 1916 and build on the business sector
debt data calculated by James and Sylla (2006), from which we deduct debt obligations
of financial institutions. For other countries, we calculate bank credit to the non-financial
business sector based on the assets of specialized commercial banks that provide loans
to business and other corporate financing. As an example, for Germany we sum loans
and advances extended to non-banks by joint-stock industrial banks as well as commercial
credit unions. We identify similar proxies for business credit in other countries, as detailed
in the appendix. The new data complement the long-run dataset in Jord`
                                                                     a, Schularick, and
Taylor (2017), from which we take data on household bank credit as well as a long list of
macroeconomic controls, updated to 2019.
   After WW2, we rely on comprehensive measures of business credit provided by the
financial accounts and the Total Credit Database assembled by the Bank of International
Settlements (BIS).6 These include secured and unsecured debt obligations of all maturities
and from all types of lenders in addition to conventional bank lending contracts. Additional
financial accounts data on non-financial business liabilities come from the OECD and
Eurostat databases and individual publications such as Bonci and Coletta (2012) for Italian
data, Roe (1971) and Office for National Statistics (2016) for U.K. data, and Deutsche
Bundesbank (1983) and Deutsche Bundesbank (1994) for German data. All postwar U.S.
data are from the Fed's financial accounts (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, 2020).
   As noted earlier, we use the terms "business debt" and "corporate debt" interchangeably
throughout the paper to refer to all debt liabilities of all firms, whether corporate or
non-corporate. Whenever available, our series include the debt liabilities of non-corporate
businesses as well. Historical sources do not always allow for a clean separation of the two.
Corporate debt is the dominant component. In the U.S., non-corporate businesses account
for only one third of total non-financial business debt outstanding.
   In total, there are 1,717 country-year observations for business sector debt, 480 of which
correspond to the pre-WW2 period. The individual series are plotted in the the appendix,
  5 The  17 advanced economies are the U.S., Japan, Germany, France, U.K., Italy, Canada, Netherlands,
Belgium, Sweden, Australia, Spain, Portugal, Denmark, Switzerland, Finland, Norway.
   6 For details on its construction see Dembiermont, Drehmann, and Muksakunratana (2013).



                                                  5
                                         Figure 1: Business credit/GDP since 1870

                       1.5
 Business credit/GDP




                        1




                        .5




                                                                                                         Average
                                                                                                         Interquartile range
                        0
                             1870              1920                                  1970                                  2020


Notes: The figure shows non-financial business credit over GDP for our sample of 17 advanced economies. Interquartile range shown
as the shaded region. See text.



which also describes details of the construction and underlying sources, including the
materials kindly shared by Muller
                            ¨     (2018). The results presented in the paper always use the
entire dataset, excluding the wartime years of WW1 and WW2. All findings are qualitatively
and quantitatively similar when restricting the data to the post-WW2 period. For brevity,
we place these results in the appendix for the interested reader.
                  In corporate finance, the term "leverage" often refers to the ratio of debt to equity.
However, we will instead focus on the ratio of corporate debt to GDP. The reason is that
several of the episodes that we will investigate involve sudden and dramatic repricing of
assets. Thus, debt and equity could both be shifting at the same time, making the traditional
definition of leverage harder to interpret. By taking the ratio of debt to GDP, one can think
of it as a cash-flow based measure of leverage and hence we will often just denote this ratio
as leverage.
                  Figure 1 shows the evolution of business credit over the full sample, which starts in
1870. The figure plots the cross-country median and the inter-quartile-range of business
credit relative to GDP--our measure of leverage. Historically, business credit has ranged
between 50% and 100% of GDP for most advanced countries. The series trends up before
WW1, before entering a period of high volatility in the interwar years, followed by a sharp
reduction during WW2. Since then, business credit has doubled from about 50% to 100% of
GDP today. Many countries are currently at their highest level in the past 150 years.


                                                               6
   Another aspect of our empirical strategy requires that we identify business cycle turning
points. Here we follow Jord`
                           a, Schularick, and Taylor (2013) and use the Bry and Boschan
(1971) algorithm for all countries. At annual frequency and for the U.S., this algorithm
reproduces almost exactly the NBER's dating. Briefly, the Bry and Boschan (1971) algorithm
dates turning points as local maxima and minima of real GDP per capita data in levels.
Minima are labeled as troughs and maxima as peaks. Recessions go from peak to trough,
expansions from trough to peak.
   Finally, we further separate recessions into two types. We will refer to financial recessions
as those associated with a financial crisis in a ±2 year window around a peak. The rest
are denoted normal recessions. The financial crisis chronology itself is based on the latest
                   a, Schularick, and Taylor (2017) Macrohistory Database.7
version of the Jord`


    3. Do large business credit expansions make recessions worse?

For motivation, we first consider first how business and household credit build-ups during
the expansion correlate with the severity of the recession and the speed of the recovery. As
a first pass the easiest thing is to plot, for each of the 150 business cycles in our dataset,
the scatter of two-year GDP per capita log-difference in the first two years of the recession
(from peak year t to t + 2) against the five-year change in business credit relative to GDP in
the preceding 5 years before the peak (from t ­ 5 to t). This is presented in Figure 2, which
shows that there is no relationship between the two: that is, the depth of the recession does
not depend on how much business credit grew in the preceding expansion.
   Figure 2 is persuasive, but it is too crude in at least two respects. First, it is interesting
to see how the trajectory of the recession is affected by business credit. Do we fail to see a
relationship because high growth of business credit leads to shallower but longer-lasting
recessions? Or perhaps recessions are deeper but with quicker recoveries? Or is it that
recessions come in all shapes and sizes that have nothing to do with business credit?
Second, we may wonder whether the scatter plot is confounded by effects coming from
factors other than business credit, which would require controlling for macroeconomic
aggregates observed before the start of the recession.
   We solve these two issues by estimating the cumulative change in real GDP per capita
from the start of the recession to h periods thereafter using local projections. In particular,
let yit denote log real GDP per capita, multiplied by 100, observed for country i at time t.
Our interest on the trajectory of recessions/recoveries means that we will focus on those
time periods associated with a peak in economic activity and denoted p = 1, . . . , P where the
  7 http://www.macrohistory.net/data/.




                                               7
                                                     Figure 2: Business credit expansions and recession severity



                                         10                                                   DNK1962
                                                                                    SWE1924          SWE1904
                                                                    CAN1903                   SWE1881
                                                                                                FRA1905
                                                                                           ESP1925
                                                                                                 CHE1893
                                                                                         ESP1927
                                                                                               DEU1966
                                                                                             ESP1952
           Change in GDP, t to t+2 (%)

                                                                                          FRA1974


                                                                          ESP1992
                                                                                                                        BEL2011
                                          0                                                                            ESP2007
                                                                                                                      SWE1990
                                                     GBR1979             CAN1891                                       NLD1980
                                                                        NOR1930
                                                                                SWE1930   NOR1876
                                                                           CHE1974   FRA1933 FIN1989
                                                                                                   ITA2007
                                                                                              GBR1929
                                                                            JPN2007                                  IRL2007
                                                                                           CAN1928
                                                                                                       FRA1929

                                         -10                                                ESP1929
                                                                                              CHE1875


                                                                                               USA1929



                                         -20
                                               -.8               -.4             0                 .4                              .8
                                                                Change in business credit/GDP, t-5 to t

Notes: The figure provides the scatter plot and regression fit line of 2-year real GDP per capita growth after business cycle peaks against
business the change in the credit/GDP ratio in the preceding 5 years. Each point is a cyclical peak or start of a recession. See text.



index is understood to be specific to each country and hence it is not expressly indicated to
avoid cluttered notation. Hence, we denote by t = t(p) the time period associated with the
pth recession peak.
     Thus, the outcome variable yit(p)+h ­ yit(p) will (approximately) measure the cumulative
percentage change in real GDP per capita, h horizons after the peak p, where we will
                                                                                                                 j             j   j
display responses up to 5 years out. Using similar notation, 5 xit(p)  xit(p) ­ xit(p)­5 , for
j = B, H , denotes the 5-year change in Business, B, or Household, H, debt measured as
a ratio to GDP. Hence, these variables are predetermined once the recession starts. In
addition, the vector wit(p) summarizes all other macroeconomic variables observed before
the start of the recession. This vector includes the current plus two lagged values of real
GDP growth, inflation, real investment growth, short-term interest rates on government
debt, real household credit growth, and real business credit growth.
     We make one remark. If, under the null, the history of medium-term credit growth
did not matter then the last two credit variables listed above and their lags should be
adequate controls, and should leave no explanatory power for our main variables of interest
     j
5 xit(p) , j = B, H. This is intentional: we set ourselves a higher hurdle over which to show
that recession/recoveries after sustained credit booms are different.


                                                                                    8
   With these variable definitions, we estimate the following local projections (Jord`
                                                                                     a, 2005):

 yit(p)+h ­ yit(p) = h + hi + B    B       H     H
                              h 5 xit(p) +  h 5 xit(p) + h wit(p) + it(p)      for h = 1, . . . , 5 , (1)

where hi are country-fixed effects normalized to sum to zero so that h is the average
percentage change in real GDP per capita after a peak since we demean all regressors by
                                                                    j
their full-sample averages.8 The coefficients of interest are  h for j = B, H, each indicating
how the expected future path of real GDP per capita varies with the behavior of credit (in
the business and household sectors) during the expansion.
                                                j
   We do not interpret the coefficients  h for j = B, H causally since our interest is in
comparing the typical trajectory in a recession/recovery given the behavior of business
versus household credit in the preceding expansion. That said, the predetermined nature of
our variables of interest and our rich set of controls reduce the chances that the differences
could be explained by other factors.


3.1. Baseline results
Table 1 presents estimates of h , B       H                              9
                                  h , and  h from our main specification. Based upon these
coefficient estimates, Figure 3 plots predicted trajectories or responses for the average reces-
sion as well as recessions preceded by a two-standard-deviation (above mean) expansion of
business credit. The peak year is normalized to zero and deviations in subsequent years are
measured in log points times 100 (approximate percentage changes). For comparison, we
also show the responses for a corresponding two-standard-deviation expansion of house-
hold credit. For household credit-to-GDP expansions 5 xH
                                                       it(p) , two standard deviations
amount to 34 percentage points. The corresponding figure for business credit-to-GDP
expansions 5 xBit(p) stands at 14.4 percentage points.
   The results paint a clearer picture than Figure 2. The table presents formal tests, but
Figure 3 makes it unequivocal that the effects of past corporate credit booms (especially
once controlling for other macroeconomic aggregates) are negligible--in the economic
and statistical senses--as compared to household credit booms. Recessions preceded by
household credit expansions are not only deeper, but are followed by significantly slower
recoveries. These findings are very much consistent with the existing evidence in Jord`
                                                                                      a,
Schularick, and Taylor (2013); Reinhart and Rogoff (2014); Bordo and Haubrich (2017), for
example.
  8 Applying    the within transformation but adding sample means on both sides of the equation allows
OLS to estimate h . Demeaning LHS regressors by sample averages prior to estimation yields the desired
interpretation.
   9 Unconditional results are shown in appendix Table A.14.



                                                    9
                                                      Table 1: Credit booms and business cycle responses: local projections, with macro controls

 Dependent variable: Change in real GDP per capita since peak (log ×100)
                                                 (1)        (2)        (3)                                                                    (4)       (5)
                                               h=1        h=2        h=3                                                                    h=4       h=5
  Average cycle h                            -1.66 -1.09             0.36                                                                   1.88      3.95
                                              (0.08)     (0.14)     (0.17)                                                                 (0.24)    (0.34)

                Business credit/GDP expansion 5 xB
                                                 it(p)                                               0.25           2.14    -0.68           0.17      2.75
                                                                                                    (1.13)         (1.56)   (2.38)         (3.81)    (4.21)

                Household credit/GDP expansion 5 xH
                                                  it(p)                                            -5.05       -22.04 -32.90 -43.60 -40.99
                                                                                                   (3.97)       (4.73) (5.55) (8.80) (9.05)

                Macro controls                                                                        Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes       Yes
                B      H
                 h =  h (p-value)                                                                   0.213        0.000        0.000         0.000     0.000
                R2                                                                                  0.15         0.35         0.41          0.44      0.48
                Cycles                                                                            150          150          150           150       149

Notes: Within-estimator, standard errors clustered on countries in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1. Credit expansion
denotes past 5-year change in credit/GDP ratio.




                                                                 Figure 3: Business and household credit, average and +2SD responses

                                                 9          Average cycle path
  Change in real GDP per capita since peak (%)




                                                            2SD Business credit/GDP shock
                                                            2SD Household credit/GDP shock
                                                 6



                                                 3



                                                 0



                                                 -3



                                                 -6


                                                      0                          1           2                      3                 4                 5
                                                                                                 Horizon (years)




Notes: Figures show the predictive effects on growth of a two-SD credit expansion in the five years preceding the recession for business
credit booms (left panels) and household credit booms (right panels). Estimates based on all business cycles in 17 advanced economies
since 1870. Standard errors are clustered at the country level. Shaded areas denote the 95% confidence interval. See text.




                                                                                                   10
   To provide some texture to these results, a 10 percentage points (pps) increase in the
business credit/GDP ratio in the expansion--a considerable rate of growth by historical
standards--is associated with a mildly slower recovery. After 5 years from the start of the
recession, GDP per capita is 3.9% higher rather than the 4.5% observed in more normal
times. In contrast, a 10 pps increase in household debt in the expansion is associated with
dire consequences. The economy barely recovers the level it had at the start of the recession
5 years later. Formal Wald tests confirm that the coefficients on business and household
credit in these local projections are significantly different from one another starting in year
two.
   These results are robust to introducing linear and quadratic time trends as well as to the
exclusion of all recessions after 2007, when many of the countries in our sample experienced
the Global Financial Crisis. Moreover, we examine alternative definitions of our measure
of credit booms during the expansion preceding the recession. In particular, we looked at
three (instead of five) year changes in credit/GDP, three (or five) year growth of real credit,
and the measure proposed by Jord`
                                a, Schularick, and Taylor (2013). All corresponding
estimates are tabulated in the appendix.


3.2. Corporate debt and financial crises
Jord`
    a, Schularick, and Taylor (2013) showed that the more credit built up in the expansion,
the deeper the recession and the slower the recovery, in both normal and financial crisis
recessions. Here we investigate whether it matters what type of credit build up takes place,
business versus household credit, and whether it matters more in financial crises. We
investigate these issues by stratifying the local projections reported in the baseline case as
follows. We classify recessions into two bins as above: "financial" recessions defined as
recessions where a financial crisis occurs within a two-year window, and all other recessions
labeled as "normal" recessions. We then examine how each type of credit build-up, business
versus household, affects the subsequent response path in each type of recession, and with
or without credit booms.
   Figure 4 presents the results of this analysis. Here, panel (a) shows the results for
business credit, and panel (b) for household credit. In both cases, as is well-known,
financial recessions are deeper and last longer than normal recessions. The effect of a
business credit boom (characterized by credit growth two standard deviations above the
mean, as before) is essentially zero, economically and statistically speaking. The trajectories
do not change one way or the other. In contrast, the effects are much more sizable when
we look at household credit. A credit boom during the expansion (again, measured by
credit growing two standard deviations above the mean) makes either type of recession

                                              11
 Figure 4: Business and household credit, normal versus financial recessions, average and +2SD responses


                                                                         (a) Business credit                                                                                        (b) Household credit
   Change in real GDP per capita since peak (%)




                                                                                                                        Change in real GDP per capita since peak (%)
                                                                                                                                                                       6
                                                  6

                                                                                                                                                                       3
                                                  3


                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                  0



                                                  -3                                                                                                                   -3



                                                  -6                                                                                                                   -6
                                                       0            1          2          3         4          5                                                            0   1        2          3           4           5
                                                                              Horizon (years)                                                                                           Horizon (years)


                                                           Normal recession path                2SD business credit/GDP shock                                                             2SD household credit/GDP shock
                                                           Financial recession path             2SD busi. credit/GDP shock in fin. crisis                                                 2SD hh. credit/GDP shock in fin. crisis


Notes: Local projections stratified by type of recession. Left panel displays average and two SD business credit growth paths, right
panel displays the same figure but for household credit. All regressions include the full set of macro controls and country fixed effects.
Standard errors clustered by country. Shaded areas denote the 95% confidence interval. See text.



worse economically speaking. The effects may even be somewhat larger in a financial crisis,
although the uncertainty bands are large enough to prevent any forceful conclusions on
this issue.


3.3. The macroeconomic effects of credit booms
We have seen how debt booms relate to the business cycle as measured by real GDP per
capita. In this section we investigate a variety of other macro-financial variables. This
should give us a better sense of the underlying channels.
                             Using a similar approach to Figure 3, in Figure 5 we display the responses of other
key indicators, as follows. Panels (a) and (b) of Figure 5 show the responses of real
consumption and real investment per capita, two important components of GDP. Panels (c)
and (d) display the unemployment rate and inflation, respectively, two key variables in any
analysis of monetary policy. Panels (e) and (f) display the evolution of real household and
business credit to get a sense of frictions that may impede the recovery and hence justify
the dynamics that we observe for GDP. Finally, panels (g) and (h) show predictions for asset
prices.10
  10 All local projections underlying the figures are presented in tabular form in the appendix. They include
the full set of macro economic controls. The left-hand side variable, as before, refers to the cumulative change
since the cycle peak. All experiments refer to a credit boom 2 standard deviations above the historical mean.


                                                                                                                   12
   Generally speaking, corporate credit booms do not depress aggregate demand--whether
consumption, or more interestingly, investment. This is in stark contrast to a household
credit boom, whose effects are particularly visible in investment. A possible explanation
as to why investment is relatively insensitive to a corporate boom is that firms may shift
to other internal sources of financing, i.e., equity instead of debt. Covas and Den Haan
(2011) document that for large firms, equity issuance is countercyclical while debt take-up
is procyclical. Another alternative explanation is that, although business credit declines
(as shown in panel (e)), lower business credit may simply reflect debt restructurings and
haircuts since our data are aggregated.
   The effects on the unemployment rate and inflation are consistent with the behavior of
consumption and investment, though they are measured more imprecisely. Nevertheless,
a credit boom generally results in higher unemployment and lower inflation than in the
average recession. Thus, a recession that follows a boom in credit, especially household
credit, appears to require stronger monetary support with apparently little cost to inflation.
   Panels (e) and (f) of Figure 5 show the aftermath in credit markets. Echoing Jord`
                                                                                    a,
Schularick, and Taylor (2013), household credit booms are followed by a long period of
household deleveraging, which in turn is consistent with depressed aggregate demand,
as panels (a) to (d) indicate. Business credit also grows significantly slower after business
credit booms, requiring a similar period of financial repair. And this is true even if the boom
takes place in the household sector. The same cannot be said as strongly for household
credit. A business credit boom has much less effect on it, and it recovers more rapidly.
   Finally, we investigated asset price behavior, reported in panels (g) and (h). We find
that both house and stock prices are more negatively affected after household credit booms
as compared to business credit booms. Declining housing wealth and falling residential
investment seem to have been an important catalyst for the toxic general equilibrium spiral
of household credit reported by Mian and Sufi (2010) for the U.S. after 2008.


                   4. Tail risks: quantile local projections

In the second of the three main questions we set out to answer--Does corporate debt make
severe recessions dramatically worse?--we take inspiration from recent research by Adrian,
Boyarchenko, and Giannone (2019) and Jord`
                                         a, Schularick, and Taylor (2020). They suggest
that GDP growth exhibits fat-tailed behavior, that is, the lower quantiles of the GDP growth
distribution contain potentially extreme losses. Recall that earlier we found no evidence of
corporate debt overhang, on average. Thus, to investigate whether corporate debt makes
the worst recessions have very extreme declines, we estimate quantile local projections (see,


                                              13
                                            Figure 5: Business and household credit, responses of various macro-financial variables


                                                    (a) Real consumption p.c.                                                              (b) Real investment p.c.
    Change since peak (%)




                                                                                                       Change since peak (%)
                                    10                                                                                         10
                                                                                                                                0
                                        5
                                                                                                                               -10
                                                                                                                               -20
                                        0
                                                                                                                               -30
                                    -5                                                                                         -40
                                                0    1           2         3              4   5                                      0     1        2         3        4   5
                                                                Horizon (years)                                                                    Horizon (years)


                                                            (c) Unemployment                                                                          (d) CPI
    Change since peak (pct. pts.)




                                                                                                       Change since peak (%)
                                    8                                                                                          15
                                    6
                                                                                                                               10
                                    4
                                    2                                                                                           5

                                    0                                                                                           0
                                            0       1            2         3              4   5                                      0     1        2         3        4   5
                                                                Horizon (years)                                                                    Horizon (years)


                                                    (e) Real household credit                                                              (f) Real business credit
    Change since peak (%)




                                                                                                       Change since peak (%)




                                    20                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                                10
                                    10
                                                                                                                                 0
                                        0
                                                                                                                               -10
                                    -10                                                                                        -20
                                    -20                                                                                        -30
                                                0       1        2         3              4   5                                      0     1        2         3        4   5
                                                                Horizon (years)                                                                    Horizon (years)


                                                            (g) Real house prices                                                              (h) Real stock prices
    Change since peak (%)




                                                                                                       Change since peak (%)




                                        0                                                                                      40
                                    -10                                                                                        20
                                    -20                                                                                         0
                                    -30                                                                                        -20
                                    -40                                                                                        -40
                                                0       1        2         3              4   5                                      0     1        2         3        4   5
                                                                Horizon (years)                                                                    Horizon (years)


                                                                     Average cycle path                                   2SD Business credit/GDP shock
                                                                                                                          2SD Household credit/GDP shock



Notes: The figure shows responses to a two-SD credit expansion in the five years preceding the recession for business credit booms on
 the left and household credit booms on the right of each panel. The sample includes all business cycles in 17 advanced economies
         since 1870. Standard errors clustered at the country level. Shaded areas denote the 95% confidence interval. See text.




                                                                                                  14
e.g., Linnemann and Winkler, 2016; Adrian, Boyarchenko, and Giannone, 2019; Stolbov and
Shchepeleva, 2020). Specifically, we examine how corporate debt affects the distribution of
GDP per capita growth conditional on observables.
  Denote h yit(p)+h = yit(p)+h ­ yit(p) , that is, the approximate cumulative growth rate of
GDP per capita using the same notation of the previous section. Let X it(p) collect the credit
                                         j
growth variables defined earlier (5 xit(p) , j = B, H), as well as the vector of macro controls,
wit(p) , the constant, and the fixed effects. Given this setup, quantile local projections can be
estimated based on

                   t(P)
   ^h, = argmin
                           1(h yit(p)+h  X it(p) h, )|h yit(p)+h ­ X it(p) h, |
             h,      1

                           + (1 ­  ) 1(h yit(p)+h < X it(p) h, )|h yit(p)+h ­ X it(p) h, |   ,   (2)

where 1( . ) denotes the indicator function and   (0, 1) indicates the  th quantile. The
quantile of h yit(p)+h conditional on X it(p) is then given by

                           Q h yit(p)+h |X it(p)    = X it(p) h,  qh
                                                                    ,t .                         (3)

The coefficients h, measure the effect of the right-hand side variables on the  quantile
of the conditional distribution of h yit(p)+h . Specifically, using notation analogous to that
in Equation 1, the coefficient B
                               h, will measure the effect of a corporate debt boom on the
conditional distribution of h yit(p)+h , and similarly for household debt with the coefficient
Hh, . Hence, note that these coefficients will vary depending on the quantile  selected.
   Our approach to calculating quantile local projections is completely parallel to the way
one usually computes local projections at the mean, as we did in Equation 1. The only
difference is that we are now dealing with a nonlinear model so the marginal effect of a
change in corporate (household) debt has to be evaluated accordingly. However, this simple
setup admits these nonlinear effects in an unspecified, flexible manner.
   Figure 6 shows how we apply these methods to our data. In particular, we focus on the
20th percentile of the conditional distribution of GDP per capita growth to investigate tail
events. We did not choose a smaller quantile so as to have a reasonable sample of data for
estimation. The figure displays quantile local projections alongside typical local projections
evaluated at the mean. We display two cases, one for corporate debt, and one for household
debt booms. These are defined as before, comparing the debt growth at the historical mean
against growth at a rate 2 standard deviations above the historical mean. Consider first
the figure associated with a corporate debt boom. The marginal effect of a corporate debt


                                                   15
                                         Figure 6: Business and household credit, responses at 20th percentile of real GDP per capita growth

                                                10        Average cycle path
 Change in real GDP per capita since peak (%)



                                                          2SD Business credit/GDP shock
                                                          2SD Household credit/GDP shock


                                                 5




                                                 0




                                                 -5




                                                -10

                                                      0                        1           2                     3       4                     5
                                                                                               Horizon (years)

Notes: Figures show the predictive effects on growth of a two-SD business/household credit buildup in the five years preceding the
recession based on a LP series of quantile regressions. Business credit booms shown in the left-hand side panel and household credit
booms shown in the right-hand side panel. Shaded areas denote the 95% confidence interval based on bootstrap replications. See text.



boom on the recovery path is the same whether considering the average growth path or
the path of the 20th percentile worst recessions. In contrast, a household debt boom of a
similar magnitude affects the worst 20th percentile recession paths very differently than the
mean path: household debt booms increase the risk of experiencing a bad recession. These
results therefore align well with Adrian, Boyarchenko, and Giannone (2019).


                                                5. Inspecting the mechanism: the costs of debt restructuring

The analysis thus far highlights a striking dichotomy: household debt booms have much
stronger cyclical implications than corporate debt booms. One possible explanation is the
legal difference between the two types of debt: household debt is owed by individuals, busi-
ness debt is owed by abstract legal entities, which makes for different incentive structures
(Jensen and Meckling, 1976). The liabilities of businesses are limited by their assets, thereby
shielding the wealth of equity holders. Thus, recessions may darken business prospects, but
by shrinking assets they effectively reduce business liabilities. In addition, a common desire
to protect any "going concern" value of a business acts as a powerful incentive to resolve
corporate distress in a reasonable and expeditious manner. And of course, businesses
can try to finance through issuing more equity, an option not available to households.
Households face a very different environment. In a recession households see incomes


                                                                                                16
decline yet their debts remain unchanged. Consumer debt exemptions and protections are
hard-coded in the law--if any--and tend to be flimsy (Niemi-Kiesil¨
                                                                  ainen, 1997; Mitman,
2016). Creditors cannot of course secure a claim to human capital, and recourse provisions
can drive the pursuit of recoveries like wage garnishments. Such settlements can take
a long time to work out and even longer to fulfill and escape. Here debt overhang can
cast a longer, darker shadow. Agarwal, Amromin, Ben-David, Chomsisengphet, Piskorski,
and Seru (2016) and Auclert, Dobbie, and Goldsmith-Pinkham (2019), among others, have
highlighted the importance of debt relief for aggregate demand management.
   An implication from this literature is that efficient debt resolution is crucial to prevent
debt overhang and zombie firms following a corporate debt boom. A corollary is that
variations in the efficiency of the institutions will modulate the costs of debt booms. The
harder it is to restructure debt, the worse the corporate debt overhang is likely to be.
Similarly, liquidation with high deadweight costs grow the population of zombie firms
at the margin. In this section, we examine these ideas more carefully. We aim to get to a
more granular empirical differentiation between a world of Myers (1977) and large-cost
liquidation and the frictionless Modigliani and Miller (1958) benchmark view where debt
overhang and zombie firms should not arise. While these are substantively firm-level
questions, we are interested in tracing out their aggregate macroeconomic implications.
   We put these ideas to work with an analysis of the 1978­2019 period by assessing how
measures of efficient debt restructuring and business liquidation modulate the responses
that we calculated earlier. That is, for a recession preceded by corporate debt built-up, do
frictions impeding restructuring and liquidation slow down the recovery? To measure the
characteristics of these legal procedures we draw on the creditor rights indicator of Djankov,
McLiesh, and Shleifer (2007) which spans the years 1978­2003. This measure codes legal
norms regarding creditors' ability to extract--and present owners from channeling off--
assets in case of bankruptcy. Strong protection of creditor claims reduces the possibility that
firms owners can withhold assets in bankruptcy, which would weaken owner's incentives
to negotiate a restructuring. Moreover, strong creditor protection decreases liquidation costs
for creditors, reducing their incentives to keep zombie firms afloat. We extend this series
using World Bank survey data collected using the methodology of Djankov, Hart, McLiesh,
and Shleifer (2010) for the later period 2004­2019. They asked practitioners to characterize
national insolvency proceedings and reports various measures of legal efficiency. The
recovery rate measures the share of debt paid to creditors in the event of default. A high
recovery rate reflects both low frictions in restructuring as well as liquidations.11
  11 The results are very similar when using other indicators provided by the survey: insolvency procedure
cost, insolvency procedure time, or two further summary measures--the resolution score and overall strength
of the bankruptcy procedure.


                                                    17
   To maximize sample size, we seek to combine the two indicators into a single series. To
do this, we transform each series by using the deciles of the distribution over each sample
into a discretely-valued variable, Lit , that takes on values from 1 to 10 to refer to each
decile.12 Thus, when the indicator takes the value of one, this refers to a country-year pair
that has among the highest frictions impeding restructuring and liquidation. With this new
indicator, the data cover the full time span from 1978 to 2019, totaling 65 business cycles
from all 17 countries in our sample.
    Using the new variable Lit , we can modulate the effect of business credit expansion
 5 xB                                                                         BL      B
    it on the recession with an interaction term. To ease exposition, define xit = 5 xit × Lit .
Using this new variable, we now specify the local projection in Equation 1 as

             h yit(p)+h = h + hi + BL BL      H     H       B     B
                                   h xit(p) +  h 5 xit(p) +  h 5 xit(p) + h wit(p) + eit(p) .                (4)

Impulse responses estimated for the 1978­2019 period with OLS for Equation 4 are shown
in Figure 7a. The figure shows the recession path as a function of corporate debt 2 standard
deviations above the mean in the preceding 5-years modulated by whether bankruptcy
procedures are "high-friction" (i.e., Lit = 1), or "low-friction" (i.e., Lit = 10).
   This figure makes the point quite strikingly. The harder it is to restructure of liquidate the
more protracted and incomplete the recovery. In fact, for the least efficient cases, a preceding
corporate debt boom has nearly the same effects on the recovery path as a preceding
household debt boom. Institutional frictions can therefore have substantial macroeconomic
effects and possibly explain why there is such a difference between household and corporate
debt buildups.
   However, the institutions of insolvency responds, to some extent, to a country's economic
experience as legal systems have evolved alongside society. Hence, a reason for concern
is that unobserved factors, independently affecting legal and economic institutions, could
create a spurious statistical link between insolvency frictions and recession trajectories.
We try to address these concerns using instrumental variable local projections, or LP-IV.
Specifically, we instrument the friction indicator using differences in the legal traditions
across countries.
   In particular, we follow an established literature and distinguish traditions of civil law
and common law. The civil law traditions originate in Roman law, but they then morphed
into different European varieties under the influence of gradual or drastic change such as
the French Revolution. By contrast, the British common law tradition is associated with legal
principles of private dispute resolution with less public control (La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,
  12 The   results are virtually unchanged when varying the number of quantiles used to partition the indicators.



                                                        18
                                                   Figure 7: Frictions to restructuring and liquidation make the corporate debt overhang worse


                                                                                     (a) OLS estimates modulated by bankruptcy costs

                                                 10         Average cycle path
  Change in real GDP per capita since peak (%)




                                                            2SD Business credit/GDP shock, low-cost bankruptcy regime
                                                            2SD Business credit/GDP shock, high-cost bankruptcy regime


                                                   5




                                                   0




                                                  -5




                                                 -10

                                                        0                        1                       2                      3            4   5
                                                                                                             Horizon (years)



                                                                       (b) Friction indicators instrumented by the type of legal tradition

                                                  15        Average cycle path
                                                            2SD Business credit/GDP shock, low-cost bankruptcy regime
  Change in real GDP since peak (percent)




                                                            2SD Business credit/GDP shock, high-cost bankruptcy regime


                                                 7.5




                                                   0




                                                 -7.5




                                                 -15


                                                        0                        1                       2                      3            4   5
                                                                                                              Horizon (years)



Notes: Both panels show the responses of a 2-SD expansion in business credit/GDP in the five years preceding a recession. The "high-
friction" institutions refers to Lit = 1 whereas the "low-frictoin" institutions refers to Lit = 10. All estimates are conditional on controls
for contemporaneous and two lags of GDP per capita growth and inflation. Panel (a) is based on OLS estimation of Equation 4. Panel
(b) instruments friction indicators with a dummy for legal tradition, civil or common law. Standard errors are clustered at the country
level. Shaded areas denote the 95% confidence interval. See text.




                                                                                                               19
                            Table 2: Explaining bankruptcy regime quality by legal origin

 Dependent variable: Interaction term xBL
                                       it(p)
                                                                                                                                  (1)
   Instrument zit(p)                                                                                                           -2.55
                                                                                                                               (0.75)

   Business credit/GDP expansion 5 xB
                                    it(p)                                                                                        3.26
                                                                                                                                (0.59)

   Household credit/GDP expansion 5 xH
                                     it(p)                                                                                     -0.14
                                                                                                                               (0.79)

   Macro controls                                                                                                                 Yes
   F statistic                                                                                                                 41.26
   R2                                                                                                                           0.54
   Cycles                                                                                                                      65

Notes: First stage results for LP-IV estimation. Within-estimator, standard errors clustered on countries in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, **
p < 0.05, * p < 0.1. Credit expansion denotes past 5-year change in credit/GDP ratio. Macro controls include contemporaneous and
two lags of GDP per capita growth and inflation.



Shleifer, and Vishny, 1998; Glaeser and Shleifer, 2002). The adoption of either civil or
common law dates back to the 17th and 18th centuries, when revolution, colonalisation and
Napoleonic conquest laid the foundations of legal principles across Europe and America. In
Japan, a variety of German civil law was adopted during extensive reforms under Emperor
Meiji at the end of the 19th century (Djankov, McLiesh, and Shleifer, 2007).
     Most importantly for us, civil and common law traditions differ in their handling of
bankruptcy. Djankov, McLiesh, and Shleifer (2007) and Gamboa-Cavazos and Schneider.
(2007) document that civil law systems rely on frequent interlocutory appeals, leading to
bankruptcy procedures that are more intricate and costly than those under common law.
Based on the coding of legal origins in Djankov, McLiesh, and Shleifer (2007), we instrument
the variable xBL                                                                     B
              it with the interaction of the business credit buildup variable, 5 xit and the
legal origin dummy, dLO                      B     LO                        BL      B
                       it , that is zit = 5 xit × dit is the instrument for xit = 5 xit × Lit .
   The first stage regression of xBL
                                  it(p) on zit(p) and controls for our sample of business cycle
peaks is shown in Table 2. Our instrument is strong, with an F-statistic above 40, and
the sign of the coefficient is significant and consistent with our hypothesis. Common law
traditions result in more efficient resolution of corporate financial distress.
     The results based on estimating Equation 4 with LP-IV are shown in Figure 7b. These
confirm the findings from Figure 7a; although the estimates are slightly less precise the path
differences are even starker. As before, frictions impeding restructuring and liquidation
aggravate the effects of corporate financial distress to the point of making the recession

                                                                   20
trajectory resemble that from a household debt boom. In contrast, efficient institutions
are associated with recession trajectories that resemble normal recession trajectories, even
when there is a preceding large buildup of corporate debt. The differences between the
"high-friction" and "low-friction" bankruptcy trajectories are statistically significant at the
5% level.
   History contains important lessons. Our IV estimates suggest that deep-rooted legal
principles may have a profound impact on how efficiently financial distress from business
debt booms is resolved. It makes one wonder if similarly frictionless debt resolution
procedures were available to individuals, whether household debt booms would also then
be associated with milder recessions.


                                     6. Conclusion

Debt overhang can lead to under-investment by firms. Following Myers (1977), a large
theoretical literature has explored the idea that investment declines for indebted firms
as existing debt holders, not new investors, would be the main beneficiaries from new
investment. In practice, the strength of these effects depends on departures from the
canonical Modigliani and Miller (1958) theorem. How large these departures are in practice,
and how strong the repercussions are from a macro perspective are largely an empirical
question. Our results suggest that, at the aggregate level, corporate debt overhang does not
play an economically or statistically significant role.
   As a first macroeconomic approximation, for the most part we seem to live in a
Modigliani-Miller world when it comes to corporate debt overhang in advanced economies.
Unlike household credit, business debt can be restructured quickly. Damage from debt
overhang is not common. However, the after-effects of business debt booms become more
problematic when debt restructuring and liquidation become more costly. In this situation,
zombie firms are more likely to emerge as high costs of liquidation increase incentive for
banks "extend and pretend" instead of liquidating.
   We used institutional proxies for the costs of balance sheet reorganization to delineate
different institutional environments that make debt reorganization more or less efficient. In
places and times where reorganization and restructuring is inefficient and costly, corporate
debt overhang is an important macroeconomic force that has measurably negative effects at
business cycle frequency.




                                              21
                                          References
Abraham, Facundo, Juan J. Cortina, and Sergio L. Schmukler. 2020. Growth of Global Corporate
 Debt: Main Facts and Policy Challenges. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper Series 9394.

Admati, Anat R., Peter M. Demarzo, Martin F. Hellwig, and Paul Pfleiderer. 2018. The leverage
 ratchet effect. Journal of Finance 73(1): 145­198.

Adrian, Tobias, Nina Boyarchenko, and Domenico Giannone. 2019. Vulnerable Growth. American
 Economic Review 109(4): 1263­1289.

Adrian, Tobias, Federico Grinberg, Nellie Liang, and Sheheryar Malik. 2018. The Term Structure of
 Growth-at-Risk. IMF Working Paper 18/180.

Agarwal, Sumit, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Tomasz Piskorski,
  and Amit Seru. 2016. Policy Intervention in Debt Renegotiation: Evidence from the Home
 Affordable Modification Program. Journal of Political Economy 125(3): 654­712.

Aivazian, Varouj, and Jeffrey L. Callen. 1980. Corporate leverage and growth the game-theoretic
  issues. Journal of Financial Economics 8(4): 379­399.

Auclert, Adrien, Will S. Dobbie, and Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham. 2019. Macroeconomic Effects of Debt
  Relief: Consumer Bankruptcy Protections in the Great Recession. NBER Working Paper 25685.

Bergman, Yaacov, and Jeffrey Callen. 1991. Opportunistic underinvestment in debt renegotiation
  and capital structure. Journal of Financial Economics 29: 137­171.

Berkovitch, Elazar, and E. Han Kim. 1990. Financial Contracting and Leverage Induced Over- and
  Under-Investment Incentives. Journal of Finance 45(3): 765­794.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2020. Financial Accounts of the United States ­
  Z.1. https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/z1/.

Bonci, Riccardo, and Massimo Coletta. 2012. Italy's Financial Accounts since 1950. Available at
  SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2120474.

Bordo, Michael D., and Joseph G. Haubrich. 2017. Deep Recessions, Fast Recoveries, and Financial
  Crises: Evidence from the American Record. Economic Inquiry 55(1): 527­541.

Botta, Marco. 2020. Financial crises, debt overhang, and firm growth in transition economies. Applied
  Economics 52(40): 4333­4350.

Brunnermeier, Markus, and Arvind Krishnamurthy. 2020. The Macroeconomics of Corporate Debt.
  The Review of Corporate Finance Studies 9(3): 656­665.

Bry, Gerhard, and Charlotte Boschan. 1971. Cyclical Analysis of Time Series: Selected Procedures and
  Computer Programs. New York: NBER.

Caballero, Ricardo J., Takeo Hoshi, and Anil K. Kashyap. 2008. Zombie Lending and Depressed
  Restructuring in Japan. American Economic Review 98(5): 1943­77.

Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel. 2014. The Employment Effects of Credit Market Disruptions: Firm-Level
  Evidence from the 2008-9 Financial Crisis. Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(1): 1­59.

                                                 22
Covas, Francisco, and Wounter Den Haan. 2011. The Cyclical Behavior of Debt and Equity Finance.
  American Economic Review 101(2): 877­899.

Dembiermont, Christian, Mathias Drehmann, and Siriporn Muksakunratana. 2013. How much does
  the private sector really borrow - a new database for total credit to the private non-financial sector.
  BIS Quarterly Review .

Deutsche Bundesbank. 1983. Revidierte Ergebnisse der gesamtwirtschaftlichen Finanzierungs- und
  Geldvermogensrechnung
           ¨               fur
                            ¨ die Jahre 1950­1959. Hauptabteilung Volkswirtschaft, Deutsche
  Bundesbank, Frankfurt. Technical Report.

Deutsche Bundesbank. 1994. Ergebnisse der gesamtwirtschaftlichen Finanzierungsrechnung fur
                                                                                        ¨
 Westdeutschland 1960­1992. Hauptabteilung Volkswirtschaft, Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt.
  Technical Report.

Diamond, Douglas W., and Zhiguo He. 2014. A Theory of Debt Maturity: The Long and Short of
  Debt Overhang. Journal of Finance 69(2): 719­762.

Djankov, Simeon, Oliver Hart, Caralee McLiesh, and Andrei Shleifer. 2010. Debt Enforcement around
  the World. Journal of Political Economy 116(6): 1105­1149.

Djankov, Simeon, Caralee McLiesh, and Andrei Shleifer. 2007. Private Credit in 129 Countries.
  Journal of Financial Economics 12(2): 77­99.

Fama, Eugene F. 1978. The Effects of a Firm's Investment and Financing Decisions on the Welfare of
  Its Security Holders. American Economic Review 68(3): 272­284.

Gamboa-Cavazos, Mario, and Frank Schneider. 2007. Bankruptcy as a legal process. Available at
  SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=979614.

Gertner, Robert, and David Scharfstein. 1991. A Theory of Workouts and the Effects of Reorganization
  Law. Journal of Finance 46(4): 1189­1222.

Giesecke, Kay, Francis A. Longstaff, Stephen Schaefer, and Ilya A. Strebulaev. 2014. Macroeconomic
  effects of corporate default crisis: A long-term perspective. Journal of Financial Economics 111(2):
  297­310.

Giroud, Xavier, and Holger M. Mueller. 2017. Firm Leverage, Consumer Demand, and Employment
  Losses during the Great Recession. Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(1): 271­316.

Glaeser, Edward L., and Andrei Shleifer. 2002. Legal Origins. Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(4):
  1193­1229.

Hennessey, Christopher A. 2004. Tobin's Q, Debt Overhang, and Investment. Journal of Finance 59(4):
 1717­1742.

James, John A., and Richard Sylla. 2006. Debt and Flow of Funds. In Historical Statistics of the United
  States, edited by Carter, Susan B., Scott Sigmund Gartner, Michael R. Haines, Alan L. Olmstead,
  Richard Sutch, and Gavin Wright, 3/774­3/776. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Jensen, Michael, and William H. Meckling. 1976. Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency
  costs and ownership structure. Journal of Financial Economics 3(4): 305­360.


                                                  23
John, Kose, and David C. Nachman. 1985. Risky Debt, Investment Incentives, and Reputation in a
  Sequential Equilibrium. Journal of Finance 40(3): 863­878.

Jord`  `
    a, Oscar. 2005. Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections. American
  Economic Review 95(1): 161­182.

Jord`  `
    a, Oscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. 2013. When Credit Bites Back. Journal of Money,
  Credit and Banking 45(2): 3­28.

Jord`  `
    a, Oscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. 2017. Macrofinancial History and the New
  Business Cycle Facts. In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2016, edited by Eichenbaum, Martin, and
  Jonathan A. Parker. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Jord`  `
    a, Oscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. 2020. Disasters Everywhere: The Costs of
  Business Cycles Reconsidered. NBER Working Paper 26962.
        ¨
Kalemli-Ozcan,  Sebnem, Luc Laeven, and David Moreno. 2020. Debt overhang, rollover risk and
  corporate investment: Evidence from the European crisis. ECB Working Paper 2241.

Kuchler, Andreas. 2020. Leverage, Investment, and Recovery from a Financial Crisis: The Role of
  Debt Overhang. Studies in Economics and Finance 37(1): 143­159.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-De-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2008. The Economic Consequences
  of Legal Origins. Journal of Economic Literature 46(2): 285­332.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. 1997. The Legal
  Determinants of External Finance. Journal of Finance 52(3): 1131­1150.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. 1998. Law and
  Finance. Journal of Political Economy 106(6): 1113­1155.

Lamont, Owen. 1995. Corporate debt overhang and macroeconomic expectations. American Economic
  Review 85(5): 1106­1117.

Lang, Larry, Eli Ofek, and Rene M. Stulz. 1996. Leverage, Investment, and Firm Growth. Journal of
  Financial Economics 40(1): 3­29.

Linnemann, Ludger, and Roland Winkler. 2016. Estimating nonlinear effects of fiscal policy using
  quantile regression methods. Oxford Economic Papers 68(4): 1120­1145.

Loria, Francesca, Christian Matthes, and Donghai Zhang. 2019. Assessing macroeconomic tail risk.
  Federal Reserve Board Finance and Economics Discussion Paper 2019-026.

McGowan, Muge
          ¨ Adalet, Dan Andrews, Valentine Millot, and Thorsten Beck. 2018. The walking
 dead? Zombie firms and productivity performance in OECD countries. Economic Policy 33(96):
 685­736.

Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2010. Household Leverage and the Recession of 2007­09. IMF Economic
 Review 58(1): 74­117.

Mian, Atif, Amir Sufi, and Emil Verner. 2017. Household Debt and Business Cycles Worldwide.
 Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(4): 1755­1817.


                                                24
Mitman, Kurt. 2016. Macroeconomic Effects of Bankruptcy and Foreclosure Policies. American
 Economic Review 106(8): 2219­2250.

Modigliani, Franco, and Merton H. Miller. 1958. The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance and the
 Theory of Investment. American Economic Review 48(3): 261­297.

Muller,
 ¨      Karsten. 2018. Credit Markets around the World, 1910­2014.              Available at SSRN:
 https://ssrn.com/abstract=3259636.

Myers, Stewart C. 1977. Determinants of corporate borrowing. Journal of Financial Economics 5(2):
 147­175.

Myers, Stewart C., and Nicholas S. Majluf. 1984. Corporate financing and investment decisions when
 firms have information that investors do not have. Journal of Financial Economics 13(2): 187­221.

Niemi-Kiesil¨
            ainen, Johanna. 1997. Changing Directions in Consumer Bankruptcy Law and Practice
  in Europe and USA. Journal of Consumer Policy 20: 133­142.

Occhino, Filippo, and Andrea Pescatori. 2015. Debt overhang in a business cycle model. European
  Economic Review 73(C): 58­84.

Office for National Statistics. 2016. Pre-ESA95 financial accounts and balance sheets. Data retrieved
  from https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/nationalaccounts/uksectoraccounts.

Philippon, Thomas. 2010. Debt Overhang and Recapitalization in Closed and Open Economies. IMF
  Economic Review 58(1): 157­178.

Popov, Alexander, Francesca Barbiero, and Marcin Wolski. 2018. Debt overhang and investment
  efficiency. ECB Working Paper 2213.

Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2014. Recovery from Financial Crises: Evidence from
  100 Episodes. American Economic Review 104(5): 50­55.

Roe, Alan. 1971. The financial interdependence of the UK economy 1957­66. London: Chapman & Hall.

Stolbov, Mikhail, and Maria Shchepeleva. 2020. Macrofinancial linkages in Europe: Evidence from
  quantile local projections. International Journal of Finance & Economics forthcoming.




                                                 25
                                         ONLINE APPENDIX

                                         A. Business cycle peaks
As described in the text, we date business cycle peaks using the algorithm of Bry and Boschan (1971).
Moreover, we characterize the ensuing recession to be "financial" when the peak falls into a ±2-year
window around a financial crisis dated by Jord`   a, Schularick, and Taylor (2017). Table A.1 shows
business cycle peaks followed by normal recession and not falling into any war episode. Table A.2
shows business cycle peaks followed by normal recession and not falling into any war episode. Both
types of peaks are also visualized in Figure A.1.

                    Table A.1: List of business cycle peaks followed by normal recessions

             Australia     1961, 1973, 1976, 1981, 2008
              Belgium      1957, 1974, 1980, 1992, 2011
               Canada      1891, 1894, 1903, 1928, 1953, 1956, 1981, 1989, 2007
             Denmark       1880, 1887, 1931, 1962, 1973, 1979, 1992, 2011
               Finland     1957, 1975, 2008, 2011
                 France    1905, 1907, 1926, 1933, 1974, 1992, 2011
             Germany       1898, 1905, 1908, 1966, 1974, 1980, 1992, 2001
                Ireland    1955, 1974, 1982
                   Italy   1974, 2002, 2011
                  Japan    1973, 2001, 2007
           Netherlands     1957, 1974, 1980, 2001, 2011
              Norway       1876, 1881, 1885, 1893, 1902, 1957, 1981, 2007, 2012
              Portugal     1973, 1982, 1992, 2002, 2010
                  Spain    1927, 1952, 1958, 1980, 1992
               Sweden      1876, 1881, 1883, 1885, 1888, 1890, 1899, 1901, 1904, 1924, 1980, 2011
           Switzerland     1875, 1880, 1886, 1890, 1893, 1899, 1902, 1906, 1933, 1951, 1957, 1974, 1981, 1994, 2001, 2011
                     UK    1896, 1899, 1902, 1907, 1925, 1929, 1951, 1957, 1979
                   USA     1926, 1953, 1957, 1969, 1973, 1979, 1981, 1990, 2000




                   Table A.2: List of business cycle peaks followed by financial recessions

                                            Australia     1989
                                             Belgium      2007
                                              Canada      1907
                                            Denmark       1883, 1987, 2007
                                              Finland     1989
                                                France    1929, 2007
                                            Germany       1890, 2008
                                               Ireland    2007, 2010
                                                  Italy   1992, 2007
                                                 Japan    1997
                                          Netherlands     2008
                                             Norway       1897, 1930, 1987
                                             Portugal     2008
                                                 Spain    1925, 1929, 2007
                                              Sweden      1879, 1907, 1930, 1990, 2007
                                          Switzerland     1929, 1990, 2008
                                                    UK    1889, 1973, 1990, 2007
                                                  USA     1929, 2007




                                                               A1
            Figure A.1: Business cycle peaks followed by financial and normal recessions



            Australia                 Belgium                      Canada                   Denmark
5

4

3

2

1

            Finland                    France                     Germany                    Ireland
5

4

3

2

1

              Italy                    Japan                     Netherlands                Norway
5

4

3

2

1

            Portugal                   Spain                       Sweden                  SwiHerland
5

4

3

2

1
                                                          1870   1920   1970   2020 1870   1920   1970   2020

              UK                        USA
5

4

3

2

1
    1870   1920   1970   2020 1870   1920   1970   2020



                              Log real GDP

                              Business cycle peak
                              Business cycle peak followed by financial recession



                                                    A2
                            B. Macroeconomic environment
We show regression tables for the plots in the main text and additional impulse responses (without
tables), all conditional on the usual set of controls.

                               Table A.3: Change in log real consumption

                                                    (1)       (2)          (3)         (4)        (5)
                                                  h=1       h=2          h=3         h=4        h=5
 Average cycle                                     -0.02   1.53         2.78        5.23       7.47
                                                  (0.18)    (0.16)       (0.19)      (0.30)     (0.30)

 Business credit/GDP expansion 5 xB
                                  it(p)           -2.79      1.22        -0.97        -1.94      -2.02
                                                  (1.93)    (2.00)      (2.62)       (2.84)     (3.88)

 Household credit/GDP expansion 5 xH
                                   it(p)          -1.14    -13.77     -22.22        -35.88     -42.96
                                                  (3.93)    (5.64)      (4.95)        (7.81)     (7.43)

 Macro controls                                    Yes       Yes             Yes      Yes        Yes
 B      H
  h =  h (p-value)                                0.725     0.024           0.001    0.002      0.000
 R2                                               0.23      0.29            0.42     0.38       0.36
 Cycles                                            150       150             150      150        149
 Within-estimator, standard errors clustered on countries in parentheses.
 *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                                   A3
                               Table A.4: Change in log real investment

                                                   (1)         (2)            (3)        (4)          (5)
                                                  h=1         h=2            h=3        h=4          h=5
Average cycle                                   -4.09       -6.66          -8.47      -7.12         -3.12
                                                 (0.36)      (0.71)         (1.08)     (1.25)       (1.48)

Business credit/GDP expansion 5 xB
                                 it(p)             3.24       5.36          9.59       10.12         12.46
                                                  (5.28)     (7.97)        (11.02)    (13.21)       (14.14)

Household credit/GDP expansion 5 xH
                                  it(p)           -16.33    -75.14      -122.73      -144.57      -133.24
                                                 (12.12)     (26.25)      (37.97)      (35.32)      (33.35)

Macro controls                                     Yes        Yes            Yes        Yes          Yes
B      H
 h =  h (p-value)                                 0.133      0.011          0.006      0.002        0.002
R2                                                0.28       0.37           0.35       0.43         0.46
Cycles                                             150        150            150        150          149
Within-estimator, standard errors clustered on countries in parentheses.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                               Table A.5: Change in unemployment rate

                                                     (1)         (2)          (3)       (4)         (5)
                                                   h=1         h=2          h=3       h=4         h=5
Average cycle                                     1.21        2.24         2.88      2.87        2.94
                                                   (0.28)      (0.41)       (0.51)    (0.69)      (0.88)

Business credit/GDP expansion 5 xB
                                 it(p)              0.28       -0.40        -0.80     -0.86      -1.04
                                                   (0.99)      (2.50)       (3.40)    (3.98)     (4.22)

Household credit/GDP expansion 5 xH
                                  it(p)            -0.42        5.74        12.50    16.17       14.47
                                                   (3.06)      (6.44)       (7.98)   (8.36)      (8.47)

Macro controls                                      Yes         Yes          Yes       Yes         Yes
B      H
 h =  h (p-value)                                  0.837       0.410        0.177     0.126       0.141
R2                                                 0.39        0.23         0.35      0.35        0.34
Cycles                                              112         113          113       113         112
Within-estimator, standard errors clustered on countries in parentheses.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                                  A4
                             Table A.6: Change in log real household credit

                                                     (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)         (5)
                                                   h=1         h=2           h=3          h=4         h=5
Average cycle                                     3.45        8.14          13.60        18.32       22.17
                                                   (0.23)      (0.45)        (0.52)       (0.69)      (0.98)

Business credit/GDP expansion 5 xB
                                 it(p)          -13.96       -32.54         -43.08       -38.77      -36.26
                                                  (3.68)       (9.53)        (11.00)      (16.44)     (15.67)

Household credit/GDP expansion 5 xH
                                  it(p)            -15.40     -32.50         -83.22     -137.02     -166.99
                                                  (15.63)     (34.43)        (40.81)     (49.08)      (43.73)

Macro controls                                      Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes
B      H
 h =  h (p-value)                                  0.938       0.999          0.420       0.109        0.023
R2                                                  0.28        0.29           0.37       0.33         0.40
Cycles                                              149         149            149         149          146
Within-estimator, standard errors clustered on countries in parentheses.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                             Table A.7: Change in log real business credit

                                                     (1)        (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)
                                                   h=1        h=2           h=3         h=4          h=5
Average cycle                                     3.02       5.41          7.69        10.22        14.93
                                                   (0.28)     (0.46)        (0.57)      (0.77)       (1.02)

Business credit/GDP expansion 5 xB
                                 it(p)          -17.69       -24.80         -24.27       -34.15       -43.74
                                                  (4.28)      (11.13)      (18.70)      (23.80)      (31.74)

Household credit/GDP expansion 5 xH
                                  it(p)             8.03       -21.86      -73.06      -115.89      -184.01
                                                  (10.35)     (18.72)       (27.36)      (36.51)      (42.89)

Macro controls                                      Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
B      H
 h =  h (p-value)                                  0.042       0.900        0.178        0.097        0.027
R2                                                  0.39        0.35         0.27         0.28         0.31
Cycles                                              149         149          149          149          148
Within-estimator, standard errors clustered on countries in parentheses.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                                  A5
                                                                                Table A.8: Change in log CPI

                                                                                                 (1)               (2)           (3)       (4)       (5)
                                                                                               h=1               h=2           h=3       h=4       h=5
Average cycle                                                                                 3.00              4.70          5.93      7.79      9.34
                                                                                               (0.10)            (0.21)        (0.30)    (0.38)    (0.50)

Business credit/GDP expansion 5 xB
                                 it(p)                                                         0.15                 -0.31      1.76      4.60      4.73
                                                                                              (2.03)                (4.27)    (6.19)    (7.16)    (7.67)

Household credit/GDP expansion 5 xH
                                  it(p)                                                        0.47                   2.99      1.79     -9.30    -22.31
                                                                                              (4.33)                (10.97)   (13.84)   (16.99)   (19.22)

Macro controls                                                                                  Yes                  Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes
B      H
 h =  h (p-value)                                                                              0.941                0.749      0.999     0.454     0.209
R2                                                                                             0.75                 0.71       0.68      0.66      0.67
Cycles                                                                                          150                  150        150       150       150
Within-estimator, standard errors clustered on countries in parentheses.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                    Figure A.2: Conditional effect of 2 SD debt expansion on real imports

                                             20        Average cycle path
                                                       2SD Business credit/GDP shock
                                                       2SD Household credit/GDP shock


                                             10
                Change in real imports (%)




                                              0




                                             -10




                                             -20
                                                   0                        1             2                     3             4           5
                                                                                              Horizon (years)

    Notes: The figure shows the effects of a two-SD credit expansion in the five years preceding the
    recession for household credit booms (lhs) and business credit booms (rhs). The estimations rely
    on all business cycles in 17 advanced economies since WW2.




                                                                                              A6
       Figure A.3: Conditional effect of 2 SD debt expansion real residential investment

                                                       40                Average cycle path
                                                                         2SD Business credit/GDP shock
           Change in real residential investment (%)


                                                                         2SD Household credit/GDP shock
                                                       20



                                                            0



                                                       -20



                                                       -40



                                                       -60
                                                                    0                         1           2                     3   4   5
                                                                                                              Horizon (years)

Notes: The figure shows the effects of a two-SD credit expansion in the five years preceding the
recession for household credit booms (lhs) and business credit booms (rhs). The estimations rely
on all business cycles in 17 advanced economies since WW2.




         Figure A.4: Conditional effect of 2 SD debt expansion on short-term real rates

                                                       8                Average cycle path
                                                                        2SD Business credit/GDP shock
                                                                        2SD Household credit/GDP shock
           Change in real short-term rate (pp)




                                                       4




                                                       0




                                                       -4
                                                                0                            1            2                     3   4   5
                                                                                                              Horizon (years)

Notes: The figure shows the effects of a two-SD credit expansion in the five years preceding the
recession for household credit booms (lhs) and business credit booms (rhs). The estimations rely
on all business cycles in 17 advanced economies since WW2.




                                                                                                              A7
       Figure A.5: Conditional effects of 2-SD-expansion on nominal short-term interest

                                                    4        Average cycle path
                                                             2SD Business credit/GDP shock
           Change in nominal short-term rate (pp)


                                                             2SD Household credit/GDP shock
                                                    2



                                                    0



                                                    -2



                                                    -4



                                                    -6
                                                         0                        1           2                     3   4   5
                                                                                                  Horizon (years)

Notes: The figure shows the effects of a two-SD credit expansion in the five years preceding the
recession for household credit booms (lhs) and business credit booms (rhs). The estimations rely
on all business cycles in 17 advanced economies since WW2.




       Figure A.6: Conditional effects of 2-SD-expansion on nominal long-term interest

                                                    4        Average cycle path
                                                             2SD Business credit/GDP shock
           Change in nominal long-term rate (pp)




                                                             2SD Household credit/GDP shock


                                                    2




                                                    0




                                                    -2




                                                    -4
                                                         0                        1           2                     3   4   5
                                                                                                  Horizon (years)

Notes: The figure shows the effects of a two-SD credit expansion in the five years preceding the
recession for household credit booms (lhs) and business credit booms (rhs). The estimations rely
on all business cycles in 17 advanced economies since WW2.




                                                                                                  A8
                                          C. Robustness
We test different specifications for our main model and expose it to a battery of robustness checks.
Results are documented below. Across all variants, we find no evidence of significant and quantita-
tively relevant debt overhang effects.
    We introduce linear and quadratic time trends (Table A.9), exclude all recessions from 2007
onwards (Table A.10) and test alternative measures of debt overhang (Table A.11, Table A.12,
Table A.13). We also report unconditional estimates in ??. Finally, we test whether the effects of
business credit expansions show up only at particularly high or low levels of business debt levels.
We introduce an interaction term of 5-year changes in business credit/GDP with the level of business
credit/GDP at peak and condition on the usual set of macro controls, country fixed effects and a
linear and quadratic time trend. Figure A.7 plots the effects of a 2SD business credit expansion
when the business credit/GDP level hovers 2SD above country-specific historical average.

                         Table A.9: Introducing linear and quadratic time trends

                                                     (1)        (2)           (3)       (4)        (5)
                                                    h=1        h=2          h=3       h=4        h=5
 Average cycle                                    -1.60      -0.78          0.68     1.89       3.60
                                                   (0.13)     (0.23)        (0.35)    (0.38)     (0.50)

 Business credit/GDP expansion 5 xB
                                  it(p)             -0.04      2.47          0.42      0.22       2.65
                                                   (1.38)     (1.90)        (1.93)    (4.13)     (4.57)

 Household credit/GDP expansion 5 xH
                                   it(p)           -6.08     -16.66     -25.07       -34.89     -34.14
                                                   (4.02)     (6.73)      (7.66)      (11.89)    (12.60)

 Macro controls                                     Yes        Yes           Yes       Yes        Yes

 Time trends                                        Yes        Yes           Yes       Yes        Yes
 B      H
  h =  h (p-value)                                 0.191      0.019         0.006     0.026      0.023
 R2                                                0.16       0.38          0.43      0.47       0.49
 Cycles                                             150        150           150       150        149
 Within-estimator, standard errors clustered on countries in parentheses.
 *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                                   A9
                              Table A.10: Omitting recessions post 2006

                                                    (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)        (5)
                                                   h=1         h=2          h=3         h=4        h=5
Average cycle                                    -1.60       -0.48         1.11        2.77       4.86
                                                  (0.10)      (0.14)        (0.20)      (0.30)     (0.41)

Business credit/GDP expansion 5 xB
                                 it(p)             -0.27       2.12         -1.23      -1.34        0.55
                                                  (1.15)      (1.77)        (2.65)     (3.77)      (4.79)

Household credit/GDP expansion 5 xH
                                  it(p)            -3.86     -12.23        -27.86     -40.26     -40.46
                                                  (3.98)      (6.56)        (10.12)    (14.15)    (14.23)

Macro controls                                     Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes
B      H
 h =  h (p-value)                                 0.412       0.054         0.007       0.013      0.010
R2                                                0.21        0.32          0.39        0.42       0.41
Cycles                                             121         121           121         121        121
Within-estimator, standard errors clustered on countries in parentheses.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                   Table A.11: Expansion measured by 3-year change in credit/GDP

                                                    (1)        (2)            (3)        (4)        (5)
                                                   h=1       h=2            h=3        h=4        h=5
Average cycle                                    -1.57       -0.40         1.54       3.49       6.24
                                                  (0.18)     (0.34)         (0.53)     (0.74)     (0.77)

Business credit/GDP expansion 3 xB
                                 it(p)             -0.85      1.74         -2.21       -4.83      -10.48
                                                  (2.55)     (6.98)        (8.26)     (11.05)     (10.82)

Household credit/GDP expansion 3 xH
                                  it(p)            -1.75    -25.66     -38.03         -48.14     -58.04
                                                  (4.97)     (8.98)     (11.16)        (17.55)    (18.93)

Macro controls                                     Yes        Yes            Yes        Yes        Yes
R2                                                0.144      0.323          0.396      0.423      0.478
Cycles                                             154        154            154        154        153
Within-estimator, standard errors clustered on countries in parentheses.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                                  A10
                  Table A.12: Expansion measured by 10-year change in credit/GDP

                                                     (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)        (5)
                                                    h=1         h=2          h=3         h=4        h=5
Average cycle                                     -1.44          0.22       2.11        3.86       6.20
                                                   (0.25)       (0.43)       (0.51)      (0.56)     (0.96)

Business credit/GDP expansion 10 xB
                                  it(p)             0.53         0.31        -0.67       -1.19      -1.23
                                                   (1.11)       (1.51)       (1.89)      (1.90)     (2.86)

Household credit/GDP expansion 10 xH
                                   it(p)           -3.12       -12.20       -16.56      -20.23     -22.48
                                                   (1.75)        (2.77)       (3.62)      (4.96)     (5.41)

Macro controls                                      Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes
R2                                                 0.220        0.293        0.375       0.410      0.489
Cycles                                              132          132          132         132        131
Within-estimator, standard errors clustered on countries in parentheses.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                        Table A.13: Expansion measured by real credit growth

                                                       (1)           (2)         (3)       (4)       (5)
                                                     h=1           h=2         h=3       h=4       h=5
Average cycle                                         -0.57         -1.67       0.30      2.29     3.78
                                                     (0.69)        (1.11)      (1.73)    (2.35)    (2.00)

Business credit expansion 5 log(creditB
                                      it(p) )        0.01         0.04          0.03     0.05      0.07
                                                     (0.01)        (0.01)      (0.02)    (0.02)    (0.03)

Household credit expansion 5 log(creditH
                                       it(p) )       -0.04          -0.01       -0.02     -0.04     -0.04
                                                      (0.02)       (0.03)      (0.05)    (0.06)    (0.06)

Macro controls                                         Yes          Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes
R2                                                    0.180        0.283       0.333     0.353     0.408
Cycles                                                 150          150         150       150       149
Within-estimator, standard errors clustered on countries in parentheses.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                                  A11
                                                                                       Table A.14: Unconditional

                                                                                                           (1)                  (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)
                                                                                                         h=1                  h=2      h=3      h=4      h=5
 Average cycle                                                                                          -1.70                -0.96     0.76     2.52     4.39
                                                                                                        (0.00)               (0.00)   (0.01)   (0.01)   (0.01)

 Business credit/GDP expansion 5 xB
                                  it(p)                                                                   0.19               -1.34    -4.60    -5.14    -5.86
                                                                                                         (1.45)              (1.80)   (2.92)   (2.97)   (3.32)

 Household credit/GDP expansion 5 xH
                                   it(p)                                                                 0.62            -18.02 -24.49 -26.98 -31.79
                                                                                                        (2.62)            (3.80)  (4.87)  (7.40)  (8.20)
 B      H
  h =  h (p-value)                                                                                       0.893             0.001   0.008   0.017   0.008
 R2                                                                                                      0.00              0.12    0.11    0.09    0.10
 Cycles                                                                                                157               157     157     157     156

Notes: Within-estimator, standard errors clustered on countries in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1. Credit expansion
denotes past 5-year change in credit/GDP ratio.




                                                                           Figure A.7: Interacting expansions and levels

                                                               9
                     Change in real GDP since peak (percent)




                                                                        Average cycle path
                                                                        2SD Business credit/GDP shock, at high level
                                                               6        95% CI


                                                               3


                                                               0


                                                               -3


                                                               -6
                                                                    0             1                2                     3            4         5
                                                                                                       Horizon (years)



Notes: The figure visualizes the effects of business credit expansions when interacted with credit-to-GDP
levels. It plots predictive effects on growth of a two-SD credit expansion in the five years preceding the
recession while credit-to-GDP levels stand two standard deviations above country-specific historical averages.
Estimates based on all business cycles in 17 advanced economies since 1870. Standard errors are clustered at
the country level.




                                                                                                        A12
                      Table A.15: Summary statistics for full sample of annual data

                                              N      Mean     SD     SD resid.   Min      P10    P90    Max
 Business debt/GDP, 5-year change            1286    0.04     0.16     0.15      -0.63   -0.15   0.22   0.62
 Household credit/GDP, 5-year change         1218    0.04     0.08     0.07      -0.35   -0.03   0.13   0.44
 Business debt/GDP                           1373    0.86     0.37     0.19      0.12    0.44    1.40   2.14
 Household credit/GDP                        1313    0.35     0.26     0.11      0.00    0.03    0.72   1.21
Notes: SD resid denotes residual standard deviation after controlling for country fixed effects and country-
specific linear time trends.


                                   D. Business credit data
For parts of the post-WW2 sample, we can draw on financial accounts data of the OECD and
Eurostat databases and individual publications such as Bonci and Coletta (2012) for Italy, Roe (1971)
and Office for National Statistics (2016) for U.K. data, Deutsche Bundesbank (1983) and Deutsche
Bundesbank (1994) for German data. All postwar U.S. data are from the Fed's Flow of Funds.
    In addition, we rely on comprehensive measures of business credit provided by the "Total
credit database" assembled by the Bank of International Settlements (BIS). These include secured
and unsecured debt obligations of all maturities and from all types of lenders in addition to
conventional bank lending contracts. For methodological details see Dembiermont, Drehmann, and
Muksakunratana (2013).
    For earlier years, we proxy credit growth using data on bank lending to the non-financial
business sector. In addition, we extend the business lending series of Jord`  a, Schularick, and Taylor
(2017) to obtain data for the 19th and the first half of the 20th . We fill post-WW2 gaps with data
kindly provided by Muller
                        ¨    (2018).
    For the pre-WW2 period, we calculate bank credit to the non-financial business sector based
on the assets of specialized commercial banks, providing loans to business and other corporate
financing. For example in the case of Germany, we sum credit extended to non-banks by joint-stock
industrial banks as well as commercial credit unions. Where the banking sector is more diversified,
we exploit that the bulk of pre-WW2 household loans were mortgages and obtain business credit
as the residual to total private credit. Here, we can rely on Jord`a, Schularick, and Taylor (2017) for
necessary data on residential mortgages and total credit. We list all sources in detail below.
    Table A.15 presents summary statistics of business credit and of household credit for comparison.


Sources
Australia
1948 ­ 1954 bank lending to non-financial corporate business from Karsten Muller
                                                                           ¨     (2018) Credit
            Markets around the World, 1910­2014. SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3259636.

1955 ­ 1976 residual of total bank loans to non-financial private sector and total bank loans to
            households (both from JST MacroHistory Database).

1977 ­ 1988 bank loans to business and capital market debt from "Total Credit Database" of the Bank
            of International Settlements: https://www.bis.org/statistics/totcredit.htm.

1989 ­ 2013 total non-equity liabilities of the private non-financial business sector from OECD
            financial accounts data.


                                                    A13
2014 ­ 2019 bank loans to business and capital market debt from "Total Credit Database" of the Bank
            of International Settlements: https://www.bis.org/statistics/totcredit.htm.

Belgium
1950 ­ 1979 residual of total loans to non-financial private sector and total loans to households
            (both from JST MacroHistory Database).

1980 ­ 1993 bank loans to business and capital market debt from "Total Credit Database" of the Bank
            of International Settlements: https://www.bis.org/statistics/totcredit.htm.

1994 ­ 2013 OECD financial accounts data on total non-equity liabilities of the private non-financial
            business sector.

2014 ­ 2019 eurostat financial accounts data on total non-equity liabilities of the private non-financial
            business sector.

Canada
1884 ­ 1941 lending of chartered banks recorded in Urquhart, M. C., and Buckley, K. A. H., Histori-
            cal Statistics of Canada, "Banking and Finance," Series H87-179 and Canada Statistical
            Yearbooks (various).

1942 ­ 1960 lending to non-financial corporate business from Karsten Muller
                                                                      ¨     (2018) Credit Markets
            around the World, 1910­2014. SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3259636.

1961 ­ 1969 from Statistics Canada, Table 378­0059 (terminated 2011) "Chartered banks and
            quasi­Banks: Loans". (accessible online at http://www5.statcan.gc.ca/cansim/
            pick\OT1\textendashchoisir?lang=eng&p2=33&id=3780059).

1970 ­ 2013 OECD financial accounts data on total non-equity liabilities of the private non-financial
            business sector.

2014 ­ 2019 bank loans to business and capital market debt from "Total Credit Database" of the Bank
            of International Settlements: https://www.bis.org/statistics/totcredit.htm.

Denmark
1875 ­ 1950 Business loans of banks proxied by lending and domestic bills of exchange from
            commercial banks from Johannsen (1985).

1951 ­ 1993 from Abildgren (2007), ibid. Appendix B, Table B.1 and B.2, Series "Commercial
            lending".

1994 ­ 2013 OECD financial accounts data on total non-equity liabilities of the private non-financial
            business sector.

2014 ­ 2018 eurostat financial accounts data on total non-equity liabilities of the private non-financial
            business sector.

       2019 bank loans to business and capital market debt from "Total Credit Database" of the Bank
            of International Settlements: https://www.bis.org/statistics/totcredit.htm.


                                                  A14
Finland
1948 ­ 1969 calculated from Statistics Finland (various), Statistical Yearbook (various issues). Table
            "Loans by the credit institutions by groups of borrowers on 31 December", Series "Total
            w/o municipalities and parishes". Base is 1970 value.

1970 ­ 1994 bank loans to business and capital market debt from "Total Credit Database" of the Bank
            of International Settlements: https://www.bis.org/statistics/totcredit.htm.

1995 ­ 2013 financial accounts data on total non-equity liabilities of the private non-financial
            business sector.

2014 ­ 2019 eurostat financial accounts data on total non-equity liabilities of the private non-financial
            business sector.

France
1902 ­ 1933 residual of total bank credit from JST database (from Saint Marc, Patat and Lutfalla)
            less real estate lending from Cr´
                                            edit Foncier.

1958 ­ 1976 from Annual Reports of the Conseil National du Cr´edit, published between 1959 and
            1976: Cr´
                    edit aux entreprises industrielles et comercielles, total series. Available at
            www.gallica.bnf.fr.

1977 ­ 1994 bank loans to business and capital market debt from "Total Credit Database" of the Bank
            of International Settlements: https://www.bis.org/statistics/totcredit.htm.

1995 ­ 2012 OECD financial accounts data on total non-equity liabilities of the private non-financial
            business sector.

2013 ­ 2018 eurostat financial accounts data on total non-equity liabilities of the private non-financial
            business sector.

       2019 bank loans to business and capital market debt from "Total Credit Database" of the Bank
            of International Settlements: https://www.bis.org/statistics/totcredit.htm.

Germany
1885 ­ 1920 from Bundesbank (1976): loans and discounts of joint-stock banks (Aktienkreditbanken)
            and commercial credit unions (Genossenschaftsbanken) to non-banks proxying lending
            to business.

1924 ­ 1944 from Bundesbank (1976): loans and discounts of Großbanken and Kreditgenossen-
            schaften.

1949 ­ 1990 from Deutsche Bundesbank (1983) "Revidierte Ergebnisse der gesamtwirtschaftlichen
            Finanzierungs- und Geldvermogensrechnung
                                         ¨              fur
                                                         ¨ die Jahre 1950-1959", and Deutsche
            Bundesbank (1994) "Ergebnisse der gesamtwirtschaftlichen Finanzierungsrechnung fur   ¨
            Westdeutschland 1960-1992. Total private non-financial business sector liabilities less
            equity.

1991 ­ 2012 OECD financial accounts data on total non-equity liabilities of the private non-financial
            business sector.

                                                  A15
2013 ­ 2018 eurostat financial accounts data on total non-equity liabilities of the private non-financial
            business sector.
        2019 bank loans to business and capital market debt from "Total Credit Database" of the Bank
             of International Settlements: https://www.bis.org/statistics/totcredit.htm.

Ireland
1932 ­ 2002 from Rebecca Stuart (2017) "70 years of personal disposable income and consumption in
            Ireland", Journal of the Statistical and Social Inquiry Society of Ireland, Vol.46, pp.47-70
            and sourced cited therein: Bank lending to business.
2003 ­ 2018 from Central Bank of Ireland's online Bank Balance Sheets Data, Table A.5 "Loans to
            the Irish Private Sector", credit to the private non-financial business sector.

Italy
1948 ­ 1949 bank lending to non-financial corporate business from Karsten Muller
                                                                           ¨     (2018) Credit
            Markets around the World, 1910­2014. SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3259636.
1950 ­ 1994 financial accounts data on total non-equity liabilities from Bonci and Coletta (2012)
            "Italy's Financial Accounts since 1950", SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2120474.
1995 ­ 2012 OECD financial accounts data on total non-equity liabilities of the private non-financial
            business sector.
2013 ­ 2018 eurostat financial accounts data on total non-equity liabilities of the private non-financial
            business sector.
        2019 bank loans to business and capital market debt from "Total Credit Database" of the Bank
             of International Settlements: https://www.bis.org/statistics/totcredit.htm.

Japan
1948 ­ 1963 from Nihon Ginko    ¯ Tokeikyoku
                                   ¯          and Nihon Ginko   ¯ Chosakyoku
                                                                     ¯         (various) as well as
            Honpo­Keizai­T
                   ¯          okei
                              ¯    and Nihon Ginko ¯ Tookeikyoku,
                                                       ¯           Tokyo. 1948-59: Table "All banks:
            Loans classified by industry", Series "Total without lending to private households,
            local governments, and financial institutions". 1960-61: Table "Outstanding loans and
            discounts of all banks by industry", Series "Total (without lending to private persons,
            local governments, and finance)". 1962-63: Table "All banks (banking accounts): Loans
            classified by industry", Series "Total without loans to households, local government,
            financials, and companies overseas" + Table "All banks (trust accounts): Loans classified
            by industry", Series "Total without loans to households, local government, financials,
            and companies overseas".
1964 ­ 1979 bank loans to business and capital market debt from "Total Credit Database" of the Bank
            of International Settlements: https://www.bis.org/statistics/totcredit.htm.
1980 ­ 2012 OECD financial accounts data on total non-equity liabilities of the private non-financial
            business sector.
2013 ­ 2019 bank loans to business and capital market debt from "Total Credit Database" of the Bank
            of International Settlements: https://www.bis.org/statistics/totcredit.htm.

                                                  A16
Netherlands
1946 ­ 1989 bank lending to business sector proxied by loans of "Handelsbanken" from De Neder-
            landsche Bank (2000).

1990 ­ 1994 bank loans to business and capital market debt from "Total Credit Database" of the Bank
            of International Settlements: https://www.bis.org/statistics/totcredit.htm.

1995 ­ 2018 eurostat financial accounts data on total non-equity liabilities of the private non-financial
            business sector.

        2019 bank loans to business and capital market debt from "Total Credit Database" of the Bank
             of International Settlements: https://www.bis.org/statistics/totcredit.htm.

Norway
1872 ­ 1939 bank lending to non-financial business sector proxied by commercial bank lending
            from Historical Monetary Statistics for Norway.

1940 ­ 1974 bank lending to non-financial corporate business from Karsten Muller
                                                                           ¨     (2018) Credit
            Markets around the World, 1910­2014. SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3259636.

1975 ­ 1994 bank loans to business and capital market debt from "Total Credit Database" of the Bank
            of International Settlements: https://www.bis.org/statistics/totcredit.htm.

1995 ­ 2013 OECD financial accounts data on total non-equity liabilities of the private non-financial
            business sector.

2014 ­ 2019 eurostat financial accounts data on total non-equity liabilities of the private non-financial
            business sector.

Portugal
1947 ­ 1978 bank lending to non-financial corporate business from Karsten Muller
                                                                           ¨     (2018) Credit
            Markets around the World, 1910­2014. SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3259636.

1979 ­ 1994 bank loans to business and capital market debt from "Total Credit Database" of the Bank
            of International Settlements: https://www.bis.org/statistics/totcredit.htm.

1995 ­ 2013 OECD financial accounts data on total non-equity liabilities of the private non-financial
            business sector.

2014 ­ 2019 eurostat financial accounts data on total non-equity liabilities of the private non-financial
            business sector.

Spain
1904 ­ 1935 bank lending to business from Estadisticas Historicas de Espana, by Lopez, Carreras,
            and Tafunell (1989); table 9.12: Entitades de credito.

1946 ­ 1979 residual of total bank loans to non-financial private sector and total loans to households
            (both from JST MacroHistory Database).



                                                  A17
1980 ­ 2012 OECD financial accounts data on total non-equity liabilities of the private non-financial
            business sector.

2013 ­ 2019 eurostat financial accounts data on total non-equity liabilities of the private non-financial
            business sector.

Sweden
1872 ­ 1940 residual of total bank loans to non-financial private sector and total loans to households
            (both from JST MacroHistory Database); total bank loans less loans of housing credit
            institutions.

1975 ­ 1979 bank loans to business calculated from Statistics Sweden (various), Financial Market
            Statistics. Series: "Housing credit institutions' lending, SEK millions", Series "Non-
            financial corporations" + Series: "Banks' total landing and lending to non-MFI, SEK
            million", Series "Non-financial corporations ­ Total", Series "Financial corporate sector,
            not MFI ­ Total".

1980 ­ 1994 bank loans to business and capital market debt from "Total Credit Database" of the Bank
            of International Settlements: https://www.bis.org/statistics/totcredit.htm.

1995 ­ 2013 OECD financial accounts data on total non-equity liabilities of the private non-financial
            business sector.

2014 ­ 2019 eurostat financial accounts data on total non-equity liabilities of the private non-financial
            business sector.

Switzerland
1870 ­ 1976 bank loans to business from JST MacroHistory Database, building on Swiss National
            Bank. "Historical Time Series." 2009. Section 5: "Banks in Switzerland".

1977 ­ 1998 bank loans to business from Swiss National Bank, "Historical Time Series 5." 2009.
            "Banks in Switzerland.", Table 21 "Sectoral breakdown of domestic assets", Series
            "Non-Financial Corporations, Private legal entities".

1999 ­ 2011 OECD financial accounts data on total non-equity liabilities of the private non-financial
            business sector.

2012 ­ 2019 bank loans to business and capital market debt from "Total Credit Database" of the Bank
            of International Settlements: https://www.bis.org/statistics/totcredit.htm.

United Kingdom
1880 ­ 1950 residual of total bank loans to non-financial private sector and total loans to households
            from JST MacroHistory Database.

1951 ­ 1956 Bank of England (2017); Table LPQBC57 (accessible online at http://www.bankofengland.
            co.uk/).

1957 ­ 1966 total non-equity liabilities of the private non-financial business sector from Roe (1971)
            "The financial interdependence of the UK economy 1957­66", London: Chapman and
            Hall.

                                                  A18
1967 ­ 1986 total non-equity liabilities of the private non-financial business sector from the Office of
            National Statistics (2016), "Pre-ESA95 financial accounts and balance sheets", (accessible
            online at https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/nationalaccounts/uksectoraccounts).

1987 ­ 2013 OECD financial accounts data on total non-equity liabilities of the private non-financial
            business sector.

2014 ­ 2019 bank loans to business and capital market debt from "Total Credit Database" of the Bank
            of International Settlements: https://www.bis.org/statistics/totcredit.htm.

United States of America
1916 ­ 1938 total corporate debt less interbank debt from James, John A. and Richard Sylla (2006),
            "Debt and Flow of Funds" in "Historical Statistics of the United States" edited by Susan
            B. Carter and Scott Sigmund Gartner and Michael R. Haines and Alan L. Olmstead and
            Richard Sutch and Gavin Wright.

1945 ­ 2019 total loans, bonds and miscellaneous liabilities of non-financial corporate businesses
            and total loans and miscellaneous liabilities of non-financial non-corporate businesses
            from Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020) "Financial Accounts of
            the United States".




                                                 A19
