                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  CYBERSECURITY RISK

                                      Chris Florakis
                                    Christodoulos Louca
                                      Roni Michaely
                                      Michael Weber

                                     Working Paper 28196
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28196


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2020




We gratefully acknowledge valuable comments from several seminar and conference participants.
Weber also gratefully acknowledges financial support from the University of Chicago Booth
School of Business and the Fama Research Fund. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Chris Florakis, Christodoulos Louca, Roni Michaely, and Michael Weber. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Cybersecurity Risk
Chris Florakis, Christodoulos Louca, Roni Michaely, and Michael Weber
NBER Working Paper No. 28196
December 2020
JEL No. G14,G31

                                        ABSTRACT

We develop a novel firm-level measure of cybersecurity risk using textual analysis of
cybersecurity-risk disclosures in corporate filings. The measure successfully identifies firms
extensively discussing cybersecurity risk in their 10-K, displays intuitive relations with
quantitative measures of cybersecurity risk disclosure language, exhibits a positive trend over
time, is more prevalent among industries relying more on information technology systems,
correlates with several characteristics linked to firms hit by cyber attacks and, importantly,
predicts future cyber attacks. Stocks with high exposure to cybersecurity risk exhibit high
expected returns on average, but they perform poorly in periods of increasing attention to
cybersecurity risk.

Chris Florakis                                 Roni Michaely
University of Liverpool                        University of Geneva
Chatham Street, L69 7ZH                        Switzerland
Liverpool L69 7ZH                              rm34@cornell.edu
United Kingdom
c.florackis@liverpool.ac.uk                    Michael Weber
                                               Booth School of Business
Christodoulos Louca                            University of Chicago
Cyprus University of Technology                5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Archiepiskopou Kyprianou 30                    Chicago, IL 60637
Limassol 3036                                  and NBER
Cyprus                                         michael.weber@chicagobooth.edu
christodoulos.louca@cut.ac.cy
1. Introduction

Cybersecurity risk is the risk of financial loss, disruption, or damage to the reputation of a firm

as a result of a failure in its information technology systems due to external attacks (Institute

of Risk Management). 1 Examples of cybersecurity risk include the risk of losing sensitive data,

disruption in a firm's network, systems, and services, and physical electronic damage.

Cybersecurity risk is currently considered one of the top global concerns for firm executives

and market participants in advanced economies, 2 which is not surprising given the increase in

major cyber attacks in recent years. 3 Despite substantial investments in information security

systems, firms remain highly exposed to cybersecurity risk, 4 with possible losses amounting to

$6 trillion annually by 2021. 5 Although the attacks and the possible preventive measures are

well studied in the literature, whether a firm's exposure to cybersecurity risk is priced in

financial markets remains unclear.

     We propose a novel firm-level measure of cybersecurity risk for all listed firms in the U.S.

and examine whether heterogeneity in cybersecurity risk is priced in the cross section of stock

returns. We find that portfolios of firms with high exposure to cybersecurity risk outperform

other firms by up to 8.3% per year in terms of equal-weighted (7.9% value-weighted) returns.

Our measure of cybersecurity risk is a robust return predictor, and its effect is not subsumed

by standard return predictors in Fama-MacBeth regressions. A cybersecurity-mimicking

portfolio performs poorly in times of heightened cybersecurity risk and investors' concerns

about data breaches.


1
  IRM Cyber Risk: Executive Summary, pp. 1-16.
2
  See "The Global Risks Report 2019" (14th Edition), World Economic Forum, and the 2017 survey from DTCC
Systemic Risk Barometer (Bouveret, 2018, provides further information).
3
  According to a recent report from the Center for Strategic and International Studies and McAfee, the amount
lost to cybercrime every year is experiencing a rapidly increasing trend (valued at nearly 1% of global GDP for
2018).
4
  Gartner, a global research and advisory firm, for example, estimates worldwide spending on information security
products of $124 billion in 2019, representing an increase of 8.8% relative to 2018.
5
  See "Cybercrime Damages $6 Trillion by 2021. In addition, Steve Morgan, Founder of Cybersecurity Ventures
and Editor-in-Chief at Cybercrime Magazine, suggests the cybercrime damage costs could potentially double
during the COVID-19 outbreak period.

                                                       2
     To construct our measure, we use firms that were subject to cyber attacks as a training

sample, and then compare the wording and language in the relevant risk-disclosure section in

annual reports of the attacked firms with that of all other firms. Specifically, we first extract

the discussion on cybersecurity risk in the "Item 1A. Risk Factor" section from firms' 10-K,

which contains information about the most significant risk factors for each firm on Edgar over

the period 2007-2018. Second, we identify a sample of firms that have been subject to a major

cyber attack (involving lost personal information by hacking or malware-electronic entry by

an outside party) in any given year. We argue these firms have high cybersecurity risk, and

they serve as our training sample. Third, we estimate the similarity of each firm's

cybersecurity-risk disclosure with past cybersecurity-risk disclosures of firms in the training

sample (i.e., from the one-year period prior to the firm's filing date). 6 The higher the measured

similarity in cybersecurity risk disclosure for our sample firms and firms in the training sample,

the greater the exposure to cybersecurity risk.

     We validate our measure in several ways. First, firms that score high on our measure (i.e.,

top 5 firms) emphasize cybersecurity risk in their 10-K filings more than firms with low scores

(i.e., bottom 5 firms). For instance, top 5 firms typically mention that the increasing

sophistication of hackers makes defending against cybersecurity attacks difficult, despite

investments in preventive systems. Firms with the 5 lowest scores instead tend to emphasize

that they can adequately deal with cybersecurity risk through preventive measures. Moreover,

these firms typically do not devote a separate section to cybersecurity risks in their 10-Ks. 7

     Second, firms with higher scores provide lengthier and more comprehensive

cybersecurity-risk disclosures in their 10-Ks, discuss legal consequences associated with

cybersecurity risk, use more precise language, and use more negative words in their


6
  Other studies that use document similarity to extract meaning from text collections include, among others,
Hoberg and Phillips (2010; 2016), Brown and Tucker (2011), Hoberg and Maksimovic (2015), Lang and Stice-
Lawrence (2015), and Lowry, Michaely, and Volkova (2020).
7
  We find similar patterns when we consider more firms (e.g. top 10 vs. bottom 10).

                                                     3
discussions, which potentially lowers their exposure to litigation risk (Loughran and

McDonald, 2011).

    Third, high-score firms actively manage their exposure to cybersecurity risk through real

actions. Within our sample, a non-negligible number of firms purchase cyber insurance

policies; notably, our measure is positively correlated with the presence of cyber insurance

policies, supporting the view that firms use cyber insurance to partially protect against claims

that may arise due to cyber attacks.

    Fourth, our measure exhibits an increasing trend over time, especially after 2011, when

the SEC issued for the first time specific disclosure obligations relating to cybersecurity risks

and cyber incidents. The estimated cybersecurity score for the average firm in our sample

increased from 0.153 in 2011 to 0.454 in 2018. Importantly, this increase is not only an average

effect; whereas 49.03% of our sample firms exhibit zero cybersecurity risk in 2011, only

10.59% of them exhibit zero cybersecurity risk in 2018. Overall, these results are consistent

with the recent growth in the number and significance of successful cyber attacks against major

organizations, as well as firms' increasing vulnerability to cyber attacks.

    Fifth, our measure is particularly high in industries that rely heavily on information

technology system to perform their operations, which makes them more vulnerable to cyber

attacks (e.g., the Telephone & Television Transmission, Business Equipment, and Money

Finance industries). According to our calculations, these industries exhibit a high cyber-attack

incident rate (see also Romanosky, 2016).

    Sixth, our measure correlates with firm characteristics that previous research linked to

firms hit by cyber attacks. For example, in line with Kamiya et al. (2020), our measure relates

cross sectionally with firm characteristics such as size, age, profitability, growth opportunities

and tangibility. It is also positively associated with other characteristics that likely indicate

vulnerability to cyber attacks such as R&D expenditures and the presence of trade secrets.


                                                4
    Seventh, based on the theoretical premise that any kind of bad news should induce negative

asymmetry in stock returns (see, e.g., Campbell and Hentschel, 1992), we posit that exposure

to cybersecurity risk should result in negative returns once the risk materializes; that is, we

expect large negative stock returns when firms are subject to cybersecurity attacks. Consistent

with this view, our measure is positively associated with (negative) asymmetries in stock

returns.

    Finally, and most directly, we show firms with higher cybersecurity risk scores are more

likely to experience a future cyber-attack. In economic terms, one standardized unit increase in

our cybersecurity risk score increases the probability of a future cyber attack by 92.70%. Taken

together, our firm-level measure of cybersecurity risk has features that one would expect for

firms indeed being exposed to the risk of cyber attacks.

    Although the measure we propose has properties that one would associate with a

heightened risk of cyber attacks, another way to validate the measure is to check whether

cybersecurity is priced in the cross section of stock returns. Accordingly, we sort stocks into

portfolios based on their cybersecurity-risk score and track their future returns over time. Firms

with high cybersecurity risk exhibit higher future returns. Specifically, an equal-weighted

portfolio that goes long stocks with high cybersecurity risk and shorts stocks with low

cybersecurity risk earns a statistically significant excess return of 66 to 69 basis points per

month, or 8.3% per year; similar results exist for value-weighted portfolios (7.9% per year).

High cybersecurity-risk portfolios differ from low cybersecurity-risk portfolios in terms of

several firm- and 10-K-specific characteristics. Through bivariate portfolio sorts, we confirm

the premium remains robust across all sub-samples of stocks sorted by size, book-to-market,

profitability, institutional ownership, illiquidity, idiosyncratic volatility, risk-section length,

and 10-K readability (Fog-Index). We also show the excess returns of high versus low




                                                5
cybersecurity-exposure stocks is larger when we exclude firms that partially insure against

cyber attacks.

    We also examine the cross-sectional relation between cybersecurity risk and stock returns

by running stock-level Fama-MacBeth (1973) regressions and document a strong positive

relation between cybersecurity risk and stock returns. Interestingly, we find that cybersecurity

risk predicts cross sectional variation in stock returns up to 12 months into the future.

Accordingly, the predictability is not a short-term phenomenon.

    Finally, we introduce a cybersecurity-risk factor and test its economic and statistical

significance for the full sample and for important subsample periods (i.e., upon the occurrence

of events that increase attention to cybersecurity risk). If our measure accurately captures

cybersecurity risk and it is a priced source of risk, then high-cybersecurity-risk stocks should

perform poorly and significantly worse than low-cybersecurity-risk stocks on the days of

intense attention toward cybersecurity risk. To perform the analysis, we resort to daily data and

identify days of increasing attention to cybersecurity risk based on abnormal search volume

index (SVI) of the search topics "Hacker" and "Data Breach" in Google Trends. We find that

the cybersecurity-risk factor exhibits poor performance during periods of increasing attention

to cybersecurity risk, although generally it performs well throughout our sample period.

    This study contributes to the literature in several ways. First, it adds to a growing literature

extracting important economic information utilizing text as data. 8 For example, Baker, Bloom

and Davis (2016) use newspaper articles to develop an index of economic-policy uncertainty.

More recently, Hassan, Hollander, van Lent, and Tahoun (2019) and Sautner, van Lent, Vilkov,

and Zhang (2020) utilize text from earnings conference calls to develop firm-level measures of

political risk and climate-change exposure, respectively. Other studies use text from financial



8
  Gentzkow, Kelly, and Taddy (2019) provide an introduction of text in economic research whereas Loughran and
Mcdonald (2016) discuss commonly applied textual-analysis methods and provides an excellent review of the
literature.

                                                     6
reports, such as 10-Ks and 10-Qs. Cohen, Malloy, and Nguyen (2020) link changes in the

language of financial reports to future firm operations. Hoberg and Maksimovic (2015) and

Buehlmaier and Whited (2018) use the management's discussion and analysis section to obtain

measures of financial constraints. Finally, Frésard, Hoberg, and Phillips (2020) link product

descriptions with vertically-linked product descriptions from the Bureau of Economic Analysis

to construct measures of vertical relatedness. Most relevant to our work are the studies that

extract information from the risk-factor disclosures section in 10-Ks. For example, Campbell

et al. (2014) find that risk-factor disclosures are not "boilerplate" and are positively associated

with post-disclosure market-based measures of firm risk. We are the first to focus on cyber-

related risk disclosures and examine whether these convey useful information about firm

exposure to cyber threats and the associated costs, rather than focusing on overall risk exposure.

Using an estimation procedure that is transparent, objective, and easily implementable, we

contribute to this literature by developing, for the first time, a firm-level measure of

cybersecurity risk.

   Second, we add to the asset-pricing literature by showing that cybersecurity risk is priced

in the cross section of stocks. Our tests show that stocks of firms exposed to high cybersecurity

risk earn higher expected returns. Further, we observe a degree of commonality in

cybersecurity risk among US stocks, especially around periods of increasing attention to

cybersecurity risk. This finding is consistent with the view that cybersecurity risk is priced as

a systematic risk factor and investors require a premium to hold stocks exposed to high

cybersecurity risk.

   Finally, we also add to the literature focusing on the implications of cyber attacks on the

attacked firms. For example, several studies focus on the valuation impact of cyber attacks

(see, e.g., Hilary, Segal, and Zhang, 2016; Johnson, Kang, and Lawson, 2017; Amir, Levi, and

Livne, 2018; Lending, Minnick, and Schorno, 2018; and Tosun, 2020); other studies focus on


                                                7
how firms adjust their financial, investment, governance, and risk-management policies

following costly cyber attacks (see, e.g., Akey, Lewellen, and Liskovich, 2020; Kamiya et al.,

2020). Instead of focusing only on attacked firms, we resort to cyber-related disclosures for the

population of US traded firms and assess their cybersecurity-risk exposures.

    The remainder of the study is organized as follows. In section 2, we present our data,

develop the cybersecurity-risk measure, and provide descriptive statistics. In section 3, we

evaluate our measure and its ability to capture cybersecurity risk. Section 4 presents results on

the relation between cybersecurity risk and stock returns, and section 5 provides various

robustness tests. Finally, section 6 concludes.



2. Data and Methods

2.1 Data

We combine several databases to construct the sample. We use the Center for Research in

Security Prices (CRSP) to obtain stock returns, Standard and Poor's Compustat Industrial

Annual (CIA) to obtain financial information, Thomson-Reuters 13F database to obtain

information on institutional ownership, BoardEx to obtain corporate governance-related

information, SEC Edgar for annual filings, and Privacy Rights Clearinghouse (PRC) to collect

data on cyber attacks. 9 The final sample with complete information covers the period 2007-

2018 and consists of 5,534 firms with 35,308 firm-year observations.



2.2 Cybersecurity-risk Disclosures

We use a web-crawling algorithm to download all "10-K," 10-K405," "10-HSB," or 10-

KSB40" filings, excluding amended documents from SEC Edgar and extract the fiscal year,




9
  PRC is a non-profit organization that aims to increase consumers' awareness of privacy protection (for more
details, see https://privacyrights.org/).

                                                     8
the central index key (CIK), and the cybersecurity-risk disclosures from "Item 1A. Risk Factor"

section. 10 Appendix A provides detailed information about our disclosure-extraction procedure

and examples about its reliability. Note we exclude all firms that do not have an "Item 1A. Risk

Factor" section; these firms are typically small, as defined by SEC Regulation S-K Item 10,

and are not required to provide information about risk factors. Furthermore, like Hoberg and

Phillips (2010), we exclude firms that incorporate the "Item 1A. Risk Factor section" by

reference. 11 Finally, we link each firm's cybersecurity-risk disclosures with the CIA database

using the fiscal year, the CIK, and the mapping table from the WRDS SEC Analytics suite.



2.3 Training Sample

We obtain from PRC information about firms that were subject to a data breach, a short

description of the incident, the date the event was made public, the type of breach, the type of

organization, and, if available, the number of records that were affected. Following Kamiya et

al. (2020), we exclude incidents on governments, educational institutions, and non-profit

organizations, and focus only on cyber attacks that involve lost personal information by

hacking or malware-electronic entry by an outside party. We collect information on all

recorded cyber attacks, and manually search news articles from Factiva to cross reference the

information and to identify which cyber attacks attracted the attention of global news outlets

(e.g., CNBC, Financial Times, Wall Street Journal) or are covered in major Newswires (e.g.,

AP, Bloomberg, Reuters). We call such cyber attacks "major" and use them as our training

sample. Using only major attacks ensures the cybersecurity-risk estimation approach only

employs information that is widely disseminated and available to investors (nevertheless, we

repeat our experiment using all incidents of cyber attacks as the training sample, and the results


10
   According to SEC Regulation S-K Item 305 publicly listed firms must disclose "Item 1A. Risk Factor" section
in 10Ks since December 1, 2005.
11
   One example of such a 10-K is as follows:
https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/72971/000007297114000337/wfc10k_20131231.htm

                                                      9
are unchanged). Out of a total of 175 cyber attacks identified during the period 2005-2018 with

available cybersecurity-risk disclosures in Item 1A. Risk Factors, 69 are classified as major

cyber attacks that attracted extensive media coverage. These major cyber attacks span the

period 2006-2018 and correspond to 54 firm-year cyber attacks (e.g., a firm may exhibit more

than one cyber attack in a given year). Note the first cyber attack appears in 2006; therefore,

given that our cybersecurity-risk measure utilizes past disclosures of firms that have been

subject to cyber attacks, the earliest year we can estimate cybersecurity risk is 2007. Finally,

we manually link the names of these firm-year cyber attacks in the PRC database with firm

names in CRSP and CIA.



2.4 Cybersecurity-risk Measure

Given the growing dependence of firms on information technology systems to perform their

operations, the risk associated with cybersecurity has increased over time. As a result, firms

have to provide qualitative information about how cybersecurity risk affects their operations

(SEC Regulation S-K Item 305). The SEC issued specific guidelines in 2011 and 2018,

instructing public companies to inform their investors about material cybersecurity risks and

incidents in a timely, comprehensive, and accurate manner (see, SEC, CF Disclosure Guidance:

Topic No. 2 Cybersecurity, October 13, 2011; and updated SEC, Commission Statement and

Guidance on Public Company Cybersecurity Disclosures, February 21, 2018). The guidelines

apply to both the attacked companies and companies that are subject to material cybersecurity

risks but may not yet have been the target of a cyber attack.

   We use the textual information about cybersecurity risk in "Item 1A. Risk Factors" to create

the cybersecurity-risk measure. The measure is based on how similar each firm's cybersecurity-

risk disclosure is to past cybersecurity-risk disclosures of firms that have been subject to cyber

attacks; that is, firms in our training sample. The idea behind the measure is firms more


                                               10
vulnerable to cyber attacks are actually attacked, express this heightened risk ex-ante in their

disclosure and that firms that use similar words to describe risk exposure and exposure

management, exhibit similar levels of cybersecurity risk. This approach is quite common in

information processing and has been recently applied in finance and economics. For instance,

Hoberg and Phillips (2010) estimate product-market language similarity between firms, and

Hoberg and Maksimovic (2015) estimate the similarity of firms' liquidity and capitalization

resources relative to a training set of financially constrained firms.

     After excluding certain types of words (e.g., pronouns, conjunctions, stop words, common

words and/or articles, compound words, words that refer to geographic locations or names, and

words with frequency less than 10), we store the text in separate word vectors. In line with

previous work, these vectors are based on word roots rather than actual words. We identify

word roots using a web-crawling algorithm and https://www.merriam-webster.com/. The

universe of all words in the sample is 3,210 and the top 20 most common words in the text

include: "security," "system," "information," "result," "business," "breach," "data,"

"operation," "customer," "service," "failure," "loss," "financial," "damage," "computer,"

"include," "technology," "disruption," "reputation," "unauthorized". Then, for each firm, we

populate the vector of 3,210 words with the count of the number of times each word appears

in the cybersecurity-risk disclosures and use this vector to measure the similarity between any

two 10-K documents.

     Next, for each firm and year, we consider the N t-1 firms that have been subject to cyber

attacks during the one-year period ending at the firm's filing date (training sample). 12 For each

firm and year, we then calculate the cosine similarity (CS i,n,t ) and the Jaccard similarity (JS i,n,t )

of the cybersecurity-risk disclosures with all N t-1 disclosures of firms that have been subject




12
  If no cyber attack occurs in the previous one-year period, we look for cyber attacks in the previous two-year
period.

                                                       11
to a cyber attack (i.e., for each firm and year, we have N t-1 such similarities). Cosine similarity

is defined as the cosine angle between two text vectors, whereas Jaccard similarity is defined

as the size of the intersection divided by the size of the union of the two vectors (see Hanley

and Hoberg, 2010 and Cohen, Malloy and Nguyen, 2020, for more information). Both cosine

and Jaccard similarities are bounded between (0,1), and greater values imply a firm's words

overlap more with the vector of words for firms that have been subject to past cyber attacks

(i.e., more similar cybersecurity-risk disclosures). Finally, we define the cybersecurity risk for

each firm and year as the average cosine or Jaccard similarity across all N similarities:

                                                             
                                                                ,,
                                , =                                                            [1]
                                                                
                                                           =1

                                                                 
                                                                     ,,
                              , =                                                              [2]
                                                                     
                                                                =1




3. Validation

In this section, we describe the output of our measure and present various tests to verify that it

captures exposure to cybersecurity risk.


3.1 Excerpts from Cybersecurity-risk Disclosures

Our measure utilizes cybersecurity-risk-related disclosures from Item 1A. Risk Factors in

firms' 10-Ks. To gain some intuitive understanding of the relevance of its content, Panel A (B)

of Table 1 compares excerpts from cybersecurity-risk disclosures, focusing on the five firms

with top scores and the five with the lowest positive score.

    Seeing that firms with the highest scores emphasize risk in their discussions in 10-K (see

Panel A of Table 1) is reassuring; for instance, the firm with the highest score (Walgreens

Boots Alliance Inc) acknowledges the businesses it interacts with, and the firm itself, have

experienced threats to their data and systems. Other firms highlight the difficulty and

                                                12
impossibility of defending against every risk, because the techniques used to attack change

frequently, and attacks can originate from a wide variety of sources, which creates a risk of

cybersecurity incidents. As the excerpts in Panel B suggest, the discussions of firms with the

lowest score are quite different. For example, the firm with the lowest score (Weyerhaeuser

Co) mentions their service providers and the firm itself employ adequate security measures,

whereas other firms simply discuss cyber attacks in conjunction with other risks. Overall, firms

with the lowest score appear to believe that, through preventive measures, they can adequately

deal with cybersecurity risk, and that cybersecurity risk is not important enough for explicit

and separate discussion.

    This evidence suggests firms with high values of our measure indeed discuss threads of

cybersecurity-risk extensively in their risk disclosures, whereas firms with low scores manage

these risks and threads adequately and face little risk.



3.2 Cybersecurity-risk-disclosure Language

Another way to verify that our measure captures variation in exposure to cybersecurity risk is

to directly study how it correlates with certain language features of the risk-disclosure section.

Intuitively, we would expect firms facing a higher threat of cybersecurity risk to spend more

time discussing these risks relative to other risks. Table 2 reports the results. We find a positive

correlation of the measure with the number of cybersecurity-risk-disclosure sentences (CRD

Sentences (#)) and the ratio of the number of cybersecurity-risk-disclosure sentences scaled by

the number of sentences in the Item 1A. Risk Factors section (CRD Sentences (Ratio)) (0.57

and 0.43, respectively). This finding suggests firms with higher scores tend to have more

comprehensive disclosures and perceive cybersecurity risk as a more important source of risk

(compared with other types of risks that firms face).




                                                13
    We also use a collection of predefined words constructed by Loughran and McDonald

(2011) to extract additional information about certain attributes of cybersecurity-risk

disclosures. Specifically, our basic premise is that managers anticipating cybersecurity-risk

challenges will communicate their concerns to shareholders; doing so would help them lower

their exposure to litigation risk. Consistent with this view, we find firms with higher scores

discuss significant legal consequences (Litigious words), use more precise language (Precise

words), and use more negative words (Negative words) in their relevant discussions; the

corresponding correlations between our measure and the variables Litigious words, Precise

words, and Negative words are modest but positive (0.13, 0.08, and 0.03, respectively), and

they are all statistically significant at the 1% level.

    Further, we would expect firms subject to more cybersecurity-risk exposure to actively

manage their exposure through real actions. One such real action is to use a cyber insurance

policy. By looking for the word "insurance" in the cybersecurity-risk disclosures, we identify

a non-negligible number of firms that explicitly mention insurance policies (8.43% of all firm-

years in our sample). The vast majority of these firms (80%) have high above median

cybersecurity-risk scores. We manually read all disclosures in which the word "insurance"

appears. In almost all cases, firms mention their insurance policy only partially protects them

against claims that may arise due to cyber attacks. For example, Apple Inc in its cybersecurity-

risk disclosures for fiscal year 2017 states, "While the Company maintains insurance coverage

that is intended to address certain aspects of data security risks, such insurance coverage may

be insufficient to cover all losses or all types of claims that may arise". Likewise, Verizon

Communications Inc in its cybersecurity-risk disclosures for fiscal year 2017 states, "The

potential costs associated with these attacks could exceed the insurance coverage we maintain".

Our measure is positively correlated (0.16) with the existence of an insurance policy (Cyber

Insurance).


                                                 14
    Overall, our findings reveal correlations between our cybersecurity-risk measure and a

series of quantitative measures of language, which are computed using a different methodology

(i.e., by using word lists). Therefore, these results further suggest our measure captures

exposure to cybersecurity risk.



3.3 Time-series and Industry Properties

Figure 1 presents the yearly average value of our measure as well as the number of successful

cyber attacks per year. The figure shows a positive time trend, especially after 2011, when the

SEC issued the first cybersecurity-disclosure requirements. The observed increased in the

average score is notable, increasing from 0.153 in 2011 to 0.454 in 2018. In addition, whereas

49.03% of the firm-years exhibit zero cybersecurity risk in 2011, only 10.59% do in 2018.

Overall, this period is characterized by increasing concerns over cybersecurity risk, which

largely originate from the large number of successful cyber attacks against public firms (e.g.,

32 incidents in 2014, up from 11 in 2010 and 9 in 2012). A simple correlation between our

measure and the percentage of cyber attacks per year is 0.72, suggesting the time-series

properties of our measure aligns well with the percentage of cyber attacks.

    Figure 2 presents the average value of the cybersecurity-risk measure across the 12 Fama

and French industries. The measure exhibits considerable across-industry differences.

Cybersecurity risk is more pronounced in Telephone and Television Transmission; Wholesale,

Retail and Some Services; Business Equipment and Money Finance sectors. All of these

industries rely on information technology systems, which makes them more vulnerable to cyber

attacks. Indeed, 125 cyber attacks or 71.4% of the total number of cyber attacks occur in these

industries. Firms in more "traditional" industries such as Energy, Oil and Gas; and

Manufacturing exhibit much lower cybersecurity risk and fewer cyber attacks.




                                              15
        Taken together, both the time-series and industry variation of our measure has features that

intuitively relate to cybersecurity risk: the average exposure and the number of firms exposed

to cybersecurity risk increases over time, and firms in industries that are more reliant on

information technology are more exposed to cybersecurity risk than other firms.



3.4 Firm and 10-K Characteristics

Table 3 presents descriptive statistics of our measure as well as various firm, industry, 10-K,

and corporate-governance characteristics. We detail all variable definitions in Appendix B. To

mitigate the impact of outliers, we winsorize the continuous variables in the sample at the 1st

and 99th percentiles (by year). The results show the average score (Cybersecurity Risk Index)

is 0.24. Because our measure is based on cybersecurity-risk disclosures, and several firms in

our sample started providing such disclosures after the SEC specific guidelines in 2011, the

25th percentile is zero. 13 In addition, the 75th percentile of our measure is 0.45. Overall, as

expected, the distribution of our measure is not normal and exhibits a positive skewness.

        We then employ a linear regression model to examine how our measure relates to firm

characteristics. The model also includes industry, 10-K, and corporate-governance

characteristics. Table 4 reports the results. In Model 1, we control for industry and year fixed

effects, whereas in Model 2, we control for firm and year fixed effects. Including firm fixed

effects removes the impact from possible boilerplate or generic cybersecurity-risk disclosures

that could lead to highly sticky scores across time for the same firm. Finally, standard errors

are clustered at the firm level. The results show a positive association between our measure

and firm size (Firm Size (ln)), growth opportunities (Tobin's Q), and profitability (ROA). These

results indicate the score is higher for typically more visible firms. Firms with higher scores

are also younger (Firm Age (ln)), have trade secrets (Secrets), and spend more on research and


13
     Excluding firm-year observations prior to 2011 from the analyses, does not alter our main conclusions.

                                                         16
development (R&D Expenditures). Naturally, such firms are expected to be more vulnerable

to cyber attacks.

     For the remaining variables, our measure is negatively related to industry cash-flow

volatility (Cash Flow Volatility (Industry)), which suggests risky innate operations that

characterize certain industries, as reflected by cash-flow risk, are associated with our measured

scores. Our measure is also related to 10-K and corporate-governance characteristics. Firms

with higher scores also have lengthier Item 1A. Risk Factors sections (Risk Section Length (ln))

and less readable 10-Ks (Readability (ln)). These results support the view that firms with higher

scores are inherently riskier firms. In addition, firms with better governance quality (e.g., those

with higher institutional ownership (Institutional Ownership), more independent directors

sitting on their boards (Independent Directors), and a separate risk committee (Risk

Committee)) exhibit a higher score. These findings might indicate firms with better corporate

governance are also pre-emptively more active in attempting to understand, report, and manage

their risks, including the risk of litigation and cyber attacks.

     Overall, these results indicate our measure is related to characteristics of firms that were

successfully attacked (see Kamiya et al., 2020). 14 Therefore, these results provide additional

support to the view that our measure captures exposure to cybersecurity risk.



3.5 Firm Outcomes

Finally, we verify that the measure captures cybersecurity-risk exposure by investigating

whether it is associated with firm-level outcomes that are consistent with cybersecurity risk. If

our measure indeed captures exposure to cybersecurity risk, we would expect a higher

likelihood of such an event materializing, which would result in negative stock returns. A




14
   We obtain similar results when using Jaccard similarity as a proxy for cybersecurity risk (see Table IA.1 of
Internet Appendix).

                                                      17
negative stock market reaction may occur even in the absence of a cyber-attack directed against

a firm's systems and operations; that is, negative returns may occur for high-cybersecurity-

risk firms in times of heightened concerns over data breaches for various reasons (e.g.,

disclosure regulatory changes) and when investors require higher compensation for holding

stocks with high exposure to cybersecurity risk. Accordingly, we expect that firms with high

cybersecurity risk should have negative asymmetries in stock returns. Therefore, we estimate

a linear regression where the dependent variable is the negative coefficient of skewness of

weekly returns (NCSKEW) (Chen, Hong, and Stein, 2001; Lettau, Maggiori, and Weber, 2014).

The main explanatory variable is our cybersecurity-risk measure. Control variables include

firm, industry, 10-K, and corporate-governance characteristics. In addition, we include time

and industry fixed effects. All continuous variables are standardized to have a mean of 0 and

standard deviation of 1. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. In Model 1 of Table 5,

the results show our measure positively correlates with NCSKEW. As a robustness test, we use

extreme sigma as an alternative measure of negative asymmetries in stock returns. Extreme

sigma is the negative of the worst deviation of firm-specific weekly returns from the average

firm-specific weekly returns divided by the standard deviation of firm-specific weekly returns

(EXTR_SIGMA) (Andreou, Louca, and Petrou, 2017). In Model 2 of Table A, the results

continue to support a positive and statistically significant association between our measure and

EXTR_SIGMA. In Table IA.2 of the Internet Appendix, we repeat this analysis and obtain

similar findings using the cybersecurity-risk measure constructed through Jaccard similarity.

    Our next test focuses on whether our measure forecasts future cyber attacks. We estimate

a logit regression in which the dependent variable equals 1 if a firm experiences a cyber-attack

in a given year, and 0 otherwise. The key explanatory variable is our (one-year) lagged measure

of cybersecurity risk. Like before, we control for firm, industry, 10-K, and corporate-

governance characteristics, and time and industry fixed effects. All continuous variables are


                                              18
standardized to have a mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1. Standard errors are clustered at

the firm level. Table 6 presents the results. In Panel A, the dependent variable is based on all

cyber attacks reported in the PRC database for which we have complete data. Model 1 only

adds year and industry fixed effects, and Model 2 additionally controls for various firm,

industry, 10-K, and corporate-governance characteristics. Furthermore, it includes an indicator

variable of whether a firm has been subject to a cyber-attack in the past (Previous Attack

Dummy), which controls for the fact that the history of past attacks may be a good predictor of

future attacks. The results show a positive and statistically significant association between our

measure and the probability of experiencing a cyber attack. In terms of economic importance,

one standardized unit increase in our measure increases the probability of a cyber attack by

92.70%. These results are not surprising; by construction, our cybersecurity-risk measure is

likely to contain forward-looking information. The reason is the cybersecurity-related

disclosures, which we use to construct cybersecurity-risk exposure, are legally required to be

accurate and current, and thus are likely to reflect the top management's view about exposure

to cybersecurity risk. As a result, our measure contains unique information that is incremental

relative to both past attacks and other known accounting determinants of cyber attacks, such as

firm size or profitability (which tend to be backward looking).

    As a robustness test, we repeat the analysis after redefining the dependent variable; rather

than using all the cyber attacks reported in PRC database, we focus on major attacks that

attracted attention from global news outlets (e.g., CNBC, Financial Times and the Wall Street

Journal) or are covered in major Newswires (e.g., AP, Bloomberg, Reuters). Panel B of Table

6 reports the results; our measure retains a positive and statistically significant coefficient, and

therefore, it also predicts major future cyber attacks.

    Finally, we repeat our analysis after focusing on non-major cyber attacks (those that did

not attract attention from major Newswires). Accordingly, in Panel C of Table 6, our dependent


                                                19
variable takes the value of 1 if a firm experiences a non-major cyber-attack in year t, and 0

otherwise. Notably, firms with no experience of major attacks are not included in our training

sample used to construct our cybersecurity-risk measure. Therefore, this analysis offers an out-

of-sample setting for our predictive exercise. The results of Panel C confirm the predictive

ability of our measure for future (non-major) attacks. These findings are further validated via

predictive regressions based on Jaccard similarity as a proxy for cybersecurity risk (see Table

IA.3 of the Internet Appendix).



4. Cybersecurity Risk and Stock Returns

In the previous section, we show our measure is correlated with both language and real actions,

consistent with managing exposure to cybersecurity risk. In addition, it displays intuitive time-

series, industry, and firm characteristics that are associated with the probability of cyber

attacks. Consistent with these results, our measure is significantly associated with negative

asymmetries in stock returns and predicts future cyber attacks. After providing evidence that

our measure captures exposure to cybersecurity risk, in this section, we examine whether the

stock market prices cybersecurity risk in the cross section of returns.

    Specifically, we conjecture that investors may demand compensation for bearing

cybersecurity risk; that is, they may require a higher expected return from a firm exposed to

high cybersecurity risk. We first use univariate portfolio-level analyses to examine the return

performance of firms exposed to high and low cybersecurity risk. Second, we conduct bivariate

portfolio sorts to better understand whether exposure to cybersecurity risk is more prevalent in

certain subsamples of stocks with different characteristics. Third, we present Fama-McBeth

(1973) cross sectional regression results to ensure we are not simply capturing exposure to

other well-known risk factors. Finally, we investigate the time-series variation of a

cybersecurity-risk factor.


                                               20
4.1 Univariate Portfolio-level Analysis

We implement the portfolio analysis as follows. We first assign firms into three tercile

portfolios according to their exposure to cybersecurity risk. Portfolio 1 includes stocks with the

lowest exposure to cybersecurity risk. Given the nature of the data, Portfolio 1 may consist of

firms with no cybersecurity-risk disclosures in their 10-Ks. The remaining stocks are then

assigned into Portfolio 2 and Portfolio 3 based on the median values of cybersecurity risk. 15

Our objective is to test whether stocks in Portfolio 3 (high-cybersecurity-risk stocks)

outperform those in Portfolio 1 portfolio (low-cybersecurity-risk stocks). For our benchmark

tests, we start in December 2007 and construct portfolios at the end of each quarter (quarterly

rebalancing). 16 We then track the performance of the three portfolios and compute monthly

returns in excess of the risk-free rate over the period of March 2008 - March 2019. 17 We

calculate both equal-weighted (ew) and value-weighted (vw) monthly portfolio returns. We

report average excess portfolio returns as well as portfolio alphas adjusted for market risk

(CAPM alphas) or, alternatively, for market, size (SMB), value (HML), and momentum

(MOM) factor exposures according to Carhart's (1997) FFC model (FFC alphas), as well as

alphas adjusted for market, size and value, profitability (RMW) and investment (CMA) factor

exposures according to the Fama and French's (2015) model (five-factor alphas).

     The results are presented in Table 7. The average portfolio returns increase from 0.17% to

0.84% from low- to high-cybersecurity-risk stocks for the equal-weighted portfolios, indicating

a monthly average difference of 0.67% between the two portfolios. The difference is also

statistically significant at the 1% level with a Newey-West t-statistic of 4.54. 18 The


15
   We have chosen tercile portfolios for our benchmark analysis so that the three portfolios have a similar number
of firms. In a series of robustness tests, we also present results based on quartile, quintile, and decile portfolios
(see section 5).
16
   For robustness purposes, we present in section 5 results based on monthly and yearly rebalancing.
17
   Due to data availability (i.e., small number of firms assigned in each portfolio in January 2008 and February
2008), our portfolio analysis starts in March 2008.
18
   We use 12 lags for the calculation of standard errors. Our results are stronger when we use fewer lags, such as
six or four.


                                                         21
corresponding return differential is slightly lower for the case of value-weighted returns (0.61%

per month), but it remains statistically significant at the 1% level. Controlling for the market,

Fama-French-Carhart, and Fama-French (2015) risk factors does not affect our findings. For

example, the FFC (five-factor) alpha for the long-short portfolio is 0.69% (0.66%) per month

with a t-statistic of 4.80 (4.38) for the case of equal-weighted portfolios. The results based on

value-weighted returns yield slightly smaller return differences across the two portfolios, but

these differences remain both economically and statistically significant (e.g., the five-factor

alpha for the long-short portfolio is 0.57% per month with a t-statistic of 3.58). Overall, the

results imply firms with high cybersecurity risk exhibit higher future excess returns and

positive alphas net of well-known risk factors. We further validate the results using the

alternative measure of cybersecurity risk, constructed through Jaccard similarity (see Table

IA.4 of the Internet Appendix); therefore, the findings are not sensitive to the method used to

measure the degree of similarity in cybersecurity-risk disclosures.

    Panel B of Table 7 reports the average portfolio characteristics in each cybersecurity-risk

portfolio. Specifically, we present information about the number of stocks in each portfolio,

well-known stock characteristics, such as size and book-to-market (Fama and French, 1992,

1993), profitability (Fama and French, 2015), institutional ownership (Weber, 2018), illiquidity

(Amihud, 2002), idiosyncratic volatility (Ang, Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang, 2006), and 10-K

characteristics such as the length of Item 1A. Risk Factor disclosures and the complexity of 10-

K disclosures (You and Zhang, 2009; Lehavy, Li, and Merkley, 2011). The results show

Portfolio 1 includes a larger number of stocks than Portfolio 3 on average (1233 vs. 966). This

is driven by the fact that a non-negligible number of firms have no cybersecurity-risk

disclosures in their 10-Ks (Item 1A); by construction, no cybersecurity-risk disclosures imply

zero cybersecurity risk. Firms may not report cybersecurity-risk disclosures, because they

simply have no such risk concerns. Nevertheless, firms may not report cybersecurity-risk


                                               22
disclosures, because of (i) low awareness of cybersecurity risk and/or (ii) poor disclosure

practises. In section 5, we explicitly address these possibilities through several robustness tests

and show our main result is not driven by firms with no cybersecurity-risk disclosures.

    The results in Panel B of Table 7 also indicate non-negligible differences between

Portfolios 1 and 3 in terms of several firm and 10-K characteristics. Specifically, the average

firm in Portfolio 3, which contains high-cybersecurity-risk stocks, is larger in size and exhibits

higher profitability, institutional ownership, length of Item 1A, and lower book-to-market,

illiquidity, and readability than the average firm in Portfolio 1, which contains low-

cybersecurity-risk stocks. These differences, which are also statistically significant between

Portfolios 1 and 3, motivate us to conduct bivariate portfolio tests to examine whether the

excess returns of high-cybersecurity-risk stocks are confined to subsamples of firms with

certain characteristics.



4.2 Bivariate Portfolio-level Analysis

In this section, we use bivariate portfolio sorts. Specifically, starting from December 2007, we

sort stocks at the end of each quarter in ascending order on the basis of their cybersecurity risk

and allocate them into three groups (low-cyber-risk stocks, middle group and high-cyber-risk

stocks), and we also independently sort stocks into ascending order according to several firm-

and 10-K-level characteristics. Specifically, we allocate them into two portfolios (low and

high) based on median values for each of the following characteristics: market value, book-to-

market, return-on-assets (ROA), institutional ownership, illiquidity, idiosyncratic volatility,

risk-section length, and readability. The intersection of the above classifications yields several

double-sorted portfolios. We track the performance of the intersection portfolios over the

following quarter until they are rebalanced, and report results in Table 8. Specifically, we

directly report the excess returns of high- versus low-cybersecurity-risk portfolios within each


                                                23
subsample sorted by another firm characteristic. The outperformance of high-cybersecurity-

risk stocks persists in all combinations of stocks and remains statistically significant in the vast

majority of cases. These results hold for different measures of excess returns (i.e., average

return and five-factor alpha) and both equal- and value-weighted portfolio returns. These

results ensure our findings are not contained within a small subsample of stocks, and alleviate

concerns that exposure to cybersecurity risk captures other well-known risk proxies.



4.3 Cross-sectional Regressions with Individual Securities

The previous portfolio-level analysis may mask some relevant information: First, controlling

for multiple effects jointly is difficult (Freyberger, Neuhierl and Weber, 2020), and second,

through portfolio aggregation, it throws away a significant amount of information in the cross

section of stock returns. Therefore, we also test the cross sectional relation between

cybersecurity risk and subsequent stock returns, using Fama-MacBeth (1973) regressions. For

each month of our sample, we run cross sectional regressions of excess stock returns on lagged

cybersecurity-risk exposure and a series of characteristics. Specifically, we control for beta,

size, and book-to-market (Fama and French, 1992), momentum (Jegadeesh and Titman, 1993),

short-term reversal (Jegadeesh, 1990), illiquidity (Amihud, 2002), coskewness (Harvey and

Siddique, 2000), idiosyncratic volatility (Ang, Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang, 2006), asset growth

and profitability (Fama and French, 2015), and demand for lottery-like stocks (Bali, Cakici,

and Whitelaw, 2011). We also control for 10-K characteristics such as the length of Item 1A.

Risk Factors and the degree of readability of the 10-K. Table 9 reports the average slope

coefficients estimated from these monthly regressions as well as their t-statistics computed

using Newey-West standard errors. To interpret the economic significance of our findings, all

explanatory variables are standardized (demeaned and divided by their standard deviations).




                                                24
    In Model 1, we only include our cybersecurity-risk index in the regressions and find the

time-series average of the cross sectional coefficients is 0.30% (with a Newey-West adjusted

t-statistic of 6.28); therefore, a one standard deviation increase in cybersecurity risk increases

returns by 0.30% per month. Model 2 controls for a series of additional stock- firm-level

characteristics (as listed above), and in Model 3, we additionally control for the length of Item

1A. Risk Factors and the readability of 10-K filings. The results show the coefficient estimate

of cybersecurity risk remains positive and significant, although the magnitude of the

cybersecurity risk effect is reduced.

    In the last five columns of Table 9 (Models 4 to 8), we assess the long-term (up-to-12

month) predictive power of the cybersecurity-risk proxy. The results show that controlling for

all firm characteristics and risk factors, cybersecurity risk predicts monthly cross-sectional

variation in stock returns up to 12 months into the future. This finding suggests the

predictability is not a short-term phenomenon.

    Finally, we also re-estimate the Fama-MacBeth regressions using Jaccard similarity as our

key explanatory variable and proxy for cybersecurity risk. The results, which are reported in

Table IA.5 of the Internet Appendix, are very similar to the ones reported in Table 9.



4.4 A Cybersecurity-risk Factor and its Time-series Variation

So far, we have documented that stocks exposed more to cybersecurity risk have higher

expected returns, and exposure to cybersecurity risk predicts the cross-sectional variation in

individual stock returns. To the extent that our measure accurately captures cybersecurity risk,

and this is a priced source of risk, then high-cybersecurity-risk stocks should perform poorly

and significantly worse than low-cybersecurity-risk stocks on the days of intense attention

toward cybersecurity risk. To test whether this conjecture holds, we first form a simple

cybersecurity-risk factor using a method similar to the one proposed by Fama and French


                                               25
(1993). At the end of each month, we sort all stocks into two groups based on market value

(using the median market value as a cut-off point). We then independently sort all stocks into

three groups based on our cybersecurity-risk measure using the 30th and 70th percentiles as

cut-off points. The cybersecurity-risk factor portfolio is calculated as the average return of the

two value-weighted high-cybersecurity-risk portfolios minus the average return of the two

value-weighted low-cybersecurity-risk portfolios. As Fama and French (1993) note, this

ensures the constructed factor captures returns associated with a risk premium (in our case

cybersecurity risk) while maintaining neutrality to market capitalization.

    For the analysis of the time-series variation of the factor, we resort to daily data and

calculate daily returns of the factor over the period March 2008 to March 2019, that is, 2789

daily returns. We are interested in examining the performance of the cybersecurity-risk factor,

especially during days of intense attention toward cybersecurity risk. We identify these days

based on abnormal search volume index (SVI) in Google Trends. The SVI measures the

intensity on "search terms" or "search topics" during a time period, and it is considered a

reliable measure of revealed investor attention and demand for information (Drake, Roulsstone,

and Thornock, 2012; Da, Engelberg, and Gao, 2011). "Search topics" are a collection of related

"search terms"; therefore, we focus on "search topics" because potentially capture attention

more comprehensively. We identify the following relevant topics: hacker, data breach, cyber-

attack, cyber insurance, cybersecurity, cyber security regulation and hacking. However, not all

topics exhibit the same intensity. After comparing them, we find that the average intensity of

hacker in our sample period is 19.14 whereas for data breach, it is 15.01; all the remaining

topics exhibit substantially less intensity. As a result, to gauge when investors have increasing

concerns over cybersecurity risk, we use the topics hacker and data breach.

    More specifically, we estimate the following regression model:

        =  +  × __ _ +  ×  + ,                                                                [3]


                                               26
where CRF is the cybersecurity-risk factor, "High_Google_SVI_dummy" is a dummy variable

that takes the value of 1 on days with high SVI, and 0 otherwise, and X is a vector of commonly

used (daily) risk factors, namely, market, size, value, momentum, operating profitability, and

investment factors (see Carhart, 1997; Fama and French, 2015). We construct the variable

"High_Google_SVI_dummy" as follows: we first download the monthly SVI for our sample

period and take its first difference. 19 We then identify the months with the highest attention on

cybersecurity risk (top decile of the distribution), and through another Google Trends search

for each of these months, we identify the day with the highest SVI. 20 We present results using

the highest SVIs identified using both hacker and data breach topics. However, the results are

robust if we consider independently the highest SVIs identified by hacker or data breach topics.

Our event window covers the period [0,+1].

        We estimate equation [3] using alternative models and present the results in Table 10.

Models 1 includes High_Google_SVI_dummy as the only explanatory variable. Model 2

controls for the market risk factor (CAPM specification); in Model 3, we add the size, value

and momentum factors (FFC specification), and Model 4 controls for the five risk factors

proposed by Fama and French (2015) (Fama-French five-factor specification). Based on the

findings, the cybersecurity-risk factor exhibits, on average, positive returns over the sample

period; the daily estimate for the constant term  is positive (at 0.0002, which implies an

annualized return above 5% per year) and is statistically significant (at the 1% level) in all

models. Importantly, the estimate for  is consistently negative and statistically significant,

which suggests the cybersecurity-risk factor exhibits negative returns on days with major

concerns on cybersecurity risk. These results suggest firms with high exposure to cybersecurity

risk earn high returns on average, but they perform poorly when concerns about cybersecurity



19
     Google Search Trends provide daily data only for query period shorter than nine months.
20
     For non-trading days with the highest monthly SVI, we use the first subsequent trading day.

                                                         27
risk are heightened. The premium that high-cybersecurity-risk stocks earn compensates risk-

averse investors for holding high-cybersecurity-risk stocks, which significantly underperform

in times of heightened cybersecurity risk and investors' concerns about data breaches.

    Finally, in Panels B and C, we re-estimate equation [3] after replacing the variable

High_Google_SVI_dummy with the variable High_Google_SVI_dummy + 5 days

(High_Google_SVI_dummy + 1 month), which moves the event window a trading week

(month) after the actual peak of the SVI index. For these placebo events, we find no evidence

of underperformance of the cybersecurity-risk factor, ensuring we are not capturing any other

events coincidentally close in time.



5. Portfolio Analysis: Robustness Tests

This section presents several robustness tests. First, we check whether the outperformance of

stocks exposed to high cybersecurity risk is more pronounced in the latter period of our sample,

in particular, after SEC's 2011 guidance for public-disclosure obligations with respect to

cybersecurity risk and cyber incidents. Consistent with the view that concerns over

cybersecurity risk have increased in the post-2011 period, the results in Panel A of Table 11

show the excess return and five-factor alpha for the long-short portfolio are higher than those

reported in Table 7 for the entire period (i.e., the five-factor alpha increases to 0.65% - up from

0.57%- for the case of value-weighted portfolios).

    In Panel B of Table 11, we assess the outperformance of high-cybersecurity-risk stocks

after excluding from the sample all firms that use cyber insurance as a form of (partial)

protection against cybersecurity risk. As mentioned above, we identify these firms by searching

for the word "insurance" in their cybersecurity-risk disclosures and looking at their relevant

discussions. By construction, these firms are more likely to be classified as high-cybersecurity-

risk firms (P3) than low-cybersecurity-risk firms (P1) (i.e. P1 only includes firms with no

cybersecurity-related disclosures in the early years of our sample). Such classification may be

                                                28
problematic because these firms are at least partially protected against claims that may arise

due to cyber attacks, which suggests investors should be less concerned about their exposure

to cybersecurity risk. Consistent with this reasoning, we find the performance of the long-short

portfolio increases after the exclusion of firms with cyber insurance from our sample (i.e., the

five-factor alpha increases to 0.65% - up from 0.57% - for the case of value-weighted

portfolios).

    In Panel C, we perform a similar exercise after excluding from the analysis all firms that

experienced major attacks and that we used for the construction of our cybersecurity-risk

measure; that is, all firms in the training sample. These are, by construction, high-

cybersecurity-risk firms and their exclusion has a direct effect on the composition of the

portfolio with the highest-cybersecurity-risk stocks (P3). Indeed, we observe a decline in the

spread of the long-short portfolio, especially for the case of value-weighted returns.

Nevertheless, the documented premium still remains robust and statistically significant (at 1%

for the case of equal-weighted portfolios and 5% for the case of value-weighted portfolios).

This result suggests our findings are not driven by firms that experienced major cyber attacks.

    In Panel D, we repeat our analysis for monthly and annual rebalancing of our portfolios.

Once again, our results are robust and very similar to those reported in Table 7.

    We then check whether the outperformance of stocks exposed to high cybersecurity risk

is driven by certain industries. To do so, we repeat the portfolio analysis (as in section 4.1) 12

times after excluding each industry at a time, to remove any potential abnormal impact of a

particular industry group. Panel E of Table 11 presents the estimates on the performance (both

in terms of average return and five-factor alpha) of the spread strategy, that is, long the portfolio

with the highest-cybersecurity-risk stocks (P3) and short the portfolio with the lowest-

cybersecurity-risk stocks (P1). In all cases, we find a positive and statistically significant




                                                 29
premium of high-cybersecurity-risk stocks, both in terms of equal-weighted and value-

weighted returns. Therefore, the results are not driven by any particular industry.

    Then, we deal with the fact that a non-negligible number of firms in the sample have no

cybersecurity-risk related disclosures in their 10-Ks (Item 1A). This feature of the data is

concentrated in the early years of the sample (i.e., 2008-2011) and results in the assignment of

zero cybersecurity risk for such firm-years. Given that in the earlier years of the sample,

cybersecurity risk was arguably not so prevalent, we can assume that these firms have indeed

relatively low levels of cybersecurity risk. However, a non-cybersecurity-risk disclosure may

also be driven by (i) low awareness of cybersecurity risk and/or (ii) poor disclosure practices.

The subperiod analysis in Panel A helps (partly) in dealing with this potential measurement

problem in the cybersecurity-risk measure, because the non-disclosure problem largely

disappears in the January 2012-March 2019 period. As an additional test, we replace all firm-

year observations of cybersecurity risk with zero values, with the median industry value in the

corresponding year. To capture risk exposure as accurately as possible, we use four-digit SIC

codes for the industry classification. The results, as reported in Panel F of Table 11, are

qualitatively similar to those based on the original cybersecurity-risk measure. As our final test,

we assume a firm's exposure to cybersecurity risk is likely to be persistent across time, and

hence backfilled all zeros in the measure with the first available non-zero observation of each

firm. A complication, however, with this approach is that, on average, the cybersecurity risk

increases across time; therefore, given the non-disclosure problem is concentrated in the early

years of the sample, backfilling cybersecurity risk artificially "inflates" the exposure to

cybersecurity risk for firms that do not report cybersecurity-risk disclosures in a certain year

relative to firms that do. Nevertheless, as shown in Panel G, the results remain largely

unaffected; although the spread is lower, reflecting perhaps the noisier measure of

cybersecurity risk. Interestingly, when we focus on more "extreme" portfolios to calculate the


                                                30
spread (i.e., quartile, quintile and decile portfolios), the return spread increases in magnitude

(e.g., 0.53% per month using a five-factor alpha for decile portfolios, up from 0.29% per month

for tercile portfolios). Overall, these results, along with the fact the more extreme portfolio

classifications help distinguish more clearly between low- and high-cybersecurity-risk stocks,

lead to the conclusion that the results are not driven by firm-years with no cyber-related

disclosures in 10-Ks.



6. Conclusions

We construct a novel firm-level measure of cybersecurity risk using textual analysis of

cybersecurity-risk disclosures in Item 1A. Risk Factors in 10-K statements and use it to

examine whether cybersecurity risk is priced in the cross section of stock returns. We show

that the measure successfully identifies firms that discuss risk extensively, and that it displays

intuitive relations with quantitative measures based on cybersecurity-risk-disclosure language.

In addition, the measure displays interesting time-series and cross sectional characteristics. For

instance, it exhibits a positive trend over time, and it is more prevalent among industries that

rely on information technology systems. We also find the measure correlates with several

characteristics linked to firms hit by cyber attacks, such as size, age, growth opportunities, asset

tangibility, R&D expenditures, and the presence of trade secrets. Finally, we find the measure

is positively associated with (negative) asymmetries in stock returns and it also predicts the

probability of experiencing a future cyber attack. Overall, these results support the view that

our measure captures exposure to cybersecurity risk.

    In financial markets, cybersecurity risk is priced in the cross section of stock returns.

Specifically, a portfolio long on firms with high-cybersecurity-risk and short on low-

cybersecurity-risk stocks earns a statistically significant 66-69 (56-66) basis points per month

- up to 8.3% (7.9%) - in equal-weighted (value-weighted) returns over the following year.



                                                31
Fama-MacBeth cross sectional regressions confirm a positive and statistically significant

association between future individual stock returns and our cybersecurity-risk measure. A

factor-mimicking portfolio calculated as the difference in the return of stocks with high and

low cybersecurity risk performs poorly around periods of increasing investor attention to

cybersecurity risk but earns a high premium during other times. These results support the

predictions of asset-pricing theory that investors require compensation for bearing

cybersecurity risk.

    Our study opens several avenues for future research. The cybersecurity-risk measure and

its underlying methodology, which is transparent, easily implementable, and comprehensively

covers the population of US firms that file 10-K reports in Edgar, enables a systematic analysis

on cybersecurity risk and its implications for firm value, corporate policies, and firm

operations.




                                              32
                                         References

Akey, P., Lewellen, S., Liskovich, I., & Schiller, C. (2020) Hacking corporate reputations.
   Rotman School of Management Working Paper No. 3143740, Available at SSRN:
   https://ssrn.com/abstract=3143740.
Amihud, Y. (2002) Illiquidity and stock returns: cross section and time-series effects. Journal
   of Financial Markets 5:31-56.
Amir, E., Levi, S., & Livne, T. (2018) Do firms underreport information on cyber attacks?
   Evidence from capital markets. Review of Accounting Studies 23:1177-1206.
Andreou, P. C., Louca, C., & Petrou, A. P. (2017) CEO age and stock price crash risk. Review
   of Finance 21:1287-1325.
Ang, A., Hodrick, R. J., Xing, Y., & Zhang, X. (2006) The crosssection of volatility and
   expected returns. Journal of Finance 61:259-299.
Baker, S.R., Bloom, N., & Davis, S.J. (2016) Measuring economic policy uncertainty.
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 131:1593-1636.
Bali, T.G., Cakici, N., & Whitelaw, R.F. (2011) Maxing out: Stocks as lotteries and the cross
   section of expected returns. Journal of Financial Economics 99:427-446.
Bouveret, A. (2018) Cyber risk for the financial sector: A framework for quantitative
   assessment.       IMF       Working      paper       143.      Available      at      SSRN:
   https://ssrn.com/abstract=3203026.
Brown, S.V., & Tucker, J.W. (2011) Large-sample evidence on firms' year-over-year MD&A
   modifications. Journal of Accounting Research 49:309-346.
Buehlmaier, M.M., & Whited, T.M. (2018) Are financial constraints priced? Evidence from
   textual analysis. Review of Financial Studies 31:2693-2728.
Campbell, J.L., Chen, H., Dhaliwal, D.S., Lu, H-S, & Steele, L.B. (2014) The information
   content of mandatory risk factor disclosures in corporate filings. Review of Accounting
   Studies 19:396-455.
Carhart, M. (1997) On the persistence in mutual fund performance. Journal of Finance 52:57-
   82.
Chen, J., Hong, H., & Stein, J.C. (2001) Forecasting crashes: Trading volume, past returns, and
   conditional skewness in stock prices. Journal of Financial Economics 61:345-381.
Cohen, L., Malloy, C., & Nguyen, Q. (2020) Lazy prices. Journal of Finance 70: 1371-1415.
Da, Z., Engelberg, J., & Gao, P. (2011) In search of attention. Journal of Finance 66:1461-
   1499.
Drake, M.S., Roulstone, D.T., & Thornock, J.R. (2012) Investor information demand:
   Evidence from Google searches around earnings announcements. Journal of Accounting
   Research 50:1001-1040.
Fama, E.F., & French, K.R. (1992) The crosssection of expected stock returns. Journal of
   Finance 47:427-465.
Fama, E.F., & French, K.R. (1993) Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds.
   Journal of Financial Economics 33:3-56.
Fama E.F., & French, K.R. (2015) A five-factor asset pricing model. Journal of Financial
   Economics 116:1­22.
Fama, E.F., & MacBeth, J. D. (1973) Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empirical tests. Journal of
   Political Economy 81:607-636.
Freyberger, J., Neuhierl, A., & Weber, M. (2020) Dissecting characteristics non-
   parametrically. Review of Financial Studies 33:2326-2377.
Frésard, L., Hoberg, G., & Phillips, G.M. (2020) Innovation activities and integration through
   vertical acquisitions. Review of Financial Studies 33:2937-2976.


                                              33
Gentzkow, M., Kelly, B., & Taddy, M. (2019) Text as data. Journal of Economic Literature
   57:535-74.
Hanley, K.W., & Hoberg, G. (2010) The information content of IPO prospectuses. Review of
   Financial Studies 23:2821-2864.
Harvey, C.R., & Siddique, A. (2000) Conditional skewness in asset pricing tests. Journal of
   Finance 55:1263-1295.
Hassan, T.A., Hollander, S., van Lent, L., & Tahoun, A. (2019) Firm-level political risk:
   Measurement and effects. Quarterly Journal of Economics 134: 2135-2202.
Campbell, J.Y., & Hentschel, L. (1992) No news is good news: An asymmetric model of
   changing volatility in stock returns. Journal of Financial Economics 31:281-318.
Hilary, G., Segal, B., & Zhang, M. (2016) Cyber-risk disclosure: Who cares? Georgetown
   McDonough School of Business Research Paper No. 2852519.
Hoberg, G., & Maksimovic, V. (2015) Redefining financial constraints: A text-based analysis.
   Review of Financial Studies 28:1312-1352.
Hoberg, G., & Phillips, G. (2010) Product market synergies and competition in mergers and
   acquisitions: A text-based analysis. Review of Financial Studies 23:3773-3811.
Hoberg, G., & Phillips, G. (2016) Text-based network industries and endogenous product
   differentiation. Journal of Political Economy 124:1423-1465.
Jegadeesh, N. (1990) Evidence of predictable behavior of security returns. Journal of
   Finance 45:881-898.
Jegadeesh, N., & Titman, S. (1993) Returns to buying winners and selling losers: Implications
   for stock market efficiency. Journal of Finance 48:65-91.
Johnson, M.S., Kang, M.J. & Lawson, T. (2017) Stock price reaction to data breaches. Journal
   of Finance Issues 16:1-13.
Kamiya, S., Kang, J. K., Kim, J., Milidonis, A., & Stulz, R. M. (2020) Risk management, firm
   reputation, and the impact of successful cyberattacks on target firms. Journal of Financial
   Economics. Forthcoming.
Lang, M., & Stice-Lawrence, L. (2015) Textual analysis and international financial reporting:
   Large sample evidence. Journal of Accounting and Economics 60:110-135.
Lehavy, R., Li, F., & Merkley, K. (2011) The effect of annual report readability on analyst
   following and the properties of their earnings forecasts. Accounting Review 86:1087-1115.
Lending, C., Minnick, C., & Schorno, P.J. (2018) Corporate governance, social responsibility
   and data breaches. Financial Review 53:413-455.
Lettau, M., Maggiori, M., & Weber, M. (2014) Conditional risk premia in currency markets
   and other asset classes. Journal of Financial Economics 114:197-225.
Loughran, T., & McDonald, B. (2011) When is a liability not a liability? Textual analysis,
   dictionaries, and 10-Ks. Journal of Finance 66:35-65.
Loughran, T., & McDonald, B. (2016) Textual analysis in accounting and finance: A survey.
   Journal of Accounting Research 54:1187-1230.
Lowry, M., Michaely, R., & Volkova, E. (2020). Information revealed through the regulatory
   process: Interactions between the SEC and companies ahead of their IPO. Review of
   Financial Studies 33: 5510­5554.
Romanosky, S. (2016) Examining the costs and causes of cyber incidents. Journal of
   Cybersecurity 2:121-135.
Sautner, Z., van Lent, L., Vilkov, G. & Zhang, R. (2020) Firm-level climate change exposure.
   European Corporate Governance Institute ­ Finance Working Paper No. 686/2020.
Securities and Exchange Commission. (2011) CF disclosure guidance: Topic no. 2:
   Cybersecurity.
Securities and Exchange Commission. (2018) Commission statement and guidance on public
   company cybersecurity disclosures.

                                             34
Tosun, O.K. (2020) Cyber attacks and stock market activity. Available at SSRN:
  https://ssrn.com/abstract=3190454.
Weber, M. (2018) Cash flow duration and the term structure of equity returns. Journal of
  Financial Economics 188:486-503.
You, H., & Zhang, X. J. (2009) Financial reporting complexity and investor underreaction to
  10-K information. Review of Accounting Studies 14:559-586.




                                            35
                                                 Appendix A
                              A1: Extracting Cybersecurity-risk Disclosures

Based on our reading of 500 randomly 10-K files, the relevant cybersecurity risk discussion is usually

presented separately within certain paragraphs; each paragraph contains a title (in bold or italics) followed

by the relevant discussion. The title/relevant discussion often contains a direct description of cybersecurity

risk. For instance, the title of the relevant discussion in Apple Inc 10-Ks for fiscal year 2017 is "There may

be losses or unauthorized access to or releases of confidential information, including personally identifiable

information, that could subject the Company to significant reputational, financial, legal and operational

consequences.". In general, firms describe the nature of their business, how/why a firm's business is exposed

to cybersecurity risk, potential changes in exposure, and efforts to establish or improve security measures

which mitigate cybersecurity risk. In addition, in line with the regulatory concept of "material", firms also

provide information about internal/legal/economic consequences that may arise from cybersecurity risk.

Among others, internal consequences include theft or misuse of assets, intellectual property, data and

information that may arise from potential cyber attacks; legal consequences e.g. the loss of confidential

information could subject the company to significant legal consequences; and finally, economic

consequences i.e. information about how cybersecurity risk may affect their businesses; in particular

operations, competitive positioning, reputation etc..

     Below, we provide common keywords/phrases that companies use in their direct descriptions of

cybersecurity risk. 21 Our algorithm is not case sensitive; thus, it avoids missing relevant keywords/phrases.

In addition, to alleviate issues related to language expression, it captures all the words that "start with" the

relevant keyword. For example, with the keyword attack the algorithm searches also for attacks, attacking,

attacked etc. While some keywords/phrases, such as hackers clearly describe exposure to cybersecurity risk,

others such as attacks may also be considered in different settings (e.g. terrorist attacks). We overcome this

challenge as follows: when we have a relevant keyword/phrase that may also be used in different settings

we require (i) the presence of an additional relevant hit within the same sentence and (ii) the absence of an

additional irrelevant hit within the same sentence. For instance, when we find the keyword "attack" in a

sentence we also require the presence of the keyword "cyber" and the absence of the keyword "terrorist".



21
    The compilation of keywords/phrases is based on (i) cybersecurity risk glossaries such as
https://www.threatconnect.com/cyber-security-glossary/ and (ii) the language that firm's use to describe
cybersecurity risk in the 10-Ks.

                                                        36
     In addition, we noticed that firms may also use indirect description that may relate to cybersecurity risk.

For instance, in Apple Inc 10-K for fiscal year 2017 it writes "The Company's business requires it to use

and store confidential information, including, among other things, personally identifiable information

("PII") with respect to the Company's customers and employees." This sentence does not contain any direct

keywords/phrases of cybersecurity risk. However, it is part of the cybersecurity risk discussion as it is

immediately after the title of the paragraph "There may be losses or unauthorized access to or releases of

confidential information, including personally identifiable information, that could subject the Company to

significant reputational, financial, legal and operational consequences." and it is followed by the "The

Company devotes significant resources to network and data security, including through the use of encryption

and other security measures intended to protect its systems and data." Therefore, to capture such indirect

description of cybersecurity risk we create another list of indirect keywords/phrases. 22 Below we provide

the list with the keywords/phrases, which the companies use in their indirect descriptions for cybersecurity

risk. To ensure that our algorithm retrieves only relevant to cybersecurity risk sentences, we require first, to

identify a sentence with a direct cybersecurity risk discussion. Then, we search the subsequent 10 sentences

to find indirect keywords/phrases. Because the discussion is often clustered in a paragraph, it is reasonable

to assume that indirect keywords/phrases are tagged to cybersecurity risk. While this approach is very

successful, we noticed that occasionally it may also be noisy as it may capture discussion from the

subsequent risk factor description. We reduce this noise by exploiting the presence of title fonts (bold or

italics) in the subsequent risk factor to end the search; thus, we search until we find a subsequent sentence

in bold or italics ­ if we don't find any such sentence we search up to 10 subsequent sentences.

     Finally, we provide below examples on how successful the algorithm is in extracting/missing relevant

sentences from the 10-Ks of Apple Inc, Abbott Laboratories, General Motors Co, and Verizon

Communications Inc for the fiscal year 2017. We display sentences that the algorithm retrieves from

"relevant paragraphs" (i.e., when the focus is on cybersecurity risk) and from "other paragraphs" (i.e., when

the focus is not on cybersecurity risk).




22
   The compilation of keywords/phrases is based on the structure of the most comprehensive discussions of
cybersecurity risk in the 10-Ks and includes descriptions of (i) company business, (ii) internal consequences, (iii)
legal consequences, and (iv) economic consequences.

                                                        37
                                                Keywords/Phrases

                                         Relevant hit if                               Irrelevant hit if
1. Direct description of
cybersecurity risk
Attack                                   Cyber-, cyber, networks, systems,             Terror,   war,      contraband,
                                         products,      services, datacenter,          bombs
                                         infrastructure
Threat                                   Cyber-, cyber, networks, systems,             Terror, simulator, disease,
                                         products,      services, datacenter,          legal action, competitive,
                                         infrastructure                                competitors,      substitute,
                                                                                       patent,     nuclear,     life,
                                                                                       threaten/ed
Computer, information system             Malware, virus, viruses, intrusions
Malicious                                Software, programs, third parties, attacks    fires, product sales, warranty
                                                                                       claim/s
Breaches                                                                               Fiduciary         duty/duties,
                                                                                       covenant/s,             credit,
                                                                                       agreement/s,         warranty,
                                                                                       warranties,       obligations,
                                                                                       regulations,        contract/s,
                                                                                       resolution
Hacker,        hacking,       social
engineering, denial of service,
denial-of-service, phishing, cyber-
attack, cyber attacks, cyber risk,
cyber security, cybersecurity, cyber
intrusions, unauthorized access,
unauthorized disclosure, breach in
security, security breach

2. Indirect description of
cybersecurity risk

2.1 Company business
Company, regular course                  Business, operation, services
Technology, technologies                 Computer, information, communication,
                                         proprietary, infrastructure, reliance,
                                         digital, advances
Information                              Network, services, systems, confidential,
                                         proprietary, account
Electronic                               Network, services, systems, information
Computer,        telecommunication,      Systems, networks, facilities
third-party, infrastructure
Collect, store, transmit, retrieve,      Data, information
sensitive, critical, protection
IT environment, IT systems,
operational                   systems,
communication systems, critical
infrastructure
Security                                 Network, products, services, systems,
                                         devices, data, infrastructure, patches,
                                         cloud, web, email, vulnerabilities, threat,
                                         breach, penetrate, bypass, compromised,
                                         incidence,      incident,      circumvent,
                                         measures, portfolio, solutions, practices,
                                         standards
Vulnerabilities                          Network, products, services, systems,
                                         devices, data, infrastructure, claims


                                                           38
2.2 Internal consequences
Integrity,     reliability,    protect,   Network, products, services, systems,
protection, protecting, prevent,          data, measures, information
prevention, preventing, monitors,
compromise, secure, failure
Gain access                               Network, systems, data, datacenter
Access, accessed, modified                Improper, improperly,
Theft,        misuse,        misusing,    Assets, intellectual property, data,
modification, destruction, lost,          information
loss, stolen, steal, disclose, publicly
disclosed
Investigate,                remediate,    Network, products, services, systems,
remediation,       recover,     repair,   data, measures, efforts
replace
Interruptions, disruptions, delays        Network, services, system

Degrade the user experience,
invasion, user names, password,
break-ins, terminated agreements

2.3 Legal consequences
Legal                                     Claims, actions, challenges, liability
Legislative                               Actions
Regulatory                                Actions, investigations, agencies
Liability                                 Claims
Lawsuits, litigation

2.4 Economic consequences
Business                                  Adversely, material, harm disruptive,
                                          negative
Operations, services                      Disrupt
Revenues                                  Reduce, adversely, loss, lose
Cost                                      Increase, increasing, remedy
Operating results, operating margin       Harm, diminish, reduce
Earnings                                  Reduce, adversely
Financial                                 Harm, diminish, adversely, material,
                                          damage, negative
Competitive position                      Harm, diminish
Reputation                                Harm, damage, loss, adverse
Brand                                     Harm, damage




                                                          39
                                                     Appendix A (continued)
                                       A2: Examples of Algorithm Extraction Ability
 Number of      Sentence as in Company's 10-K (Item 1A.Risk Factors)                              Sentence   Sentence Type
  Sentence                                                                                        captured
                                                                                                  (Yes/No)

Apple Inc (Fiscal year ended September 30, 2017)

Text from the relevant paragraph:

      1         There may be losses or unauthorized access to or releases of confidential           Yes      Direct: Description of
                information, including personally identifiable information, that could subject               Cybersecurity Risk
                the Company to significant reputational, financial, legal and operational
                consequences.
      2         The Company's business requires it to use and store confidential information,       Yes      Indirect: Description
                including, among other things, personally identifiable information ("PII")                   of Company Business
                with respect to the Company's customers and employees.
      3         The Company devotes significant resources to network and data security,             Yes      Indirect: Description
                including through the use of encryption and other security measures intended                 of Company Business
                to protect its systems and data.
      4         But these measures cannot provide absolute security, and losses or                  Yes      Direct: Description of
                unauthorized access to or releases of confidential information may still occur,              Cybersecurity Risk
                which could materially adversely affect the Company's reputation, financial
                condition and operating results.
      5         The Company's business also requires it to share confidential information           Yes      Indirect: Description
                with suppliers and other third parties.                                                      of Company Business
      6         Although the Company takes steps to secure confidential information that is         Yes      Direct: Description of
                provided to third parties, such measures may not be effective and losses or                  Cybersecurity Risk
                unauthorized access to or releases of confidential information may still occur,
                which could materially adversely affect the Company's reputation, financial
                condition and operating results.
      7         For example, the Company may experience a security breach impacting the             Yes      Indirect: Description
                Company's information technology systems that compromises the                                of Company Business
                confidentiality, integrity or availability of confidential information.
      8         Such an incident could, among other things, impair the Company's ability to         Yes      Indirect: Description
                attract and retain customers for its products and services, impact the                       of Legal
                Company's stock price, materially damage supplier relationships, and expose                  Consequences
                the Company to litigation or government investigations, which could result in
                penalties, fines or judgments against the Company.
      9         Although malicious attacks perpetrated to gain access to confidential               Yes      Direct: Description of
                information, including PII, affect many companies across various industries,                 Cybersecurity Risk
                the Company is at a relatively greater risk of being targeted because of its
                high profile and the value of the confidential information it creates, owns,
                manages, stores and processes.
     10         The Company has implemented systems and processes intended to secure its            Yes      Direct: Description of
                information technology systems and prevent unauthorized access to or loss of                 Cybersecurity Risk
                sensitive data, including through the use of encryption and authentication
                technologies.
     11         As with all companies, these security measures may not be sufficient for all        Yes      Direct: Description of
                eventualities and may be vulnerable to hacking, employee error, malfeasance,                 Cybersecurity Risk
                system error, faulty password management or other irregularities.
     12         For example, third parties may attempt to fraudulently induce employees or          Yes      Indirect: Description
                customers into disclosing user names, passwords or other sensitive                           of Company Business
                information, which may in turn be used to access the Company's information
                technology systems.
     13         To help protect customers and the Company, the Company monitors its                 Yes      Indirect: Description
                services and systems for unusual activity and may freeze accounts under                      of Company Business
                suspicious circumstances, which, among other things, may result in the delay
                or loss of customer orders or impede customer access to the Company's
                products and services.
     14         In addition to the risks relating to general confidential information described     Yes      Indirect: Description
                above, the Company may also be subject to specific obligations relating to                   of Company Business
                health data and payment card data.
     15         Health data may be subject to additional privacy, security and breach               Yes      Indirect: Description
                notification requirements, and the Company may be subject to audit by                        of Company Business


                                                                   40
                governmental authorities regarding the Company's compliance with these
                obligations.
     16         If the Company fails to adequately comply with these rules and requirements,       Yes         Indirect: Description
                or if health data is handled in a manner not permitted by law or under the                     of Legal
                Company's agreements with healthcare institutions, the Company could be                        Consequences
                subject to litigation or government investigations, may be liable for associated
                investigatory expenses, and could also incur significant fees or fines.
     17         Under payment card rules and obligations, if cardholder information is             Yes         Indirect: Description
                potentially compromised, the Company could be liable for associated                            of Internal
                investigatory expenses and could also incur significant fees or fines if the                   Consequences
                Company fails to follow payment card industry data security standards.
     18         The Company could also experience a significant increase in payment card           Yes         Indirect: Description
                transaction costs or lose the ability to process payment cards if it fails to                  of Economic
                follow payment card industry data security standards, which would materially                   Consequences
                adversely affect the Company's reputation, financial condition and operating
                results.
     19         While the Company maintains insurance coverage that is intended to address         Yes         Indirect: Description
                certain aspects of data security risks, such insurance coverage may be                         of Company Business
                insufficient to cover all losses or all types of claims that may arise.

Relevant paragraph algorithm accuracy: The algorithm successfully extracted 19/19 sentences or 100% of the total number of sentences.

Text from other paragraphs (outside Item 1A. Risk Factors):

      1         The Company may be subject to information technology system failures or            Yes         Direct: Description of
                network disruptions caused by natural disasters, accidents, power disruptions,                 Cybersecurity Risk
                telecommunications failures, acts of terrorism or war, computer viruses,
                physical or electronic break-ins, or other events or disruptions.
      2         System redundancy and other continuity measures may be ineffective or              Yes         Indirect: Description
                inadequate, and the Company's business continuity and disaster recovery                        of Company Business
                planning may not be sufficient for all eventualities.
      3         Such failures or disruptions could adversely impact the Company's business         Yes         Indirect: Description
                by, among other things, preventing access to the Company's online services,                    of Company Business
                interfering with customer transactions or impeding the manufacturing and
                shipping of the Company's products.
      4         These events could materially adversely affect the Company's reputation,           Yes         Indirect: Description
                financial condition and operating results.                                                     of Economic
                                                                                                               Consequences



Abbott Laboratories (Fiscal year ended December 31, 2017)

Text from the relevant paragraph:

      1         Abbott depends on sophisticated information technology systems and a cyber         Yes         Direct: Description of
                attack or other breach of these systems could have a material adverse effect                   Cybersecurity Risk
                on Abbott's results of operations.
      2         Similar to other large multi-national companies, the size and complexity of        Yes         Direct: Description of
                the information technology systems on which Abbott relies for both its                         Cybersecurity Risk
                infrastructure and products makes them susceptible to a cyber attack,
                malicious intrusion, breakdown, destruction, loss of data privacy, or other
                significant disruption.
      3         These systems have been and are expected to continue to be the target of           Yes         Direct: Description of
                malware and other cyber attacks.                                                               Cybersecurity Risk
      4         In addition, third party hacking attempts may cause Abbott's information           Yes         Direct: Description of
                technology systems and related products, protected data, or proprietary                        Cybersecurity Risk
                information to be compromised.
      5         A significant attack or other disruption could result in adverse consequences,     Yes         Direct: Description of
                including increased costs and expenses, problems with product functionality,                   Cybersecurity Risk
                damage to customer relations, lost revenue, and legal or regulatory penalties.
      6         Abbott invests in its systems and technology and in the protection of its          Yes         Direct: Description of
                products and data to reduce the risk of an attack or other significant                         Cybersecurity Risk
                disruption, and monitors its systems on an ongoing basis for any current or
                potential threats and for changes in technology and the regulatory
                environment.



                                                                   41
      7         There can be no assurance that these measures and efforts will prevent future        Yes       Direct: Description of
                attacks or other significant disruptions to any of the systems on which Abbott                 Cybersecurity Risk
                relies or that related product issues will not arise in the future.
      8         Any significant attack or other disruption on Abbott's systems or products           Yes       Direct: Description of
                could have a material adverse effect on Abbott's business.                                     Cybersecurity Risk

Relevant paragraph algorithm accuracy: The algorithm successfully extracted 8/8 sentences or 100% of the total number of sentences.

Text from other paragraphs (outside Item 1A. Risk Factors): None



General Motors Co (Fiscal year ended December 31, 2017)

Text from the relevant paragraph:

      1         Security breaches and other disruptions to information technology systems and        Yes       Direct: Description of
                networked products, including connected vehicles, owned or maintained by us,                   Cybersecurity Risk
                GM Financial, or third-party vendors or suppliers on our behalf, could interfere
                with our operations and could compromise the confidentiality of private
                customer data or our proprietary information.
      2         We rely upon information technology systems and manufacture networked                Yes       Indirect: Description
                products, some of which are managed by third-parties, to process, transmit and                 of Company Business
                store electronic information, and to manage or support a variety of our business
                processes, activities and products.
      3         Additionally, we and GM Financial collect and store sensitive data, including        Yes       Indirect: Description
                intellectual property, proprietary business information, proprietary business                  of Company Business
                information of our dealers and suppliers, as well as personally identifiable
                information of our customers and employees, in data centers and on
                information technology networks.
      4         The secure operation of these systems and products, and the processing and           Yes       Indirect: Description
                maintenance of the information processed by these systems and products, is                     of Company Business
                critical to our business operations and strategy.
      5         Despite security measures and business continuity plans, these systems and           Yes       Direct: Description of
                products may be vulnerable to damage, disruptions or shutdowns caused by                       Cybersecurity Risk
                attacks by hackers, computer viruses, or breaches due to errors or malfeasance
                by employees, contractors and others who have access to these systems and
                products.
      6         The occurrence of any of these events could compromise the operational               Yes       Indirect: Description
                integrity of these systems and products.                                                       of Internal
                                                                                                               Consequences
      7         Similarly, such an occurrence could result in the compromise or loss of the          Yes       Indirect: Description
                information processed by these systems and products.                                           of Company Business
      8         Such events could result in, among other things, the loss of proprietary data,       Yes       Indirect: Description
                interruptions or delays in our business operations and damage to our reputation.               of Internal
                                                                                                               Consequences
      9         In addition, such events could result in legal claims or proceedings, liability or   Yes       Indirect: Description
                regulatory penalties under laws protecting the privacy of personal information;                of Company Business
                disrupt operations; or reduce the competitive advantage we hope to derive from
                our investment in advanced technologies.
     10         We have experienced such events in the past and, although past events were           No
                immaterial, future events may occur and may be material.
     11         Portions of our information technology systems also may experience                   Yes       Indirect: Description
                interruptions, delays or cessations of service or produce errors due to regular                of Company Business
                maintenance efforts, such as systems integration or migration work that takes
                place from time to time.
     12         We may not be successful in implementing new systems and transitioning data,         Yes       Indirect: Description
                which could cause business disruptions and be more expensive, time-                            of Internal
                consuming, disruptive and resource intensive.                                                  Consequences



                                                                     42
     13         Such disruptions could adversely impact our ability to design, manufacture and       Yes       Indirect: Description
                sell products and services, and interrupt other business processes.                            of Internal
                                                                                                               Consequences
     14         Security breaches and other disruptions of our in-vehicle systems could impact       Yes       Direct: Description of
                the safety of our customers and reduce confidence in GM and our products.                      Cybersecurity Risk
     15         Our vehicles contain complex information technology systems.                         Yes       Indirect: Description
                                                                                                               of Company Business
     16         These systems control various vehicle functions including engine,                    No
                transmission, safety, steering, navigation, acceleration, braking, window and
                door lock functions.
     17         We have designed, implemented and tested security measures intended to               Yes       Indirect: Description
                prevent unauthorized access to these systems.                                                  of Company Business
     18         However, hackers have reportedly attempted, and may attempt in the future, to        Yes       Direct: Description of
                gain unauthorized access to modify, alter and use such systems to gain control                 Cybersecurity Risk
                of, or to change, our vehicles' functionality, user interface and performance
                characteristics, or to gain access to data stored in or generated by the vehicle.
     19         Any unauthorized access to or control of our vehicles or their systems or any        Yes       Direct: Description of
                loss of data could impact the safety of our customers or result in legal claims                Cybersecurity Risk
                or proceedings, liability or regulatory penalties.
     20         In addition, regardless of their veracity, reports of unauthorized access to our     Yes       Direct: Description of
                vehicles, their systems or data could negatively affect our brand and harm our                 Cybersecurity Risk
                business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.

Relevant paragraph algorithm accuracy: The algorithm successfully extracted 18/20 sentences or 90.00% of the total number of
sentences.

Text from other paragraphs (outside Item 1A. Risk Factors):

      1         We sometimes face attempts to gain unauthorized access to our information            Yes       Direct: Description of
                technology networks and systems for the purpose of improperly acquiring our                    Cybersecurity Risk
                trade secrets or confidential business information.
      2         The theft or unauthorized use or publication of our trade secrets and other          Yes       Indirect: Description
                confidential business information as a result of such an incident could                        of Company Business
                adversely affect our competitive position.




Verizon Communications Inc (Fiscal year ended December 31, 2017)

Text from the relevant paragraph:

      1         Cyber attacks impacting our networks or systems could have an adverse effect         Yes       Direct: Description of
                on our business.                                                                               Cybersecurity Risk
      2         Cyber attacks, including through the use of malware, computer viruses,               Yes       Direct: Description of
                dedicated denial of services attacks, credential harvesting and other means for                Cybersecurity Risk
                obtaining unauthorized access to or disrupting the operation of our networks
                and systems and those of our suppliers, vendors and other service providers,
                could have an adverse effect on our business.
      3         Cyber attacks may cause equipment failures, loss of information, including           Yes       Direct: Description of
                sensitive personal information of customers or employees or valuable technical                 Cybersecurity Risk
                and marketing information, as well as disruptions to our or our customers'
                operations.
      4         Cyber attacks against companies, including Verizon, have increased in                Yes       Direct: Description of
                frequency, scope and potential harm in recent years.                                           Cybersecurity Risk
      5         Further, the perpetrators of cyber attacks are not restricted to particular groups   Yes       Direct: Description of
                or persons.                                                                                    Cybersecurity Risk
      6         These attacks may be committed by company employees or external actors               No
                operating in any geography, including jurisdictions where law enforcement
                measures to address such attacks are unavailable or ineffective, and may even
                be launched by or at the behest of nation states.
      7         Cyber attacks may occur alone or in conjunction with physical attacks,               Yes       Direct: Description of
                especially where disruption of service is an objective of the attacker.                        Cybersecurity Risk


                                                                     43
      8         While, to date, we have not been subject to cyber attacks which, individually       Yes        Direct: Description of
                or in the aggregate, have been material to our operations or financial condition,              Cybersecurity Risk
                the preventive actions we take to reduce the risks associated with cyber attacks,
                including protection of our systems and networks, may be insufficient to repel
                or mitigate the effects of a major cyber attack in the future.
      9         The inability to operate our networks and systems or those of our suppliers,        Yes        Direct: Description of
                vendors and other service providers as a result of cyber attacks, even for a                   Cybersecurity Risk
                limited period of time, may result in significant expenses to Verizon and/or a
                loss of market share to other communications providers.
     10         The costs associated with a major cyber attack on Verizon could include             Yes        Direct: Description of
                expensive incentives offered to existing customers and business partners to                    Cybersecurity Risk
                retain their business, increased expenditures on cybersecurity measures and the
                use of alternate resources, lost revenues from business interruption and
                litigation.
     11         The potential costs associated with these attacks could exceed the insurance        No
                coverage we maintain.
     12         Further, certain of Verizon's businesses, such as those offering security           Yes        Direct: Description of
                solutions and infrastructure and cloud services to business customers, could be                Cybersecurity Risk
                negatively affected if our ability to protect our own networks and systems is
                called into question as a result of a cyber attack.
     13         Moreover, our increasing presence in the IoT industry with offerings of             Yes        Direct: Description of
                telematics products and services, including vehicle telematics, could also                     Cybersecurity Risk
                increase our exposure to potential costs and expenses and reputational harm in
                the event of cyber attacks impacting these products or services.
     14         In addition, a compromise of security or a theft or other compromise of valuable    Yes        Indirect: Description
                information, such as financial data and sensitive or private personal                          of Company Business
                information, could result in lawsuits and government claims, investigations or
                proceedings.
     15         Any of these occurrences could damage our reputation, adversely impact              Yes        Indirect: Description
                customer and investor confidence, and could further result in a material adverse               of Economic
                effect on Verizon's results of operation or financial condition.                               Consequences

Relevant paragraph algorithm accuracy: The algorithm successfully extracted 13/15 sentences or 86.67% of the total number of
sentences.

Text from other paragraphs (outside Item 1A. Risk Factors): None




                                                                    44
                                         Appendix B: Variable Definitions
 This table provides definitions for the key variables used in our analysis. All names within square brackets refer
 to Compustat item names.
Variable                     Description                                                       Source
Beta                         The market beta of individual stocks estimated using              CRSP
                             monthly returns over the previous 60 months.
Book-to-market               Book value of common equity [ceq] divided by the market           Compustat
                             value of common equity [prcc_f x csho]
Cash Holdings                Cash holdings is the ratio of cash and short-term                 Compustat
                             investments [che] to total assets [at].
Cash Flow Volatility         Industry average of the standard deviation of cash flow from      Compustat
(Industry)                   operations [ib + dp ­ dvc] to total assets [at]. The standard
                             deviation is estimated for each firm on a rolling basis using
                             information available in the past five years. The industry is
                             defined at the two-digit SIC level.
CoSkew                       The coefficient estimate of the market square term from a         CRSP
                             regression of monthly excess returns on market and market
                             square excess returns; we require at least 24 months
                             observations for the estimation.
CRD Sentences (#)            The number of cybersecurity risk disclosure sentences in          10-K
                             Item 1A. Risk Factors section
CRD Sentences (Ratio)       The ratio of the number of cybersecurity risk disclosure          10-K
                            sentences scaled by the number of sentences in Item 1A.
                            Risk Factors section;

Cyber Insurance             A dummy variable taking the value of 1 for firms that report      10-K
                            in their 10-K that they have cyber insurance and also
                            explicitly state that such insurance only partially covers
                            them against claims that may arise due to cyber attacks, and
                            0 otherwise.
Cybersecurity Risk Index    The cosine similarity between a firm's cyber risk disclosure      10-K
                            and the cyber risk disclosures of firms that have been
                            subject to a cyber-attack during the one-year period prior to
                            the firm's current filings.
Cybersecurity Risk Index    The Jaccard similarity between a firm's cyber risk                10-K
(Jaccard)                   disclosure and the cyber risk disclosures of firms that have
                            been subject to a cyber-attack during the one-year period
                            prior to the firm's current filings.
EXTR_SIGMA                  The negative of the worst deviation of firm-specific weekly       CRSP
                            returns from the average firm specific weekly return divided
                            by the standard deviation of firm-specific weekly returns.
Firm Age                    Fiscal year ­ the year that the firm firstly appeared in          Compustat
                            Compustat.
Firm Size                   Total assets [at].                                                Compustat
High Google SVI             A dummy variable taking the value of 1 on days with high          Google Trends
         Dummy              Search Volume Index (SVI) of the search topics "Data
                            Breach" and "Hacker" in Google Trends, and 0 otherwise
Illiquidity                 The ratio of the daily absolute stock return to the daily         CRSP
                            dollar trading volume averaged within the month; for the
                            estimation, we require at least 15 daily returns within a
                            given month.




                                                         45
Independent Directors      Number of independent directors in the board to the total       BoardEx
(%)                        number of board directors.
Idiosyncratic Volatility   The standard deviation of the residual series derived from      CRSP
                           Fama and French's (1993) three-factor model on monthly
                           data within the prior 5 years.
Institutional Ownership    Number of shares held by institutional shareholders that        Thomson-Reuters
                           own more than 5% of a firm's equity to total number of          13F
                           shares outstanding.
Leverage                   Leverage is long-term debt [dltt] plus debt in current          Compustat
                           liabilities [dlc], scaled by total assets [at]
Litigious Words            The number of "litigious" words in cybersecurity-risk           10-K &
                           disclosures. To identify "litigious" words, we draw upon the    Loughran and
                           collection of pre-defined words constructed by Loughran         McDonald (2011)
                           and McDonald (2011).
Max                        The average of the five highest daily returns of the stock      CRSP
                           during a month
Momentum                   The cumulative return of a stock over a period of 11 months     CRSP
                           ending one day prior to month t
NCSKEW                     The negative of the third moment of firm-specific weekly        CRSP
                           returns for each firm in a year divided by the standard
                           deviation of firm-specific weekly returns raised to the third
                           power.
Negative Words             The number of "negative" words in cybersecurity-risk            10-K &
                           disclosures. To identify "negative" words, we draw upon the     Loughran and
                           collection of pre-defined words constructed by Loughran         McDonald (2011)
                           and McDonald (2011).
Precise Words              The number of "precise" words in cybersecurity-risk             10-K &
                           disclosures. To identify "precise" words, we draw upon the      Loughran and
                           collection of pre-defined words constructed by Loughran         McDonald (2011)
                           and McDonald (2011).
Previous Attack Dummy      A dummy variable taking the value of 1 for firms                PRC, Factiva
                           experienced past cyber attacks, and 0 otherwise.
Readability                File size in megabytes of the SEC "complete submission          10-K
                           text file" for the 10-K filing.
Reversal                   The stock returns over the previous month.                      CRSP
Risk Committee             A dummy variable that equals 1 if the name of a firm's          BoardEx
                           board committee includes "risk", and 0 otherwise.
Risk Section Length        Number of sentences in Item 1A. Risk Factors of the 10-K.       10-K
ROA                        Operating income before depreciation [oibdp] to total assets    Compustat
                           [at].
R&D Expenditures           R&D expenditures [xrd] to total assets [at]. Missing values     Compustat
                           are replaced with zero.
Secrets                    A dummy variable that equals 1 if in a firm's 10-K filing       10-K
                           there is any of the key phrases "trade secret", "trade
                           secrets", "confidential information" or "proprietary
                           information" and within a 5-word window before or after
                           one the previous key phrases the firm also mentions
                           "protect", "protection" or "safeguard", and 0 otherwise
Tangibility                Total property, plant and equipment [ppent] to total assets     Compustat
                           [at].
Tobin's Q                  Total assets [at] ­ common/ordinary equity [ceq] + market       Compustat
                           value of equity [prcc_f x csho] to total assets [at].



                                                       46
                                                                                                Figure 1
                                                                                      Cybersecurity Risk by Year
                           This figure displays the average value of our cybersecurity risk measure and the number of cyber attacks by year. Based on the way our measure
                           is constructed (i.e. we measure the similarity of each firm's cyber-related disclosures with those in past disclosures of firms that have been subject
                           to cyber attacks), 2007 is the earliest year for which we get an estimate of cybersecurity risk (see Section 2 for details).


                                  [1]    [5]        [7]       [3]       [3]      [11]       [8]         [9]     [24]      [32]      [16]      [16]      [24]     [16]
                                                                                                                                                                                    450
                            0.5

                                                                                                                                                                                    400
                           0.45

                                                                                                                                                                                    350
                            0.4

                                                                                                                                                                                    300
Cybersecurity Risk Proxy




                           0.35

                                                                                                                                                                                    250
                            0.3


                           0.25                                                                                                                                                     200


                            0.2                                                                                                                                                     150


                           0.15                                                                                                                                                     100


                            0.1                                                                                                                                                     50


                           0.05                                                                                                                                                 0
                               2005      2006      2007      2008      2009      2010      2011     2012        2013     2014       2015      2016      2017      2018      2019
                                                                                                   Axis Title

                                                              Cybersecurity Risk Proxy                  [#] Number of Cyber Attacks per Year

                                                                                                   47
                                                                           Figure 2
                                                            Cybersecurity Risk across Industries
This figure displays the average value of our cybersecurity risk measure and the number of cyber attacks by industry. Firms are classified into 12 industries
                                                  according to Fama and French's 12 industry portfolios.

Telephone and Television Transmission                                                                                                                       [9]
  Wholesale, Retail, and Some Services                                                                                                                      [29]
                   Business Equipment                                                                                                                       [54]
                        Money Finance                                                                                                                       [33]
                               Utilities                                                                                                                    [0]
              Consumer Non_Durables                                                                                                                         [14]
                                 Other                                                                                                                      [18]
         Chemicals and Allied Products                                                                                                                      [0]
 Healthcare, Medical Equipment, Drugs                                                                                                                       [8]
                    Consumer Durables                                                                                                                       [0]
                         Manufacturing                                                                                                                      [13]
                   Energy Oil and Gas                                                                                                                       [1]
                                         0.02      0.05         0.08           0.11            0.14          0.17         0.20   0.23    0.26        0.29

                                                    Cybersecurity Risk Proxy          [#] of cyber attacks per industry




                                                                                 48
                                                   Table 1
                                  Excerpts from Cybersecurity-risk Disclosures
 Panel A: Excerpts for Firms with the Highest Cybersecurity Risk Score
 Company Name       Fiscal Year   Industry       Cybersecurity                          Text from Cybersecurity
                                                 Score                                       Risk Disclosures
 Walgreens Boots    2018          9              0.684            Like other global companies, we and businesses we interact with have
 Alliance Inc                                                     experienced threats to data and systems, including by perpetrators of
                                                                  random or targeted malicious cyberattacks, computer viruses, worms,
                                                                  bot attacks or other destructive or disruptive software and attempts to
                                                                  misappropriate customer information, including credit card
                                                                  information, and cause system failures and disruptions.

 Great Western      2016          11             0.683            We are not able to anticipate or implement effective preventive
 Bancorp Inc                                                      measures against all security breaches of these types, especially
                                                                  because the techniques used change frequently and because attacks can
                                                                  originate from a wide variety of sources.

 Heritage           2017          11             0.676            However, it is difficult or impossible to defend against every risk being
 Commerce Corp                                                    posed by changing technologies as well as criminal intent on
                                                                  committing cyber-crime.

 Salem Media        2017          7              0.674            There can be no assurance that we, or the security systems we
 Group Inc                                                        implement, will protect against all of these rapidly changing
                                                                  techniques.

 Dexcom Inc         2017          10             0.670            Despite these efforts, threats from malicious persons and groups, new
                                                                  vulnerabilities and advanced new attacks against information systems
                                                                  create risk of cybersecurity incidents.

Panel B: Excerpts for Firms with Low Cybersecurity Risk Score
 Company           Fiscal Year        Industry     Cybersecurity                       Text from Cybersecurity
 Name                                              Score                                   Risk Disclosures
 Weyerhaeuser      2015               12           0.036         We and our service providers employ what we believe are
 Co                                                              adequate security measures.

 Hess Corp         2012               4            0.052          Examples of catastrophic risks include hurricanes, fires, explosions,
                                                                  blowouts, such as the accident at the Macondo prospect, pipeline
                                                                  interruptions and ruptures, severe weather, geological events, labor
                                                                  disputes or cyber attacks.

 Wayside           2013               9            0.078          Any failure on the part of us or our vendors to maintain the security
 Technology                                                       of data we are required to protect, including via the penetration of
 Group Inc                                                        our network security and the misappropriation of confidential and
                                                                  personal information, could result in business disruption, damage to
                                                                  our reputation, financial obligations to third parties, fines, penalties,
                                                                  regulatory proceedings and private litigation with potentially large
                                                                  costs, and also result in deterioration in our employees', partners'
                                                                  and clients' confidence in us and other competitive disadvantages,
                                                                  and thus could have a material adverse impact on our business,
                                                                  financial condition and results of operations.

 Sanderson         2012               1            0.109          Disruptions could be caused by a variety of factors, such as
 Farms Inc                                                        catastrophic events or weather, power outages, or cyber attacks on
                                                                  our systems by outside parties.

 Dover Corp        2012               3            0.111          Disruptions or cybersecurity attacks, such as unauthorized access,
                                                                  malicious software, or other violations may lead to exposure of
                                                                  proprietary or confidential information as well as potential data
                                                                  corruption.


                                                                 49
                                                                                 Table 2
                                                                              Correlations
This table presents the correlation coefficients between our cybersecurity risk index and several quantitative measures based on cybersecurity risk disclosure language.
CRD Sentences (#) is the number of cybersecurity risk disclosure sentences in Item 1A. Risk Factors section. CRD Sentences (Ratio) is the ratio of the number of
cybersecurity risk disclosure sentences scaled by the number of sentences in Item 1A. Risk Factors section; Negative Words is the number of "negative" words in
cybersecurity-risk disclosures. Precise Words is the number of "precise" words in cybersecurity-risk disclosures. Litigious Words is the number of "litigious" words in
cybersecurity-risk disclosures. To identify "Negative Words", "Precise Words" and "Litigious Words", we draw upon the collection of pre-defined words proposed by
Loughran and McDonald (2011). Cyber Insurance is a dummy variable taking the value of 1 for firms that report in their 10-K that they have cyber insurance and also
explicitly state that such insurance only partially covers them against claims that may arise due to cyber attacks, and 0 otherwise. *** indicates statistical significance at
the 1% level.


                                                            (i)           (ii)           (iii)          (iv)           (v)            (vi)          (vii)

            (i)    Cybersecurity Risk                     1.000

            (ii)   CRD Sentences (#)                      0.569 *** 1.000

           (iii) CRD sentences (Ratio)                    0.443 *** 0.717 *** 1.000

           (iv) Negative Words                            0.033 *** -0.215 *** -0.133 *** 1.000

            (v)    Precise Words                          0.084 *** 0.071 *** 0.016 *** -0.145 *** 1.000

           (vi) Litigious Words                           0.127 *** 0.049 *** 0.042 *** 0.263 *** -0.071 *** 1.000

           (vii) Cyber Insurance                          0.169 *** 0.369 *** 0.266 *** -0.115 *** 0.003                             0.004          1.000




                                                                                    50
                                                                      Table 3
                                                               Descriptive Statistics
This table presents descriptive statistics for the key variables used in our analysis. Analytical variable definitions are provided in Appendix B


                                                Mean         STDEV           P1          P25          P50          P75           P99

        Cybersecurity Risk Index                 0.24         0.22           0.00        0.00         0.28         0.45         0.61
        Firm Size (ln)                           6.59         2.08           2.16        5.11         6.61         7.99         11.56
        Firm Age (ln)                            2.60         0.90           0.69        1.95         2.71         3.26         4.16
        Tobin's Q                                1.94         1.58           0.64        1.05         1.39         2.13         9.20
        ROA                                      0.03         0.25          -1.08        0.01         0.08         0.14         0.42
        Tanginility                              0.21         0.24           0.00        0.02         0.10         0.30         0.89
        R&D Expenditures                         0.05         0.13           0.00        0.00         0.00         0.04         0.68
        Secrets                                  0.30         0.46           0.00        0.00         0.00         1.00         1.00
        Cash Flow Volatility (Industry)          0.10         0.07           0.00        0.05         0.08         0.12         0.34
        Risk Section Length                     262.61       178.71          1.00      138.00        226.00       346.00       841.00
        Risk Section Length (ln)                 5.26         1.04           0.69        4.93         5.42         5.85         6.74
        Readability                           10453409 11546923             384975    1865855      6163418      15323736 52900376
        Readability (ln)                        15.52         1.22          12.86       14.44        15.63        16.54         17.78
        Institutional Ownership                  0.20         0.16           0.00        0.06         0.18         0.30         0.65
        Independent Directors                    0.82         0.09           0.56        0.78         0.86         0.89         1.00
        Risk Committee                           0.05         0.22           0.00        0.00         0.00         0.00         1.00




                                                                       51
                                                     Table 4
                               Cybersecurity Risk and Firm Characteristics
This table reports the results of linear regressions of firm characteristics on cybersecurity risk, as measured
through cosine similarity (see Section 2.2 for details). All variables are defined in Appendix B. Standard
errors are clustered at the firm level. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels,
respectively.

                                                             Model 1                  Model 2
           Firm Size (ln)                                      0.014     ***           0.016     ***
                                                              [13.28]                   [4.70]
           Firm Age (ln)                                      -0.003                  -0.041     ***
                                                               [-1.29]                 [-5.84]
           Tobin's Q                                           0.008     ***           0.003     ***
                                                                [6.73]                  [3.36]
           ROA                                                 0.062     ***           0.033     ***
                                                                [6.57]                  [3.47]
           Tanginility                                        -0.085     ***          -0.012
                                                               [-8.51]                 [-0.58]
           R&D Expenditures                                   -0.006                   0.090     ***
                                                               [-0.32]                  [4.27]
           Secrets                                             0.017     ***           0.029     ***
                                                                [4.16]                  [4.24]
           Cash Flow Volatility (Industry)                    -0.247     ***           0.025
                                                               [-6.94]                  [0.67]
           Risk Section Length (ln)                            0.057     ***           0.051     ***
                                                              [40.80]                 [20.59]
           Readability (ln)                                    0.007     ***           0.004     *
                                                                [2.92]                  [1.93]
           Institutional Ownership                             0.022     **            0.011
                                                                [2.34]                  [1.01]
           Independent Directors                               0.406     ***           0.046     **
                                                                [5.79]                  [1.98]
           Risk Committee                                      0.013     **           -0.011
                                                                [2.09]                 [-1.08]
           Constant                                           -0.461     ***          -0.301     ***
                                                             [-12.74]                  [-6.60]
           No of Observations                                 35,308                  35,308
           Clustered SE                                          Firm                    Firm
           Firm fixed effects                                     No                     Yes
           Industry fixed effects                                Yes                      No
           Year fixed effects                                    Yes                     Yes
           R-Squared                                           0.523                    0.780




                                                      52
                                                    Table 5
                 Cybersecurity Risk and (Negative) Asymmetries in Stock Returns
This table reports the results of regressions of cybersecurity risk on two different proxies for negative
asymmetries in stock returns. In Model 1 we use NCSKEW, which equals the negative of the third moment
of firm-specific weekly returns for each firm in a year divided by the standard deviation of firm-specific
weekly returns raised to the third power. In Model 2, we use EXTR_SIGMA, which is the negative of the
worst deviation of firm-specific weekly returns from the average firm specific weekly return divided by
the standard deviation of firm-specific weekly returns. Cybersecurity risk is measured at the beginning of
each year using cosine similarity. All variables are defined in Appendix B. The continuous variables are
standardized to have a mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1. Standard errors are clustered at the firm
level. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.
                                                        NCSKEW                   EXTR_SIGMA
                                                        Model 1                      Model 2
      Cybersecurity Risk Index                           0.110 ***                     0.094 ***
                                                         [3.14]                        [2.91]
      Firm Size (ln)                                     0.048 ***                     0.026 ***
                                                         [5.13]                        [3.09]
      Firm Age (ln)                                      -0.031 ***                   -0.024 ***
                                                         [-4.05]                      [-3.36]
      Tobin's Q                                          -0.085 ***                    -0.075 ***
                                                         [-9.59]                     [-10.03]
      ROA                                                0.022                         0.036 ***
                                                         [1.48]                        [2.70]
      Tanginility                                        -0.020 **                    -0.033 ***
                                                         [-2.28]                      [-4.04]
      R&D Expenditures                                   0.045 ***                     0.052 ***
                                                         [2.95]                        [3.75]
      Secrets                                            0.020 ***                     0.023 ***
                                                         [2.70]                        [3.33]
      Cash Flow Volatility (Industry)                    0.005                         0.002
                                                         [0.41]                        [0.23]
      Risk Section Length (ln)                           0.017 ***                     0.010 *
                                                         [2.71]                        [1.73]
      Readability (ln)                                   -0.015 *                     -0.010
                                                         [-1.89]                      [-1.39]
      Institutional Ownership                            0.043 ***                     0.030 ***
                                                         [6.86]                        [5.08]
      Independent Directors                              -0.013 *                     -0.007
                                                         [-1.95]                      [-1.07]
      Risk Committee                                     -0.033                       -0.050 **
                                                         [-1.55]                      [-2.35]
      Constant                                           0.212 ***                      2.714 ***
                                                         [9.05]                       [116.3]
      Clustered SE                                         Firm                         Firm
      Industry fixed effects                                Yes                          Yes
      Year fixed effects                                    Yes                          Yes
      Number of Observations                             24,657                       24,657
      R-squared                                           0.025                        0.029




                                                   53
                                                                                 Table 6
                                                           Cybersecurity Risk and Future Cyber attacks
This table reports the results of logit regressions of cybersecurity risk (cosine similarity) on future cyber attacks. Panel A includes all cyber attacks reported in PRC
database for which we have complete risk disclosure and financial data. In Panel B we restrict our attention to major cyber attacks and in particular those that attracted
attention by global news outlets (e.g. CNBC, Financial Times and the Wall Street Journal) and covered in major Newswires (e.g. AP, Bloomberg, Reuters). In Panel
C we restrict our attention to non-major cyber attacks (those that did not attract attention from major Newswires). Future cyber attacks are measured at time t+1
while all independent variables are measured at time t. All variables are defined in Appendix B. The continuous variables are standardized to have a mean of 0 and
standard deviation of 1. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                                                   54
                                  Panel A: All Cyber Attacks               Panel B: Major Cyber Attacks         Panel C: Non-major Cyber Attacks
                                  Model 1           Model 2                 Model 3           Model 4              Model 5           Model 6
Cybersecurity Risk Index            0.961 ***         0.656     ***           0.749 ***         0.461     **          1.129 ***        0.813     **
                                     [7.10]            [4.60]                  [3.85]            [2.27]                [7.06]           [4.17]
Previous Attack Dummy                 -               1.503     ***             -               1.694     **            -              1.122     **
                                      -                [3.79]                   -                [3.07]                 -               [2.26]
Firm Size (ln)                        -               1.510     ***             -               1.867     ***           -              1.221     ***
                                      -              [10.53]                    -                [8.41]                 -               [7.72]
Firm Age (ln)                         -              -0.143                     -              -0.244                   -             -0.051
                                      -               [-1.30]                   -               [-1.53]                 -              [-0.38]
Tobin's Q                             -               0.197                     -               0.321                   -              0.078
                                      -                [1.31]                   -                [1.63]                 -               [0.39]
ROA                                   -               0.483                     -               0.400                   -              0.563
                                      -                [1.48]                   -                [1.02]                 -               [1.27]
Tanginility                           -              -0.042                     -              -0.199                   -              0.074
                                      -               [-0.29]                   -               [-0.89]                 -               [0.42]
R&D Expenditures                      -              -0.031                     -              -0.227                   -              0.078
                                      -               [-0.08]                   -               [-0.46]                 -               [0.15]
Secrets                               -               0.288     ***             -               0.116                   -              0.395     ***
                                      -                [2.95]                   -                [0.83]                 -               [3.10]
Cash Flow Volatility (Industry)       -              -0.167                     -              -0.507                   -             -0.004
                                      -               [-0.72]                   -               [-1.36]                 -              [-0.01]
Risk Section Length (ln)              -              -0.235                     -              -0.338     *             -             -0.094
                                      -               [-1.62]                   -               [-1.77]                 -              [-0.57]
Readability (ln)                      -              -0.006                     -              -0.149                   -              0.111
                                      -               [-0.04]                   -               [-0.71]                 -               [0.55]
Institutional Ownership               -               0.135                     -               0.440     ***           -             -0.088
                                      -                [1.12]                   -                [2.67]                 -              [-0.62]
Independent Directors                 -              -0.065                     -              -0.140                   -              0.003
                                      -               [-0.58]                   -               [-0.98]                 -               [0.02]
Risk Committee                        -              -0.182                     -              -0.416                   -             -0.029
                                      -               [-0.45]                   -               [-0.95]                 -              [-0.05]
Constant                           -8.261 ***        -8.790     ***          -8.568 ***        -9.860     ***        -9.303 ***       -9.408     ***
                                    [-9.87]         [-10.42]                  [-7.63]           [-9.00]               [-7.74]          [-7.65]
Clustered SE                         Firm              Firm                     Firm             Firm                  Firm             Firm
Industry fixed effects                Yes               Yes                      Yes              Yes                   Yes              Yes
Year fixed effects                    Yes               Yes                      Yes              Yes                   Yes              Yes
Number of Observations             41,140            30,830                   38,934           30,830                41,140           30,830
                                                                      55
Pseudo-R-squared                    0.093             0.223                    0.074            0.235                 0.099            0.204
                                                      Table 7
                                          Cybersecurity Risk Portfolios
This table reports average excess returns, CAPM alphas, four-factor alphas from Carhart's (1997) FFC model (FFC
alphas) and five-factor alphas from Fama and French's (2015) model (Five-Factor alphas) for portfolios constructed
on the basis of our Cybersecurity Risk Index, which is measured through cosine similarity. Starting from December
2007, we sort stocks at the end of each quarter in ascending order on the basis of their Cybersecurity Risk and
allocate them into three groups (Low Cyber-Risk Stocks, Middle Group and High Cyber-Risk Stocks). We track
the performance of the three portfolios over the following quarter until these are rebalanced. We form the spread
strategy P3-P1 that is long the portfolio with the highest cybersecurity risk stocks (P3) and short the portfolio with
the lowest cybersecurity risk stocks (P1). Panel A reports returns for equally-weighted (ew) and value-weighted
(vw) portfolios over the period March 2008- March 2019. Average (monthly) excess portfolio returns and alphas
are bolded; their associated Newey-West t-statistics are reported in square brackets. We exclude from the analysis
firms that appear in a sample for a period less than 3 years and have zero disclosures on cyber-related issues
throughout that period. Panel B reports the (equally-weighted) average number of firms per portfolio, average
exposure to cybersecurity risk and average value for a series of firm/stock and 10-K characteristics. ***, ** and *
denote statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.

  Panel A : Future (1-month) portfolio returns sorted by our Cybersecurity Risk Index
                                                             Portfolios
                                       Low Cyber-Risk      Middle Group      High Cyber-Risk
                                            [P1]               [P2]                [P3]             [P3]-[P1]

  Excess return                 ew            0.169              0.710 *           0.843 **           0.674 ***
                                              [0.38]             [1.70]            [2.17]             [4.54]
                                vw            0.508              0.831 **           1.117 ***         0.609 ***
                                              [1.25]             [2.40]             [3.32]            [3.02]
  CAPM alpha                    ew           -0.727 **          -0.219             -0.054             0.673 ***
                                             [-3.32]            [-0.97]            [-0.37]            [4.69]
                                vw           -0.339 *           -0.010              0.321 ***         0.660 ***
                                             [-1.90]            [-0.09]             [4.01]            [3.41]
  FFC alpha                     ew           -0.675 ***         -0.169             0.011              0.686 ***
                                             [-4.87]            [-1.54]            [0.13]             [4.80]
                                vw           -0.277 *            0.020             0.282 ***          0.559 ***
                                             [-1.87]             [0.18]            [3.43]             [3.30]
  Five-factor alpha             ew           -0.602 ***         -0.108             0.055              0.657 ***
                                             [-3.80]            [-0.72]            [0.74]             [4.38]
                                vw           -0.306 **           0.016             0.268 ***          0.574 ***
                                             [-2.30]             [0.12]            [3.23]             [3.58]
  Panel B: Firm/Stock/10-K characteristics
  Number of firms                             1233                 960                966               -
  Cybersecurity Risk Index                    0.000              0.310              0.465               -
  Market Value (ln)                          12.375            13.483             13.717                -
  Book-to-Market                              0.717              0.596              0.615               -
  ROA                                         0.023              0.024              0.069               -
  Institutional Ownership                     0.169              0.212              0.215               -
  Illiquidity                                 1.971              0.881              0.842               -
  Idiosyncratic Volatility                    3.085              2.561              2.258               -
  Risk Section Length (ln)                    4.679              5.491              5.546               -
  Readability (ln)                           15.586            15.849             15.927                -




                                                          56
                                                        Table 8
                                              Double-Sorted Portfolios
This table reports average returns and 5-factor alphas from the Fama and French's (2015) model for double-sorted
portfolios on the basis of the cybersecurity risk index and each of the following firm characteristics: (i) Market Value,
which is the natural logarithm of market value, (ii) Book-to-Market, is the book value of common equity divided by
the market value of common equity; (iii) ROA, a measure of profitability, proxied by return on assets; (iv) Institutional
Ownership, defined as the number of shares held by institutional shareholders that own more than 5% of a firm's equity
to the total number of shares outstanding (v) Illiquidity, the ratio of the daily absolute stock return to the daily dollar
trading volume averaged within the month, (vi) Idiosyncratic Volatility, defined as the standard deviation of the
residuals estimated from the Fama and French (1993) three-factor model on monthly data within the prior 5 years; (vii)
Risk Section Length, which is the number of sentences in Item 1A. Risk Factors of the Form 10-K; and (viii)
Readability, which is the file size in megabytes of the SEC "complete submission text file" for the 10-K filing. Starting
from December 2007, we sort stocks at the end of each quarter in ascending order on the basis of their Cybersecurity
Risk and allocate them into three groups (Low Cyber-Risk Stocks, Middle Group and High Cyber-Risk Stocks), and
we also independently sort stocks into ascending order according to the value of each characteristic mentioned above
and allocate them into two portfolios (LOW and HIGH) based on median values for each quarter. The intersection of
these two classifications yields the double-sorted portfolios. We track the performance of the intersection portfolios
over the following quarter until these are rebalanced. We report both equal-weighted and value-weighted average
returns and five-factor alphas for the spread strategy High-Low Cyber Risk Stocks within each HIGH and LOW
classification. Newey-West t-statistics are reported in square brackets. ***, ** and * denote statistical significance at
1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.

                                         Equal-weighted portfolios                    Value-weighted portfolios
                                        High - Low Cyber Risk Stocks                 High - Low Cyber Risk Stocks
                                        Avg. Return        5-Factor alpha          Avg. Return        5-Factor alpha
Panel A: Firm Characteristics
                             LOW               0.681 ***           0.668 ***              0.418 ***           0.451 ***
Market Value                                   [4.39]              [3.47]                 [2.63]              [2.74]
                             HIGH              0.195 *             0.284 ***              0.577 ***           0.547 ***
                                               [1.91]              [2.60]                 [2.65]              [3.12]
                             LOW               0.818 ***           0.758 ***              0.755 **            0.725 ***
Book-to-Market                                 [5.82]              [5.71]                 [2.51]              [3.01]
                             HIGH              0.463 ***           0.519 ***              0.280               0.328 *
                                               [2.71]              [2.87]                 [1.49]              [1.88]
                             LOW               0.918 ***           0.959 ***              0.589 *             0.537 *
ROA                                            [5.01]              [4.72]                 [1.90]              [1.68]
                             HIGH              0.287 **            0.216 *                0.411 **            0.412 **
                                               [2.04]              [1.66]                 [2.27]              [2.41]
                             LOW               0.770 ***           0.755 ***              0.664 ***           0.589 ***
Institutional Ownership                        [5.22]              [4.86]                 [2.62]              [2.99]
                             HIGH              0.285 **            0.277 ***              0.170               0.272 *
                                               [2.48]              [2.63]                 [1.14]              [1.71]
                                                                                         Table Continued Overleaf




                                                           57
                                          Table 8 (Continued)
                                   Equal-weighted portfolios              Value-weighted portfolios
                                  High - Low Cyber Risk Stocks           High - Low Cyber Risk Stocks
                                   Avg. Return       5-Factor alpha     Avg. Return       5-Factor alpha
Panel B: Stock & 10-K Characteristics
                           LOW           0.271 *            0.365 ***         0.167              0.268 ***
Illiquidity                              [1.91]             [3.14]            [1.33]             [2.70]
                           HIGH          0.702 ***          0.710 ***         0.262 *            0.309 *
                                         [4.38]             [3.74]            [1.68]             [1.89]
                           LOW           0.103              0.087             0.583 **           0.551 ***
Idiosyncratic Volatility                 [1.06]             [0.82]            [2.51]             [2.77]
                           HIGH          0.791 ***          0.759 ***         0.416              0.468 *
                                         [5.72]             [5.07]            [1.24]             [1.79]
                           LOW           0.348 **           0.348 ***         0.540 **           0.559 ***
Risk Section Length (ln)                 [2.56]             [2.61]            [2.15]             [2.87]
                           HIGH          1.193 ***          1.225 ***         0.530 ***          0.488 ***
                                         [4.97]             [4.91]            [2.81]             [3.03]
                           LOW           0.861 ***          0.786 ***         0.826 ***          0.750 ***
Readability (ln)                         [6.22]             [4.84]            [3.60]             [4.24]
                           HIGH          0.273 **           0.303 ***         0.445 **           0.441 **
                                         [2.02]             [2.62]            [2.03]             [2.47]




                                                     58
                                                                            Table 9
                                                       Cross sectional Fama-MacBeth Regressions
This table reports the results from Fama-MacBeth regressions on the relation between our Cybersecurity Risk Index and subsequent monthly stock returns
(1-month to 12-month). For each month of our sample we run cross sectional regressions of excess stock returns on lagged cybersecurity risk and a set of
firm characteristics that are also lagged. These include beta, size, book-to-market, momentum, short-term reversal, illiquidity, coskewness, idiosyncratic
volatility, asset growth, profitability and demand for lottery-like stocks (max) , length of Item 1A. Risk Factors of the Form 10-K and 10-K readability. All
variables are defined in Appendix B. The continuous variables are standardized to have a mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1. The coefficients are reported
as time-series averages of the estimates from the cross sectional regressions. The t-statistics, which are reported in brackets, are based on the Newey-West
heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent standard errors. ***, ** and * denote statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                                             59
                                          Returnst+1                            Returnst+2       Returnst+3       Returnst+6       Returnst+9       Returnst+12
                               [1]           [2]              [3]                  [4]              [5]              [6]              [7]              [8]

Cybersecurity Risk Index      0.298 ***     0.097    **      0.117    ***         0.110    ***     0.104    ***     0.145    ***     0.112    ***     0.108    **
                              [6.28]        [2.53]           [2.67]               [2.72]           [2.66]           [3.01]           [2.76]           [2.52]
Beta                              -         0.097            0.094                0.092            0.038            0.030            0.027            0.017
                                            [0.89]           [0.90]               [0.82]           [0.34]           [0.30]           [0.28]           [0.18]
Market Value                     -         -0.074           -0.028               -0.043            0.013            0.006            0.067            0.012
                                           [-1.09]          [-0.37]              [-0.60]           [0.17]           [0.09]           [0.92]           [0.15]
Book-to-Market                   -         -0.001            0.007                0.009            0.002            0.015            0.010            0.022
                                           [-0.02]           [0.14]               [0.16]           [0.03]           [0.28]           [0.20]           [0.49]
Momentum                         -          0.163    *       0.154    *           0.108            0.116            0.084            0.172    ***     0.153    ***
                                            [1.86]           [1.75]               [1.34]           [1.56]           [1.28]           [4.15]           [3.32]
Reversal                         -         -0.114    **     -0.121    **          0.207    ***     0.136    **      0.145    ***     0.113    *       0.071
                                           [-2.02]          [-2.19]               [2.85]           [2.41]           [3.08]           [1.86]           [1.10]
Illiquidity                      -         -0.019           -0.018                0.020            0.025            0.048            0.021           -0.009
                                           [-0.53]          [-0.51]               [0.67]           [0.82]           [1.54]           [0.68]          [-0.27]
CoSkew                           -         -0.027           -0.025               -0.007           -0.021           -0.006           -0.025            0.035
                                           [-0.88]          [-0.79]              [-0.23]          [-0.59]          [-0.18]          [-0.72]           [1.02]
Indiosyncratic Volatility        -         -0.454    ***    -0.454    ***        -0.369    ***    -0.469    ***    -0.475    ***    -0.381    ***    -0.436    ***
                                           [-5.40]          [-5.58]              [-3.97]          [-5.31]          [-5.66]          [-4.36]          [-5.33]
Asset Growth                     -         -0.121    ***    -0.114    **         -0.081    **     -0.054           -0.078    *       0.000           -0.003
                                           [-3.14]          [-3.11]              [-2.27]          [-1.56]          [-1.70]          [-0.01]          [-0.07]
ROA                              -          0.295    ***     0.285    ***         0.282    ***     0.256    ***     0.303    ***     0.329    ***     0.407    ***
                                            [5.29]           [5.17]               [5.26]           [4.62]           [5.45]           [7.14]           [7.70]
Max                              -         -0.420    ***    -0.413    ***        -0.402    ***    -0.215    ***    -0.193    **     -0.118           -0.131    *
                                           [-4.42]          [-4.46]              [-4.11]          [-2.72]          [-2.43]          [-1.48]          [-1.67]
Risk Section Length (ln)         -              -           -0.034               -0.046           -0.040           -0.041            0.003           -0.009
                                                            [-0.81]              [-1.23]          [-1.11]          [-1.10]           [0.08]          [-0.26]
Readability (ln)                 -             -            -0.081               -0.066           -0.055           -0.040           -0.042           -0.019
                                                            [-1.46]              [-1.23]          [-1.03]          [-0.80]          [-0.82]          [-0.36]
Constant                      0.515         0.514            0.512                0.479            0.500            0.512            0.804    **      0.917    **
                              [1.14]        [1.13]           [1.12]               [1.04]           [1.09]           [1.14]           [2.25]           [2.44]
Observations                409,016       342,573          342,573              334,847          333,325          328,887          324,633          314,506




                                                                           60
                                                        Table 10
                                Cybersecurity Risk Factor: Time Series Variation
This table presents the results of the regression CRF t =a+×High_Google_SVI_dummy t + i ×X t +error, where CRF
is our cybersecurity risk factor, "High_Google_SVI_dummy" is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 on days
with high Googler SVI index of the search topics "Data Breach" and "Hacker", and 0 otherwise, X is a vector of
the (daily) risk factors proposed by Carhart (1997) and Fama and French (2015), namely market, size, value,
momentum, operating profitability and investment factors. Model 1 does not control for any risk factors. Model 2
only controls for the market risk factor (CAPM specification), Model 3 controls for market, value and momentum
factors (FFC specification), while Models 4 control for all five risk factors proposed by Fama and French (2015)
(FF-5 specification). In Panels B (C) we replace the variable High_Google_SVI_dummy with the variable
High_Google_SVI_dummy + 5 days (+ 1 month), which takes the value of 1 on days a week (a month after) after
the actual peak of the SVI index, and zero otherwise. For the estimation we use daily data over the period March
2008-March 2019. The t-statistics, which are reported in brackets, are based on the Newey-West heteroskedasticity
and autocorrelation consistent standard errors. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level.

                                                                               Cybersecurity Risk Factor t
                                                                                       CONTROLS
                                                                  NONE            CAPM         FFC             FF-5
                                                                   [1]             [2]          [3]             [4]
Panel A: Days with High SVI (Google Trends)
Constant                                                          0.0002 ***     0.0002 ***     0.0002 ***    0.0002 ***
                                                                   [3.47]         [3.64]         [3.50]        [3.54]
High Google SVI Dummy                                            -0.0015 ***    -0.0014 ***    -0.0014 ***   -0.0013 ***
                                                                  [-4.39]        [-4.34]        [-4.18]       [-4.30]
Observations (days)                                                2,789          2,789          2,789         2,789

Panel B: Placebo Tests (5 days after the the peak of SVI)
Constant                                                         0.0002 ***      0.0002 ***     0.0002 ***   0.0002 ***
                                                                  [2.94]          [3.13]         [2.99]       [3.03]
Placebo High Google SVI Dummy + 5 days                           0.0003          0.0003         0.0003       0.0003
                                                                  [0.62]          [0.59]         [0.68]       [0.77]
Observations (days)                                               2,789           2,789          2,789        2,789
Panel C: Placebo Tests (1 month after the the peak of SVI)
Constant                                                         0.0002 ***      0.0002 ***     0.0002 ***   0.0002 ***
                                                                  [2.91]          [3.08]         [2.97]       [3.04]
Placebo High Google SVI Dummy + 1 month                          0.0002          0.0002         0.0002       0.0002
                                                                  [0.55]          [0.55]         [0.48]       [0.47]
Observations (days)                                               2,789           2,789          2,789        2,789




                                                            61
                                                       Table 11
                                  Cybersecurity Risk Portfolios-Robustness Tests
This table reports average excess returns and alphas from the Fama and French's (2015) model (Five-Factor alphas)
for the spread strategy that is long the portfolio with the highest cybersecurity risk stocks and short the portfolio with
the lowest cybersecurity risk stocks. Results are reported both for equally-weighted and value-weighted portfolios. We
exclude from the analysis firms that appear in a sample for a period less than 3 years and have zero disclosures on
cyber-related issues throughout that period. In Panel A we repeat our portfolio analysis for the period January 2012-
March 2019 (Post SEC's guidance on cybersecurity). In Panel B (Panel C) we exclude firms with cyber insurance (in
the training sample). In Panel D we present results based on monthly and yearly rebalancing. In Panel E, we repeat the
analysis 12 times after excluding each of the Fama-French 12 industries in turn to flush out abnormal impact of any
particular industry group. In Panel F, we form our portfolios based on another revised cybersecurity risk measure,
which replaces all zeros with the industry/sector median value in any given year. In Panel G, we form our portfolios
based on a revised cybersecurity risk measure, which replaces all zeros with the next non-zero observation for each
firm. Average (monthly) excess portfolio returns and alphas are bolded; their associated Newey-West t-statistics are
reported in square brackets. ***, ** and * denote statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.
h




                                              Equal-weighted portfolios                 Value-weighted portfolios
                                             High - Low Cyber Risk Stocks              High - Low Cyber Risk Stocks
                                              Avg. Return        5-Factor alpha      Avg. Return       5-Factor alpha
Panel A: Post SEC's Guidance on Cybersecurity
                                                    0.916 ***           0.870 ***          0.770 ***          0.652 ***
January 2012 to March 2019
                                                    [5.88]              [5.56]             [3.00]             [3.45]
Panel B: All Firms Excluding:
                                                    0.660 ***           0.634 ***          0.676 ***          0.649 ***
Firms with Cyber Insurance
                                                    [4.40]              [4.27]             [3.34]             [4.05]
Panel C: All Firms Excluding:
                                                    0.669 ***           0.682 ***          0.522 **           0.507 **
Firms in Training Sample
                                                    [4.42]              [4.67]             [2.20]             [2.42]
Panel D: Alternative Rebalancing
                                                    0.667 ***           0.646 ***          0.599 ***          0.561 ***
Monthly Rebalancing
                                                    [4.48]              [4.32]             [2.95]             [3.49]
                                                    0.691 ***           0.669 ***          0.586 ***          0.559 ***
Yearly Rebalancing
                                                    [4.73]              [4.52]             [2.84]             [3.40]
                                                                                           Table Continued Overleaf




                                                            62
                                         Table 11 (Continued)

                                         Equal-weighted portfolios              Value-weighted portfolios
                                        High - Low Cyber Risk Stocks           High - Low Cyber Risk Stocks
                                        Avg. Return        5-Factor alpha     Avg. Return       5-Factor alpha
Panel E: All Firms Excluding:
                                              0.704 ***           0.675 ***         0.698 ***          0.644 ***
Consumer Non_Durables
                                              [4.45]              [3.24]            [4.44]             [3.89]
                                              0.674 ***           0.619 ***         0.646 ***          0.577 ***
Consumer Durables
                                              [4.63]              [3.07]            [4.42]             [3.57]
                                              0.690 ***           0.633 ***         0.636 ***          0.564 ***
Manufacturing
                                              [5.01]              [3.22]            [4.28]             [3.44]
                                              0.614 ***           0.566 ***         0.570 ***          0.495 ***
Energy Oil and Gas
                                              [4.60]              [2.80]            [3.99]             [2.88]
                                              0.666 ***           0.638 ***         0.647 ***          0.592 ***
Chemicals and Allied Products
                                              [4.58]              [3.06]            [4.42]             [3.54]
                                              0.575 ***           0.519 **          0.570 ***          0.580 ***
Business Equipment
                                              [3.56]              [2.46]            [3.52]             [3.27]
                                              0.685 ***           0.609 ***         0.666 ***          0.571 ***
Telephone and Television Transmission
                                              [4.59]              [2.96]            [4.45]             [3.41]
                                              0.688 ***           0.620 ***         0.672 ***          0.585 ***
Utilities
                                              [4.58]              [3.03]            [4.46]             [3.67]
                                              0.760 ***           0.573 ***         0.775 ***          0.541 ***
Wholesale, Retail, and Some Services
                                              [4.54]              [2.91]            [4.92]             [3.44]
                                              0.659 ***           0.681 ***         0.660 ***          0.650 ***
Healthcare, Medical Equipment, Drugs
                                              [4.31]              [3.17]            [4.47]             [3.75]
                                              0.746 ***           0.711 ***         0.671 ***          0.692 ***
Money Finance
                                              [4.93]              [2.74]            [4.41]             [3.53]
                                              0.665 ***           0.450 ***         0.661 ***          0.409 ***
Other
                                              [4.14]              [3.08]            [3.97]             [3.36]
                                                                                   Table Continued Overleaf




                                                      63
                                              Table 11 (Continued)

                                             Equal-weighted portfolios               Value-weighted portfolios
                                            High - Low Cyber Risk Stocks            High - Low Cyber Risk Stocks
                                             Avg. Return        5-Factor alpha     Avg. Return       5-Factor alpha
Panel F: Replacing zeros with industry medians
                                                   0.572 ***           0.660 ***         0.369 **           0.470 ***
Tercile Portfolios (P3-P1)
                                                   [3.87]              [5.09]            [2.07]             [2.62]
                                                   0.601 ***           0.723 ***         0.393 *            0.569 ***
Quartile Portfolios (P4-P1)
                                                   [3.27]              [4.56]            [1.91]             [3.40]
                                                   0.602 ***           0.704 ***         0.459 **           0.584 ***
Quintile Portfolios (P5-P1)
                                                   [3.04]              [4.10]            [2.07]             [3.27]
                                                   0.527 **            0.673 ***         0.387              0.487 **
Decile Portfolios (P10-P1)
                                                   [2.43]              [3.80]            [1.49]             [2.36]
Panel G: Replacing zeros with next non-zero obs.
                                                   0.235 **            0.300 ***         0.289 ***          0.289 ***
Tercile Portfolios (P3-P1)
                                                   [2.08]              [2.79]            [3.11]             [2.73]
                                                   0.306 **            0.386 ***         0.283 **           0.308 **
Quartile Portfolios (P4-P1)
                                                   [2.27]              [3.17]            [2.49]             [2.23]
                                                   0.384 ***           0.471 ***         0.314 **           0.363 **
Quintile Portfolios (P5-P1)
                                                   [2.66]              [3.61]            [2.16]             [2.35]
                                                   0.515 ***           0.423 **          0.631 ***          0.529 **
Decile Portfolios (P10-P1)
                                                   [2.75]              [2.24]            [3.51]             [2.46]




                                                           64
                    Internet Appendix

                               for

                     Cybersecurity Risk

Chris Florackis, Christodoulos Louca, Roni Michaely, Michael Weber




                               65
                                                   Table IA.1
                   Cybersecurity Risk and Firm Characteristics-Jaccard Similarity
This table reports the results of linear regressions of firm characteristics on cybersecurity risk as measured
through Jaccard similarity. All variables are defined in Appendix B. Standard errors are clustered at the
firm level. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.
                                                           Model 1                Model 2
          Firm Size (ln)                                      0.006     ***           0.007     ***
                                                             [14.44]                   [4.94]
          Firm Age (ln)                                      -0.003     ***          -0.016     ***
                                                              [-4.72]                 [-5.73]
          Tobin's Q                                           0.004     ***           0.001     *
                                                               [7.84]                  [1.89]
          ROA                                                 0.021     ***           0.012     ***
                                                               [5.55]                  [3.25]
          Tanginility                                        -0.034     ***          -0.010
                                                              [-8.78]                 [-1.28]
          R&D Expenditures                                   -0.008                   0.037     ***
                                                              [-0.99]                  [4.72]
          Secrets                                             0.010     ***           0.013     ***
                                                               [5.91]                  [4.70]
          Cash Flow Volatility (Industry)                    -0.095     ***           0.006
                                                              [-6.70]                  [0.42]
          Risk Section Length (ln)                            0.022     ***           0.020     ***
                                                             [39.70]                 [20.15]
          Readability (ln)                                    0.002     **            0.002     *
                                                               [2.36]                  [1.73]
          Institutional Ownership                             0.010     ***           0.006
                                                               [2.66]                  [1.57]
          Independent Directors                               0.037     ***           0.015     *
                                                               [5.04]                  [1.68]
          Risk Committee                                      0.007     **            0.000
                                                               [2.51]                 [-0.10]
          Constant                                           -0.175     ***          -0.112     ***
                                                            [-12.03]                  [-6.33]
          No of Observations                                 35,308                  35,308
          Clustered SE                                          Firm                    Firm
          Firm fixed effects                                     No                     Yes
          Industry fixed effects                                Yes                      No
          Year fixed effects                                    Yes                     Yes
          R-Squared                                           0.510                   0.782




                                                      66
                                                Table IA.2
      Cybersecurity Risk and Negative Asymmetries in Stock Returns- Jaccard Similarity
This table reports the results of regressions of cybersecurity risk on two different proxies for negative
asymmetries in stock returns. In Model 1, we use NCSKEW, which equals the negative of the third
moment of firm-specific weekly returns for each firm in a year divided by the standard deviation of firm-
specific weekly returns raised to the third power. In Model 2, we use EXTR_SIGMA, which is the negative
of the worst deviation of firm-specific weekly returns from the average firm specific weekly return divided
by the standard deviation of firm-specific weekly returns. Cybersecurity risk is measured at the beginning
of each year using Jaccard similarity. All variables are defined in Appendix B. *, **, and *** indicate
statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.
                                                     NCSKEW                      EXTR_SIGMA
                                                        Model 1                      Model 2
     Cybersecurity Risk Index (Jaccard)                   0.312 ***                     0.280 ***
                                                          [3.53]                        [3.47]
     Firm Size (ln)                                       0.047 ***                     0.025 ***
                                                          [5.03]                        [2.98]
     Firm Age (ln)                                       -0.030 ***                    -0.023 ***
                                                         [-3.94]                       [-3.25]
     Tobin's Q                                           -0.086 ***                     -0.075 ***
                                                         [-9.65]                      [-10.11]
     ROA                                                  0.022                         0.036 ***
                                                          [1.49]                        [2.70]
     Tanginility                                         -0.020 **                     -0.032 ***
                                                         [-2.24]                       [-4.00]
     R&D Expenditures                                     0.045 ***                     0.053 ***
                                                          [2.98]                        [3.78]
     Secrets                                              0.019 ***                     0.022 ***
                                                          [2.63]                        [3.26]
     Cash Flow Volatility (Industry)                      0.004                         0.002
                                                          [0.40]                        [0.23]
     Risk Section Length (ln)                             0.016 ***                     0.009
                                                          [2.61]                        [1.59]
     Readability (ln)                                    -0.015 *                      -0.010
                                                         [-1.88]                       [-1.38]
     Institutional Ownership                              0.043 ***                     0.029 ***
                                                          [6.85]                        [5.07]
     Independent Directors                               -0.013 *                      -0.007
                                                         [-1.95]                       [-1.08]
     Risk Committee                                      -0.033                        -0.050 **
                                                         [-1.58]                       [-2.38]
     Constant                                             0.211 ***                      2.714 ***
                                                          [9.05]                       [116.4]
     Clustered SE                                          Firm                          Firm
     Industry fixed effects                                 Yes                           Yes
     Year fixed effects                                     Yes                           Yes
     Number of Observations                              24,657                        24,657
     R-squared                                            0.025                         0.029




                                                   67
                                                                                Table IA.3
                                                 Cybersecurity Risk and Future Cyber attacks-Jaccard Similarity
This table reports the results of logit regressions of cybersecurity risk (Jaccard similarity) on future cyber attacks. Panel A includes all cyber attacks reported in PRC
database for which we have complete risk disclosure and financial data. In Panel B we restrict our attention to major cyber attacks and in particular those that attracted
attention by global news outlets (e.g. CNBC, Financial Times and the Wall Street Journal) and covered in major Newswires (e.g. AP, Bloomberg, Reuters). In Panel C
we restrict our attention to non-major cyber attacks (those that did not attract attention from major Newswires). Future cyber attacks are measured at time t+1 while all
independent variables are measured at time t. All variables are defined in Appendix B. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                                                   68
                                     Panel A: All Cyber Attacks            Panel B: Major Cyber Attacks         Panel C: Non-major Cyber Attacks
                                     Model 1           Model 2                 Model 3        Model 4              Model 5           Model 6
Cybersecurity Risk Index (Jaccard)     0.749 ***          0.504     ***          0.743 ***      0.562     ***         0.721 ***        0.440     ***
                                       [8.67]              [5.37]                 [5.45]         [4.75]                [8.20]           [3.65]
Previous Attack Dummy                   -                 1.435     ***            -            1.622     ***           -              1.061     **
                                        -                  [3.76]                  -             [2.99]                 -               [2.14]
Firm Size (ln)                          -                 1.496     ***            -            1.814     ***           -              1.236     ***
                                        -                [10.55]                   -             [8.36]                 -               [7.61]
Firm Age (ln)                           -                -0.121                    -           -0.221                   -             -0.031
                                        -                 [-1.10]                  -            [-1.38]                 -              [-0.22]
Tobin's Q                               -                 0.190                    -            0.300                   -              0.087
                                        -                  [1.28]                  -             [1.57]                 -               [0.43]
ROA                                     -                 0.505                    -            0.416                   -              0.597
                                        -                  [1.59]                  -             [1.11]                 -               [1.39]
Tanginility                             -                -0.038                    -           -0.192                   -              0.065
                                        -                 [-0.26]                  -            [-0.86]                 -               [0.36]
R&D Expenditures                        -                -0.016                    -           -0.149                   -              0.068
                                        -                 [-0.04]                  -            [-0.31]                 -               [0.13]
Secrets                                 -                 0.280     ***            -            0.105                   -              0.393     ***
                                        -                  [2.87]                  -             [0.75]                 -               [3.08]
Cash Flow Volatility (Industry)         -                -0.177                    -           -0.531                   -             -0.029
                                        -                 [-0.79]                  -            [-1.43]                 -              [-0.10]
Risk Section Length (ln)                -                -0.185                    -           -0.389     **            -              0.017
                                        -                 [-1.42]                  -            [-2.24]                 -               [0.12]
Readability (ln)                        -                 0.017                    -           -0.102                   -              0.121
                                        -                  [0.12]                  -            [-0.49]                 -               [0.61]
Institutional Ownership                 -                 0.139                    -            0.444     ***           -             -0.082
                                        -                  [1.17]                  -             [2.70]                 -              [-0.57]
Independent Directors                   -                -0.067                    -           -0.158                   -              0.012
                                        -                 [-0.59]                  -            [-1.11]                 -               [0.07]
Risk Committee                          -                -0.203                    -           -0.448                   -             -0.037
                                        -                 [-0.49]                  -            [-1.02]                 -              [-0.06]
Constant                              -8.035 ***         -8.607     ***         -8.594 ***     -9.867     ***        -8.783 ***       -9.027     ***
                                     1[-0.12]           [-10.71]                 [-7.80]        [-9.13]               [-8.04]          [-8.06]
Clustered SE                            Firm               Firm                   Firm           Firm                  Firm             Firm
Industry fixed effects                   Yes                Yes                    Yes            Yes                   Yes              Yes
Year fixed effects                       Yes                Yes                    Yes            Yes                   Yes              Yes
Number of Observations                41,140             30,830                 38,934         30,830                41,140           30,830
Pseudo-R-squared                       0.094              0.223                  0.090          0.244                 0.086            0.196
                                                                          69
                                                      Table IA.4
                              Cybersecurity Risk Portfolios-Jaccard Similarity
This table reports average excess returns, CAPM alphas, four-factor alphas from Carhart's (1997) FFC model (FFC
alphas) and five-factor alphas from Fama and French's (2015) model (Five-Factor alphas) for portfolios constructed
on the basis of our Cybersecurity Risk Index, as measured through Jaccard similarity. Starting from December 2007,
we sort stocks at the end of each quarter in ascending order on the basis of their Cybersecurity Risk and allocate
them into three groups (Low Cyber-Risk Stocks, Middle Group and High Cyber-Risk Stocks). We track the
performance of the three portfolios over the following quarter until these are rebalanced. We form the spread
strategy P3-P1 that is long the portfolio with the highest cybersecurity risk stocks (P3) and short the portfolio with
the lowest cybersecurity risk stocks (P1). Returns are reported for equally-weighted (ew) and value-weighted (vw)
portfolios over the period March 2008- March 2019. Average (monthly) excess portfolio returns and alphas are
bolded; their associated Newey-West t-statistics are reported in square brackets. We exclude from the analysis firms
that appear in a sample for a period less than 3 years and have zero disclosures on cyber-related issues throughout
that period. ***, ** and * denote statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.

Future (1-month) portfolio returns sorted by our Cybersecurity Risk Index
                                                            Portfolios
                                     Low Cyber-Risk       Middle Group      High Cyber-Risk
                                          [P1]                [P2]                [P3]              [P3]-[P1]

Excess return                ew             0.169              0.701 *             0.852 **           0.683 ***
                                            [0.38]             [1.71]              [2.15]             [4.70]
                             vw             0.508               0.883 ***          1.025 ***          0.517 **
                                            [1.25]              [2.62]             [2.95]             [2.33]
CAPM alpha                   ew            -0.727 **           -0.214             -0.059              0.668 ***
                                           [-3.32]             [-0.98]            [-0.39]             [4.71]
                             vw            -0.339 *             0.090              0.181 *            0.520 **
                                           [-1.90]              [0.80]             [1.85]             [2.37]
FFC alpha                    ew            -0.675 ***          -0.154             -0.005              0.670 ***
                                           [-4.87]             [-1.41]            [-0.06]             [4.70]
                             vw            -0.277 *            0.103               0.166              0.443 **
                                           [-1.87]             [1.04]              [1.61]             [2.26]
Five-factor alpha            ew            -0.602 ***          -0.111              0.058              0.660 ***
                                           [-3.80]             [-0.79]             [0.69]             [4.40]
                             vw            -0.306 **           0.053               0.186              0.492 ***
                                           [-2.30]             [0.49]              [1.55]             [2.58]




                                                         70
                                              Table IA.5
               Cross sectional Fama-MacBeth Regressions-Jaccard Similarity
This table reports the results from Fama-MacBeth regressions on the relation between our Cybersecurity
Risk Index, as measured Jaccard similarity and subsequent stock returns (1-month). For each month of
our sample we run cross sectional regressions of excess stock returns on lagged cybersecurity risk and a
set of firm characteristics that are also lagged. These include beta, size, book-to-market, momentum,
short-term reversal, illiquidity, coskewness, idiosyncratic volatility, asset growth, profitability and
demand for lottery-like stocks (max) , length of Item 1A. Risk Factors of the Form 10-K and 10-K
readability. All variables are defined in Appendix B. To facilitate the assessment of the economic
significance of our findings, all explanatory variables are standardized. The coefficients are reported as
time-series averages of the estimates from the cross sectional regressions. The t-statistics, which are
reported in brackets, are based on the Newey-West heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent
standard errors. ***, ** and * denote statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.

                                                                   Returnst+1
                                                        [1]            [2]              [2]

   Cybersecurity Risk Index (Jaccard)                  0.297 ***      0.107    ***     0.130    ***
                                                       [6.34]         [2.74]           [2.90]
   Beta                                                   -           0.098            0.096
                                                                      [0.90]           [0.92]
   Market Value                                          -           -0.079           -0.032
                                                                     [-1.16]          [-0.43]
   Book-to-Market                                        -            0.006            0.008
                                                                      [0.16]           [0.16]
   Momentum                                              -            0.163    *       0.153    *
                                                                      [1.85]           [1.74]
   Reversal                                              -           -0.113    **     -0.120    **
                                                                     [-2.01]          [-2.17]
   Illiquidity                                           -           -0.019           -0.019
                                                                     [-0.53]          [-0.52]
   CoSkew                                                -           -0.027           -0.025
                                                                     [-0.88]          [-0.79]
   Indiosyncratic Volatility                             -           -0.456    ***    -0.456    ***
                                                                     [-5.42]          [-5.59]
   Asset Growth                                          -           -0.122    ***    -0.115    **
                                                                     [-3.14]          [-3.10]
   ROA                                                   -            0.296    ***     0.285    ***
                                                                      [5.30]           [5.14]
   Max                                                   -           -0.421    ***    -0.414    ***
                                                                     [-4.43]          [-4.45]
   Risk Section Length (ln)                              -               -            -0.040
                                                                                      [-0.99]
   Readability (ln)                                      -               -            -0.082
                                                                                      [-1.47]
   Constant                                         0.515            0.515             0.513
                                                    [1.14]           [1.13]            [1.12]
   Observations                                   409,016          342,573           342,573




                                                  71
