                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                THE CAREER EVOLUTION OF THE SEX GAP IN WAGES:
                DISCRIMINATION VS. HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

                                        David Neumark
                                       Giannina Vaccaro

                                      Working Paper 28191
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28191


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020




This research was funded by the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF). The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by David Neumark and Giannina Vaccaro. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Career Evolution of the Sex Gap in Wages: Discrimination vs. Human Capital Investment
David Neumark and Giannina Vaccaro
NBER Working Paper No. 28191
December 2020
JEL No. J16,J24,J71

                                           ABSTRACT

Several studies find that there is little sex gap in wages at labor market entry, and that the sex gap
in wages emerges (and grows) with time in the labor market. This evidence is consistent with (i)
there is little or no sex discrimination in wages at labor market entry, and (ii) the emergence of
the sex gap in wages with time in the labor market reflects differences between men and women
in human capital investment (and other decisions), with women investing less early in their
careers. Indeed, some economists explicitly interpret the evidence this way. We show that this
interpretation ignores two fundamental implications of the human capital model, and that
differences in investment can complicate the interpretation of both the starting sex gap in wages
(or absence of a gap), and the differences in "returns" to experience. We then estimate stylized
structural models of human capital investment and wage growth to identify the effects of
discrimination and differences in human capital investment, and find evidence more consistent
with discrimination reducing women's wages at labor market entry.


David Neumark
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER
dneumark@uci.edu

Giannina Vaccaro
University of Lausanne
Switzerland
Giannina.Vaccaro@unil.ch
I. Introduction

         Many studies present evidence on how the sex gap in wages evolves from labor

market entry and over women's and men's careers. These studies generally find that there is

little sex gap in wages at labor market entry, but that the sex gap in wages emerges (and

grows) with time in the labor market. This evidence is consistent with (i) there is little or no

sex discrimination in wages at labor market entry, and (ii) the emergence of the sex gap in

wages with time in the labor market reflects differences between men and women in human

capital investment and in other decisions such as hours, career aspirations, etc., with women

investing less early in their careers. Indeed, some economists explicitly interpret the evidence

this way.

         This interpretation, however, may be incorrect, because it ignores two fundamental

implications of the human capital model. First, if two otherwise identical workers make

different decisions about early human capital investment, the worker who invests more at

labor market entry will earn lower wages initially. Thus, among equally productive women

and men, if women are investing less early in their careers, then in the absence of wage

discrimination their starting wages should be higher than men's starting wages, not equal to

men's starting wages. In this case, evidence of no sex gap in wages at labor market entry

could mask a wage penalty for women. Second, early in the career the effect of greater

human capital investment ­ in particular, a slower tapering off of human capital investment ­

can imply slower, not faster wage growth with experience, because the negative effect of

current human capital investment on wages outweighs the effect of past human capital

investment on wage growth. 1

         Thus, the evidence in much of the existing literature ­ no sex wage gap at entry, and

lower apparent "returns" to experience for women ­ could in fact reflect two different


1
 This emphasizes that the coefficient on experience in the human capital earnings function is not the return to
human capital investment.


                                                        1
phenomena than most interpretations of these findings: first, there could be wage

discrimination against women at labor market entry despite no wage gap at entry; and second,

women could be investing more in human capital (per unit of labor market experience) early

in their careers despite the flatter wage-experience profiles.

         To better interpret the evidence on the evolution of wages of women and men, we

estimate stylized structural models of human capital investment and wage growth, going back

to Mincer (1974). 2 As we show, these structural models are required to obtain an estimate of

the wage gap at labor market entry that is not contaminated by different human capital

investment decisions of women and men. Conditional on the other controls in the model,

viewed as time-invariant productivity shifters, it is more appropriate to interpret this

estimated wage gap as a measure of "residual" discrimination, based on the "residual wage

gap" approach (e.g., Hellerstein and Neumark, 2006; Kunze, 2018). 3 Moreover, these

structural models permit us to identify the parameters of human capital investment profiles.

Thus, the central value from estimating these structural models is that the estimates permit us

to do two things: (i) to separately identify sex discrimination in starting wages and sex

differences in initial human capital investment; and (ii) to identify the human capital

investment profiles of men and women that underlie the usual coefficients on experience and

its square, and hence correctly interpret changes in wages with experience as differences in

human capital investment.

II. Prior Studies of the Evolution of the Sex Gap in Wages from Labor Market Entry

         Several studies present evidence on how the sex gap in wages evolves from labor

market entry, many of which offer interpretations based on discrimination, human capital

investment, and other factors. The studies we have identified that estimate both a starting sex


2
  Earlier evidence on structural estimates of these kinds of wage equations, for white men only, was reported in
Neumark and Taubman (1995).
3
  These same sources discuss reasons the residual wage gap may not reflect discrimination. With these caveats
in mind, in the remainder of this paper, as a short-hand, we refer to this gap as an estimate of discrimination.


                                                        2
wage gap and how this wage gap evolves after labor market entry are summarized in Table 1.

        Many of these papers (Polachek, 2008; Manning and Swaffield, 2008; Bertrand et al.,

2010; Goldin, 2014; and Stokke, 2016) find that there is little sex gap in wages at labor

market entry, but that the sex gap in wages arises (and grows) with time in the labor market. 4

A natural interpretation of this evidence is that there is not sex discrimination in pay at labor

market entry, and that the sex gap that arises (and grows) with time in the labor market is

likely due to lower human capital investment by women, or other choices they make. 5

Indeed, some of the papers offer this or related explanations, as Table 1 documents.

        Polachek (2008) is very clear in arguing that human capital differences and not sex

discrimination explain some of the observed patterns of the career evolution of the sex gap in

wages. He draws on several different types of evidence: a small or non-existent sex gap in

pay for single men and women vs. a larger gap for married men and women; a larger sex gap

when children are spaced more years apart; and the relationship between marital and family

status and lifetime labor force participation. He also appeals to theoretical arguments that the

more intermittent labor force participation of many women will lower their human capital

investment, as well as related evidence. Together, he argues that "[c]urrent studies

decomposing the gender wage gap grossly underestimate the explanatory power of the human

capital model because they fail to account for future expected lifetime labor force

participation" (pp. 227-8), and that this can explain most of the sex wage gap, leaving little if

any role for wage discrimination. He concludes: "... the human capital investment process,

more specifically how gender differences in lifetime work affect human capital acquisition,



4
  There are two exceptions in the table. Kunze (2005), using data for West Germany, finds different results,
perhaps because of apprenticeship training institutions that generate quite different outcomes. Weinberger and
Kuhn (2010) find substantially larger starting wage differences, even in more recent data.
5
  Below, we discuss work by Polachek focusing on human capital decisions made by men and women. There is
the possibility, of course, of differences in opportunities for human capital investment offered to men and
women by employers. This pertains to the more general issue that controls in wage equations can sometimes
themselves reflect discrimination, a question considered by, for example, Gronau (1988).




                                                       3
can explain why there is a gender wage gap..." (p. 230). While Polachek does not explicitly

cite evidence on the absence of a sex gap in wages at labor market entry vs. the emergence of

a sex gap after labor market entry, the core of his argument is that post-entry labor market

decisions drive the sex gap in wages. 6

        Bertrand et al. (2010) explore differences in the sex gap in earnings in the corporate

and financial sectors, considering the possibility of explicit or implicit discrimination. But

they find that the earnings gap is non-existent at the outset of careers, and attribute its later

emergence in part to career interruptions (as also emphasized by Polachek, 2008). Manning

and Swaffield (2008), who report no pay gap at entry but large growth in the sex gap within

10 years after labor market entry, attribute nearly half the gap to human capital ­ training and

the accumulation of experience (and much less to job shopping or other factors). 7

        Goldin has made perhaps the most explicit statement that the absence of a starting sex

gap in wages but its emergence over time militates against discrimination being an important

determinant of the sex gap in wages, at least in recent data. 8 In interpreting the overall sex

gap in earnings, she says: "Does that mean that women are receiving lower pay for equal

work? That is possibly the case in certain places, but by and large it's not that, it's something

else... it's a pretty small number, this number for wage discrimination once you hold lots of

things constant." Instead, she emphasizes that the wage difference emerges over time: "Some

of the best studies that we have of the gender pay gap, following individuals longitudinally,

show that when they show up right out of college, or out of law school, or after they get their

M.B.A. ­ all the studies that we have indicate that wages are pretty similar then... But further


6
  He also cites the possibility that expected lower participation by women can lead to less market-oriented
schooling, which could generate a wage gap at entry (p. 228) ­ in which case a starting wage gap might not
reflect discrimination. On the other hand, he also notes that what he terms "societal discrimination" may
generate some of the sex differences in labor force participation between men and women.
7 The Manning and Swaffield paper helps emphasize the point that the human capital framework is not the sole
model that can generate some of the empirical regularities of earnings profiles. For example, interfirm job
mobility will typically generate wage growth ­ and in fact larger wage gains for younger than for older workers,
which can generate concavity in the age-earnings profile (Mincer, 1986).
8
  See Dubner (2016).


                                                       4
down the pike in their lives, by 10-15 years out, we see very large differences in their pay ...

and a lot of that occurs a year or two after a kid is born, and it occurs for women and not for

men. If anything, men tend to work somewhat harder."

        Of course, childbearing and greater responsibility for childrearing may figure

prominently in the post-entry labor market decisions men and women make, and could also

influence pre-entry decisions (such as schooling investments). Looking at data from six

countries, Kleven et al. (2019) show that earnings of men and women are similar before

parenthood, but diverge sharply after the birth of a first child, with the rapid emergence of a

large and persistent penalty for women, while men are unaffected. The evidence across

countries varies as to the relative roles of the extensive margin (employment), intensive

margin (hours), and wage rate ­ but in all cases the combined effect of hours and wage

effects are substantial. Kleven et al. do not refer specifically to discrimination, but again, the

lack of a sex gap in earnings prior to childbirth could be interpreted as indicating little or no

role for discrimination. As a result of this work, we pay explicit attention to differences in the

evolution of the sex gap in wages for women and men who have children vs. those who

remain childless. 9

III. Interpreting the Evolution of the Sex Gap in Wages in the Context of the Human

Capital Model

        The previous section notes that empirical regularities regarding the evolution of men's

and women's wages often indicate that men and women have very similar starting wages

(conditional on covariates), but then men have faster wage growth, and that some interpret

this evidence as suggesting that pay discrimination is not an important contributor to the sex

gap in wages, and instead indicating that the pay gap emerges over time because of


9
 Goldin also emphasizes that women value temporal flexibility more, choosing jobs with fewer hours, or the
same number of hours but hours that they can choose. And elsewhere, she emphasizes that women and men may
choose different occupations because of these factors, leading her to see the path to gender equality as one in
which more occupations present career profiles more amenable to women (see Goldin and Katz, 2016).


                                                      5
contemporaneous and subsequent decisions women and men make.

       Regarding starting wages, this line of thinking ignores the potential effect on starting

wages of differences in human capital investment. Consider two workers with identical initial

productivity, who are paid according to their productivity net of the effects of human capital

investment. If one invests more in human capital on the job when beginning to work, their

initial wage will be lower. Thus, if wages are determined by productivity as captured in the

controls in a wage regression, and by the effects of human capital investment in terms of both

foregone current productivity and potentially higher productivity (later), and women invest

less in human capital initially, then in the absence of wage discrimination, women's initial

wages should be higher, not equal. Conversely, in this setting equal starting wages are

consistent with wage discrimination against women.

       This can be seen formally in the context of Mincer's (1974) model of human capital

investment and the returns to experience. Suppose that, as in Mincer's baseline model, human

capital investment follows the linearly-declining profile

                         
        = max{0 -  0    , 0} ,                                                            (1)
                          


where  equals the ratio of time spent investing in period t (time for which one is not paid

because one is not productive), T is the period over which investments are made, the 0

subscript denotes the initial period, and  is experience. (So investment declines linearly in

experience, eventually reaching zero.)

       In this case, the log wage equation in period t is

                                                                        0     2
       ln( ) = 0 +  + ln 1 - 0 +  0     + 0   + -                               ,         (2)
                                                                        2


where r is the rate of return on post-schooling investments. 0 denotes the average

individual's (log) productivity "endowment," or productivity absent human capital

investment. Equation (2) is the underlying basis of the standard Mincerian log wage equation

including linear and quadratic experience terms (although the log term on the right-hand side



                                                6
is omitted, based on a first-order Taylor-series expansion giving an approximately linear

function in  ). 10

         S is years of schooling. It is written without a t subscript to simplify; S can change in

the data as individuals achieve more years of education, but, unlike E, the evolution of S over

time is not central to our analysis. Also, note that the rates of return on the two types of

human capital are constrained to be the same (r). One can see from equation (2) that, with the

Taylor-series expansion of the log term, if the return to on-the-job investment differed from

the return to schooling, we would effectively have two moments (coefficients) in three

parameters. 11 Moreover, as noted in Neumark and Taubman (1995), the argument that these

rates of return are equal can be motivated based on the framework of Willis (1986) and Ben-

Porath (1967), where r is the discount rate that individuals apply to both schooling and post-

schooling investments in investing up to where marginal returns equal marginal costs. 12

         Turning to the main concern of our paper, the second term in equation (2) ­

                  
ln 1 - 0 +  0     ­ reflects the reduction in current wages owing to lower current
                  


productivity because of contemporaneous human capital investment. At labor market entry,

when  = 0, wages are reduced in proportion to the fraction of time devoted to human

                                                                                                               
capital investment initially (0 ). Clearly if women invest less (all else the same), so that 0 <

                                                                         )             
 (with superscripts f and m denoting females and males), then ln0  > ln(0  ­ i.e., in

the absence of wage discrimination starting wages should be higher for women.



10
   Note that equation (2) is not derived from an explicit optimization problem, but rather from assumptions
about how investment affects earnings (decreasing earnings in the current period, and augmenting earnings in
future periods by a fixed return), coupled with an assumption about the functional form of the investment profile
(in this case, linearly declining). Ben-Porath (1967) shows, in an optimizing framework, that investment
declines monotonically over the life cycle, but does not pin down the rate of decline. The linearly-declining
profile is the most prevalent assumption used in empirical work, in the sense that it leads to the standard log
earnings function with linear and quadratic experience terms.
11
   The same issue arises with the Gompertz specification below, for which the first-order Taylor-series
expansion is linear.
12
   In addition, it is difficult to obtain convergence of the nonlinear models (i.e., without doing the Taylor-series
expansions) with separate rates of return.


                                                         7
        Consider what this implies for the standard estimation of the "reduced form" log wage

equation (i.e., the standard Mincerian log wage equation), including a dummy for females (F)

to test for sex discrimination in pay, and differential growth in wages with experience for

men and women (which for simplicity we include only as a linear interaction here, although

in the empirical implementation we also do this for the quadratic experience term). This

specification is
                          2
         ln( ) =  +  +  +   +  +    . 13                                                              (3)

        Suppose that, corresponding to the evidence described above, we find evidence that

 = 0 and  < 0 ­ that is, no initial sex gap in wages, and a smaller experience coefficient

for women. Interpreting the evidence that  = 0 (and the absence of evidence that  < 0) as

implying no wage discrimination against women at labor market entry (i.e., at t = 0, when

 = 0) is incorrect, because the sex difference in the intercept reflects the influence of both

                                                                                                   
sex discrimination ( ) and initial human capital investment (0 ). In particular, if 0 <  ,

then the estimate of  in equation (3) is an upward biased estimate of the sex gap in wages

(defined as the wage penalty women face). 14

        To see this more formally, modify equation (2) to include different values of the

parameter 0 for men and women, and expand the equation to include a dummy variable for

women that will separately identify wage discrimination. So denoting dummy variables for

women and men by  and , we have




13
   Other controls are added to the specifications we estimate. These are detailed in Section IV when describing
the data, as well as in the regression Table 2.
14
   As noted earlier, we realize that whether one can test for and estimate wage discrimination in a standard wage
regression is an open question. Here, we simply adopt the validity of this framework, focusing on how to
interpret  when the regression controls adequately control for productivity and other differences aside from
those related to differences in human capital investment.


                                                        8
         ln( ) = 0 + (   +   )  

                                                                  
                                                                +   
                  + ln 1 -    +    +                                    
                                                                +   

                                                 
                  +    +        +     

                                           
                            ( + ) +
                                                         2
                  + -                                      +  .                                               (4)
                                  2( + )


         Regarding the intercept, when  = 0, this equation reduces to

                                                                      
         ln( ) = 0 + (   +   )   + ln1 -    +    +  .                                                         (5)

         Equation (5) makes clear that there can be discrimination against women ( < 0)

even when  ­ the estimated coefficient on the female dummy variable in equation (3) ­

                      15 
equals zero, when  <  . That is, without estimating a structural wage equation, we

cannot separately identify the effect of discrimination from a sex difference in initial human

capital investment. 16

         The interpretation of lower early wage growth for women than for men as implying

less human capital investment by women ignores a second implication of the human capital

model. Put simply, the estimated coefficients on experience variables in a log wage equation

cannot be interpreted as "returns" to human capital investment. In the human capital


                                                                                
15
   In this case, the negative  term and the positive term ln1 -    +                 = ln1 -
                      
[ -  )   +   ( + ] can offset each other, leading to an estimate of  in equation (3) that is near
zero.
16
   To see this even more clearly, substitute for the log expression in equations (4) and (5) the first-order Taylor
series expansion around 1.
                                              
         ln1 -    +     -    +   .

Then equation (5) becomes

                                                    
         ln( )  0 +    +      -    +      +   
                                            
               = 0 +    +      - { -  }   +   +   ,

which makes it clear that we cannot, from equation (3), separately identify discrimination (  ) and the
                                        
difference in initial investment ( -     ).


                                                         9
investment profile in equation (1), T determines how quickly human capital investment tapers

off with time in the labor market; when this investment diminishes more slowly (T is large),

human capital investment is higher (for the same 0 ) in periods before it falls to zero.

        However, this slower tapering off of human capital investment generates slower wage

growth initially, not faster, and hence a smaller experience coefficient, because the negative

effect of current human capital investment on wages outweighs the effect of past human

capital investment on wage growth. This can be seen from equations (1) and (2). If T is

higher for women, their investment declines more slowly than that of men's. For lower levels

of experience, the higher value of T lowers the return to experience ­ via the

                 
ln 1 - 0 +  0     expression in equation (2) ­ precisely because the substantial current
                  

investment in period t outweighs the wage growth from the prior period to the next from past

human capital investment. 17

        We also consider an alternative investment profile proposed by Mincer in which

investment declines asymptotically to zero, rather than declining linearly:

         = 0  exp(- ) .                                                                                   (6)

        This gives rise to the Gompertz wage function, rather than the quadratic wage

function (Mincer, 1974). Without introducing separate parameters by sex (the extension is

straightforward), the wage equation becomes
                                                                   0
        ln( ) = 0 +  + ln{1 - 0  exp(- )} -                             exp(- ) .                         (7)
                                                                    

        The Gompertz earnings function exhibits strictly monotonically declining investment

over the life cycle, as in Ben-Porath (1967). However, it does not generate the declining

earnings at high experience that the linearly-declining investment profile does, and which is



17
  This same result can be demonstrated by computing the mixed second partial derivative of log wages with
respect to E and T for equation (2). This derivative is negative for small E, implying lower wage growth with
experience when investment remains higher (T is large), but becomes positive for larger values of E.




                                                      10
generally observed in the data (Murphy and Welch, 1990) ­ although in principle we should

only see declines in earnings from depreciation of human capital, which is not incorporated in

the structural specifications above. 18

         All of the preceding discussion of the implications of the underlying human capital

investment profile for identifying and interpreting the starting sex gap in wages and "returns"

to experience carry over to this specification. We report estimates based on equation (7) as

well to assess the robustness of our conclusions.

         Finally, the human capital earnings functions developed by Mincer apply to workers

who for the most part work continuously after leaving school. When work (labor force

participation) is discontinuous, on-the-job human capital investment is also likely to be

discontinuous and not monotonically declining with experience, in which case these

specifications of the human capital earnings are less appropriate (see, e.g., Polachek, 1975;

Weiss and Gronau, 1981; Mincer and Ofek, 1982). Consequently, we also report estimates

for subsamples for which we measure actual labor market experience to be at least 75 percent

of potential labor market experience, and for an even more stringent restriction to those who

never had children.

IV. Data
         We use the 1997 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY97). NLSY97

respondents were aged 12 to 16 years as of December 31, 1996. We include 16 waves in the

analysis, from 1997 through 2013. 19 The NLSY97 is a nationally representative survey of

individuals that tracks labor market and life experiences of men and women born between

1980 and 1984 in the United States. It gathers detailed information on earnings, work

experience, schooling, and training ­ the key variables needed for our analysis ­ as well as a



18
   At the same time, it is important to note that we likely need a richer model to better fit earnings profiles, at
least based on the evidence in Murphy and Welch (1990) ­ although their evidence is based on CPS data in
which actual experience cannot be directly measured.
19
   Data collection was annual from 1997 through 2011, and interviews since then are biennial.


                                                          11
host of other rich information. For our purposes, the NLSY97 has the advantage of providing

a large number of observations for people at the start of their careers, which we need to study

the evolution of wages from labor market entry, and it is also fairly contemporaneous.

        The analysis includes variables related to human capital (education, experience,

training, and wages), individual characteristics (sex, race, marital status, children, location of

current residence, union status), and industry and occupation of work.

        Our dependent variable is hourly wages. Salaried people do not usually report hourly

wages in surveys. We use the NLSY97 constructed variable CV_HRLY_PAY.xx, which

constructs the hourly rate of pay, at employee-type jobs, from survey questions on the rate

and time unit of pay. 20 We normalize hourly wages to 2010 dollars based on the CPI, and use

the natural log of the hourly wage in our regression analysis. Our education variable is the

highest grade completed by the respondent as of the survey date.

        Work experience is measured using the NLSY97 created variable

CV_HOURS_WK_YR_ET.xx, which calculates the number of hours worked by the respondent

in each calendar year, and it is created for each employee-type job. According to the NLSY97

documentation, this variable is created for each respondent even if the respondent has worked

no jobs in a given year, in which case it is set to zero. As emphasized by the technical

documentation of the survey, when both "starting hours" and "current hours" are reported,

the latter are used. In our study, work experience is based on the cumulative number of hours

worked in the main job, expressed in units of years. 21 We convert to a year measure based on

an assumed yearly number of hours based on 40 hours per week and 52 weeks per year

(2,080 hours per year).


20
   The employment section of the NLSY97 differentiates between four types of jobs: employee-type jobs,
freelance jobs, self-employment, and military service. Employee-type jobs in the NLSY97 are those in which
the respondent has an ongoing relationship with a specific employer. The constructed measure excludes
overtime and performance-based pay.
21
   Respondents to the NLSY97 report the number of hours worked per week at each job they might have and
perform at the same time. However, job 1 records information of the principal or main job or remunerated
activity the individual has performed. We use the information reported for job 1 to construct our variables.


                                                      12
         We also present some results for a subsample of those who worked relatively

continuously since leaving school. The structural models of the human capital model that we

estimate are most appropriate to the human capital investment behavior of those who work

more or less continuously, because intermittent work or long spells of unemployment can

introduce more complicated patterns of human capital depreciation and investment (e.g.,

Polachek, 1975; Mincer and Ofek, 1982; Blackburn et al., 1993), as well as affecting pre-

market human capital investment that could be reflected in a sex gap in earnings at labor

market entry that is unrelated to labor market discrimination (Polachek, 2008).

         As in Neumark and Taubman (1995), this subsample was restricted based on the ratio

of actual to potential experience; we use a minimum percentage of actual relative to potential

experience of 75 percent. For computing this percentage, we use actual experience measured

as cumulative weeks worked since leaving school (which can be less than the work

experience measure described above owing to work while in school), and potential

experience is measured as the years of experience one could accumulate from the actual date

of departure from school without interruptions. 22 However, we use the same experience

regressor as for the full sample. 23

         In addition, we do some analysis for the subsample of women and men who never had

children. This variable is constructed by combining information from two raw variables

available in the NLSY97: BIOADOPTCHILD_SEX, which reports the sex of biological and

adopted children; and CV_TTL_BIO_CHILD_XRND, which reports the number of biological


22
   We also estimated results for subsamples restricted to those with relatively continuous school enrollment.
This was defined as having age at departure from school within 2 years of what this age would have been if the
individual would had begun grade 1 at age 6, remained continuously enrolled in school, and completed one
grade each year. Results for this subsample were not materially different, and hence are not reported in the paper
(but are available upon request).
23
   If we used only experience post-schooling as the regressor, for many observations experience was much lower
because they are last enrolled in their mid-to-late 20s, or even later. In this case, the estimates of the quadratic
specification were not well-behaved, because of the concavity imposed by the corresponding investment profile
without any restriction on the wage-experience profile becoming negatively sloped. However, the estimates for
the Gompertz specification (which never leads to a negatively-sloped wage-experience profile) were similar to
those reported below.




                                                        13
children. 24

         We construct a training measure based on the cumulative number of hours in a

training program per year. We use this training measure for alternative evidence on human

capital investment patterns. Training measures in the NLSY97 provide information about

formal training received by respondents aged 16 or older, outside of their regular schooling.

We use information regarding the start and stop dates and time devoted to the training. 25

From 1997 through 2003, the questions refer to the number of hours per day and the number

of days per week spent in a training program. For subsequent years, the questions refer to

number of hours per week and number of weeks per year. We recognize, of course, that this

variable only picks up one dimension of post-schooling human capital investment, but it is

the best available measure of post-schooling training that the dataset provides.

         We include other control variables, including a dummy variable for females, urban

residence, coverage by a contract negotiated by a union or employee association, 26 and

marital status. The marital status categories include never-married, married, separated,

divorced, or widowed. We include a simple dummy variable for currently married.

         The NLSY97 includes three-digit 2002 Census industrial and occupation

classification codes. We considered three classifications of industries and occupations: (a)

coarse grouping, (b) the detailed three-digit grouping, and (c) an intermediate grouping. The

coarse grouping is based on combining many of the detailed three-digit categories, resulting

in 20 industry and 35 occupational dummies. 27 The intermediate grouping of occupations and

industry categories was obtained by using a clustering procedure that combines industry and


24
   There were 225 individuals with biological children who did not report the gender of the child, so we use the
latter variable as well to capture more accurately the presence of biological or adopted children.
25
   The survey also collects information about the kind of training, how the training is paid for, and what type of
certificates and skills are acquired.
26
   Workers are only asked this question with respect to jobs that lasted 13 weeks or more. We assume workers
with shorter jobs were not covered.
27
   This coarse grouping is based on aggregations of three-digit industries or occupations. See
https://www.nlsinfo.org/sites/nlsinfo.org/files/attachments/12124/NLSY97%202002%20Census%20I%20and%
20O%20Codes.pdf.


                                                        14
occupations codes with similar estimated coefficients from the OLS regressions using the

three-digit codes. (We explain below why we use a restricted set of industry and occupation

controls.) Specifically, we use k-means clustering based on OLS estimates of the coefficients

of the full set of industry and occupation dummy variables from the OLS log wage regression

model in column (5) of Table 2, discussed below. We use 50 industry and 100 occupation

clusters. 28

         We only include people who are not self-employed, who do not perform military

activities, and who have data on the variables described above. We only study post-schooling

observations, defined as cumulative hours of work that start counting from the year after

having finished school enrollment. We do not require a balanced panel. 29 We end up with a

final analysis sample of 81,444 observations on 8,691 individuals. Descriptive statistics for

our full sample are reported in Appendix Table A1, and for the subsample with actual

experience greater than or equal to 75 percent of potential experience in Appendix Table A2.

Appendix Table A3 restricts instead to those who never had children.

V. Testing the Alternative Interpretations of the Evolution of the Sex Gap in Wages

         We present three different types of analyses intended to better understand the

evolution of the sex gap in wages over women's and men's careers. First, we estimate

standard log wage regressions. Replicating other work that provides the motivation for this

paper, these estimates show that there is little evidence of a sex gap in starting wages, but that

the sex gap widens with the accumulation of experience ­ evidence that has been interpreted

as implying that there is no wage discrimination against women at labor market entry, and

that women engage in less human capital investment early in their careers.



28
   We verify that OLS regression results using a detailed grouping (3-digit) of industry and occupation
categories remain very similar regardless of the number of clusters.
29
   We do not address selection into work or into the sample, as we are skeptical of the kinds of identifying
assumptions needed to identify these mechanisms. Still, this does imply that our results have to be interpreted as
conditional on working, and that selective attrition could potentially influence evidence on the longer-run
evolution of wages.


                                                       15
       Second, we estimate the structural parameters of the wage equation, using equation

(4) above as well as the similar equation corresponding to equation (7), with separate

                                                            
parameters by sex. These estimates separately identify  and  ­ and hence the difference

between them ­ and  ­ which captures wage discrimination. These specifications also

provide estimates of the human capital investment profile.

       Third, we look directly at measures of training in our data, to see how the

accumulation of training differs between men and women. We do this to, in a sense, test

whether the interpretation of the data provided by the structural estimation makes sense, by

asking whether the results we get for measured training are consistent with the implications

of the parameter estimates of the human capital investment profiles for women and men.

OLS Wage Equation Estimates

       Table 2 reports standard OLS log wage regression estimates. Corresponding to

equation (3), the data for women and men are pooled. There is a dummy variable for women,

and interactions of this dummy variable with experience and its square (with the latter

divided by 100). The specifications differ in two other ways. First, we alternatively exclude

both industry and occupation dummy variables, and then include occupation dummy

variables and then both sets. Second, we vary the detail of the industry and occupation

controls. In columns (2)-(3) we use fairly aggregated industry and occupation categories (35

for occupation and 20 for industry), and in columns (4)-(5) we use highly-detailed categories

(479 for occupation, and 262 for industry). For the OLS estimation, the inclusion of the

highly-detailed categories is not problematic. However, it is for the nonlinear estimation of

the structural wage equations, so we also use a clustering procedure (explained in the data

section) to reduce the number of industry categories to 50 and the number of occupation

categories to 100 ­ as reported in columns (6) and (7). In doing this, we were guided by the

need to reduce the number of industry and occupation categories enough to do the nonlinear




                                              16
estimation, but not so much as to substantively change the estimates relative to those using

the highly-detailed industry and occupation categories in columns (4)-(5). 30 Finally, columns

(8) and (9) report the estimates for the subsample with more continuous work experience and

for individuals who never had children, respectively.

        Consider first the estimated dummy variable for females. Given that we include

interactions with experience (and its square), the coefficient of the female dummy variable

measures the sex difference in wages at labor market entry. In column (1), with no industry or

occupation controls, the estimated starting wage gap is approximately 8.5 percent lower

wages for women. In columns (2)-(3), with fairly aggregated industry and occupation

categories, this gap falls by about half, to 4.6-4.8 percent ­ as in column (1), strongly

statistically significant. However, with the highly-detailed occupation controls in column (4),

or industry and occupation controls in column (5), the estimated sex gap in pay is essentially

zero (0.1-0.2 percent) and statistically insignificant. With the somewhat more-aggregated

industry and occupation controls in columns (6)-(7) we obtain a similar result. There is a

small and statistically insignificant sex gap in pay with only occupation controls (1.3

percent), but with industry controls as well it falls to zero.

        Column (8) repeats the last specification, but using the subsample with relatively

continuous experience. Again, the estimated initial wage gap is small and statistically

insignificant. Finally, column (9) imposes a more substantial restriction ­ to those who never

had children. The estimated initial wage gap is again small and statistically insignificant.

        Consider next the estimated coefficients on experience. In every specification in

columns (1)-(8), the linear interaction between experience and the female dummy variable is

negative and significant (in column (3), the t-statistic is 1.94), indicating that at lower levels


30
  One cannot avoid the problem of a high number of industry and occupation dummy variables in the nonlinear
estimation by first regressing variables on the highly-detailed industry and occupation dummy variables, and
then doing the nonlinear estimation with the residualized variables, because the Frisch-Waugh-Lovell theorem
does not apply to nonlinear models.


                                                     17
of experience, where most of the data are concentrated (see the descriptive statistics

Appendix Tables A1 and A2), the "return" to experience on wages is lower for women than

for men. In contrast, in column (9) the interaction is positive but very small and insignificant,

indicating no difference in the experience profile between childless men and women.

        To help interpret the differences in both the linear and quadratic experience

coefficients, below the estimated experience controls we report the partial derivatives implied

by the estimates, evaluated at 0, 1, 5, and 10 years of experience. In columns (1)-(8), the

overall estimated "return" to experience is lower for women at 0, 1, and 5 years of

experience, and in all columns except (1) and (3) the estimated return to experience is also

lower at 10 years of experience (which implies that it is also lower at all intermediate years of

experience less than 10). However, the estimates for those who never had children differ a

bit; the return to experience is higher for women at 0 and 1 year of experience.

        The estimates in columns (4)-(8) reflect the key result that motivates this paper. Once

we include detailed job controls, there is effectively no sex gap in starting pay, but the sex

gap grows over time owing to the lower estimated coefficients on (or "returns to") experience

for women. 31 This is depicted in Figure 1, using the estimates from columns (7)-(9) of Table

2. Evidence of this sort provides the basis for past interpretations of the evolution of the sex

gap in wages as reflecting (a) no wage discrimination at labor market entry, and (b) an

increasing wage gap with time in the labor market, reflecting decisions made by women

regarding human capital investment (and other factors not incorporated in the human capital

earnings function) that influence wages (Bertrand et al, 2010; Goldin, 2014; Manning and

Swaffield, 2008; Polachek, 2008; Stokke, 2016).

Structural Wage Equation Estimates



31
  The research literature on the sex gap in pay considers whether including industry and occupation controls
"overcontrols" for variables that themselves reflect discrimination (e.g., Neumark, 1988). However, in our
context is it important to compare wages in very similar jobs.


                                                      18
         The key question we ask, though, is whether these are accurate interpretations of the

data. As we have shown, if women are investing less at labor market entry, then the estimated

coefficient on the female dummy variable in Table 2 is an upward biased estimate of the

wage penalty faced by women (i.e., potentially obscuring wage discrimination against

women) ­ or of the difference between men's and women's log wages net of investment

costs, which is a more appropriate measure of wage discrimination. To obtain an unbiased

estimate when there are differences in human capital investment, we need to turn to structural

wage equation estimates. 32 And we need structural estimates of the human capital investment

profile ­ and not just the experience coefficients ­ to assess differences in human capital

accumulation.

         Table 3 presents nonlinear least squares estimates for the linearly-declining

investment profile that underlies the standard Mincerian log wage equation that is quadratic

in experience ­ equation (4). 33 Columns (1) and (2) report results for the full sample, and

columns (3) and (4) for the sample with more continuous post-schooling experience. 34 The

top rows report estimates of the structural parameters, with the two columns delineating these

                                     
by sex (e.g., the estimates of  and  from equation (4)). The estimates for this

                               
specification imply that  >  (although the difference is not statistically significant in this

case or the other ones we report); these point estimates are not consistent with women

investing less initially. Consequently, the estimates of  ­ which, recall, is the unbiased

estimate of the starting sex gap in pay ­ are positive and larger than the sex difference in

starting pay from reduced-form wage equation estimates (but not statistically significant); this


32
   Of course, "unbiased" is defined conditional on the structure being correct, which we do not believe is
literally true.
33
   Recall that equation (4) is the version of equation (2) that embeds sex differences in all the parameters.
Equation (4) indicates that nonlinear least squares estimation is appropriate, as the dependent variable can be
written as a nonlinear function of parameters and variables, and an additive error term. The same is true for the
Gompertz model discussed earlier and considered below.
34
   We experimented with varying the starting values for the parameters, and found that we either obtained the
identical estimates, or for some cases of starting values very far from those reported in Table 3 obtained
different estimates at a local but not global minimum (of the least squares criterion).


                                                        19
occurs more for the full-sample estimates, for which the difference between the estimates of

     
 and  is larger. That is, since, according to the structural estimates, women are investing

more initially, which would imply that the estimate of the sex difference in wages that does

not take account of initial investment is downward biased; so even the very small negative

estimates of the starting wage penalty for women in columns (4)-(8) of Table 2 overestimate

the wage penalty faced by women because of discrimination. (Note that this contrasts with

the hypothesis discussed in the Introduction ­ that women may invest less initially, in which

case the sex difference in starting wages underestimates wage discrimination against women

at labor market entry.)

       The estimates of  indicate that  >  , which is consistent with women's

investments declining more slowly ­ i.e., with women starting out with higher investments

                                      
(coupled the higher estimate of  than  ), and maintaining them longer. As already

pointed out, these estimates are not inconsistent with the lower "return" to experience

reported in the nonstructural estimates in Table 2, since higher investment both holds down

current wages and increases future wages. To see this more clearly in terms of the structural

parameters, the bottom four rows of the table show the implied partial derivatives with

respect to experience (based on the estimates of equation (4)). Consistent with the OLS

estimates, through 10 years of experience the "effect" of experience is higher for men, even

though they are investing less; this happens precisely because their investments decline more

quickly (consistent with  >  ).

       Table 4 reports estimates of the Gompertz specification, based on the alternative

investment profile in equation (6). In this case, we get somewhat different estimates. For this

                                                               
specification, the estimates for the full sample indicate that   
                                                                  , consistent with nearly

                                                                            
equal initial investments, while for the restricted sample the estimate of  is a little smaller.

In both cases, again, men's investments decline more quickly (as the estimate of  is larger



                                               20
for men than for women). The key difference, however, is that now the estimate of  is

negative, consistent with wage discrimination against women in starting pay; this is true in

both cases, and for the continuous experience sample the estimate is larger and significant at

the 10-percent level. Thus, the application of this structural model gives a qualitatively

different view on the evolution of the sex gap in wages, with the estimates indicating that

once we estimate this pay gap net of investment differences, women may be underpaid

considerably (by around 7-14 percent) at labor market entry. Again, though, women's human

capital investment tapers off more slowly, and the bottom of the table shows that the implied

"effect" of experience through 10 years of experience is larger for men than for women,

although women are clearly investing more early in their careers in the estimates in columns

(1) and (2), and doing so after an initial period for the estimates in columns (3) and (4).

        One potential issue is that the structural models used thus far are less likely to apply to

women with children, who ­ because of primary responsibility for child care, including labor

market interruptions ­ may have very different optimal human capital investment profiles that

do not follow the contours of the Ben-Porath model (e.g., Weiss and Gronau, 1981). We

therefore also estimate our models for subsamples of men and women who never have

children, for whom we should be able to better isolate the effects of differential treatment by

employers. 35

        The results are reported in Table 5. There are, in our view, three findings of note.

First, whichever specification we use, the estimates of the structural investment parameters

tend to be more similar for men and women. For example, in columns (1) and (2) of Table 3,

the estimate of T was 25.95 for women vs. 8.32 for men; in columns (1) and (2) of Table 5,

the corresponding estimates are 6.27 and 9.42. The same is true for the estimates of  for the

Gompertz specification, and for k0 (for the quadratic specification). Still, the evidence


35
  We estimate these models for the subsample of the full sample that never had children, since the
discontinuous experience should be less important for these women and men.


                                                      21
indicates that women invest less initially (based on the estimates of 0 ). Second, as we would

expect if children have a greater effect on human capital investment decisions of women, the

estimates for women change a good deal, but the estimates for men do not change much. For

example, the estimate of T for women in columns (1) and (2) of Table 3 declines from 25.95

to 6.27, while the estimate for men only changes from 8.32 to 9.42. The same is true for k0 for

the quadratic specification, and for  for the Gompertz specification.

         Most importantly, though, the estimates of  are now negative and fairly similar for

both specifications (-0.15 for the quadratic and -0.10 for the Gompertz specification),

although both are estimated imprecisely and are statistically insignificant. Thus, using

samples for which the monotonically declining investment profiles are much more likely to

be appropriate, we now find consistent evidence (although not statistically strong) indicating

fairly substantial wage discrimination against women (a 10-15 percent penalty). 36 The

negative estimates of  are consistent with the estimates of 0 indicating that women invest

less initially, which we find for both specifications.

Evidence on Training Profiles

         The qualitative answer obtained thus far ­ at least regarding initial investment ­

depends on the structural model assumed. Of course, as usual, both are based on highly

stylized assumptions. Thus, for additional evidence we turn to evidence on training as

reported in the NLSY97 data.

        To that end, Table 6 reports estimates from a regression that corresponds exactly to the

wage equation specifications and samples in columns (7)-(9) of Table 2, but with the

dependent variable defined as cumulative (100s of hours of) training. 37 In column (1) of




36
   Note also that these results suggest the less plausible estimate of T for women, in column (1) of Table 3, arises
because the monotonically declining investment profile does not provide a good structural model for women
who have children.
37
   We use the same clustering of industry and occupation dummy variables so that we can more reliably
compare the estimates of the training specification to the estimates of the structural wage equations.


                                                        22
Table 6, the estimates do not provide any indication of lower training by females initially ­

the point estimate is positive (0.033) but insignificant. The point estimate is consistent with

the sign of the initial investment gap for the linearly-declining specification in Table 3, while

                                                                              
viewing the estimate as zero, it is consistent with the near-equality of  and  for the

Gompertz specification. The estimated coefficients of experience ­ which capture the

experience profile of training ­ indicate that, in the early years, women's cumulative human

capital investment grows faster. This result is consistent with the estimates for both

specifications ­ the lower estimates of  for men in Table 3, and the higher estimates of  for

men in Table 4.

      Looking the subsample with more continuous work experience, column (2) differs,

with a negative (but insignificant) point estimate for the initial training difference for women.

                                                                               
In terms of the point estimates, this is consistent with the estimates of  and  in Table 4,

                      
where the estimate of  is larger, but not with the estimates in Table 3, where the estimate
   
of  is smaller. Still, though, for the subsample in column (2), women's cumulative human

capital investment grows faster in the early years in the labor market.

      The profiles for these two specifications are shown in the first two panels of Figure 2.

Both panels (more so the top one) show women's human capital investment growing faster in

the early years in the labor market.

      In the estimates in column (3), for those who never had children, the estimated female

                                                                      
intercept is positive, consistent with the smaller estimates of  than  for both

specifications in Table 5. Moreover, there is no evidence that women's training grows faster

in the early years in the labor market; the estimated interaction between female and linear

experience is very close to zero, and negative (as indicated in the third panel of Figure 2).

This is consistent with the smaller estimate of T and the larger (but similar) estimate of  for

women. The greater consistency of the results for training and the structural estimates for the



                                               23
subsample that never had children again suggests that the declining investment profiles on

which the two sets of structural estimates are based are more appropriate for this subsample.

Interpretation

      What are the implications of our evidence? First, our evidence on the discriminatory

sex gap in pay at labor market entry is not statistically strong. However, more of the evidence

points to a sizable pay gap for women, and perhaps the cleanest evidence ­ for women and

men who never had children ­ points this way for both specifications. Second, again for this

cleanest evidence, the story underlying the difference between the estimated sex gap in

starting wages is consistent. Women invest less initially, which implies that the estimated sex

gap in starting wages in the reduced-form wage equation is biased upward (toward zero); put

the other way, although the reduced-form estimates indicate no sex gap in starting wages,

were women and men doing the same initial human capital investment women's starting

wages would be lower. The estimates of the Gompertz specification for the subsample with

relatively continuous work supports a similar conclusion. Finally, this same analysis yields

little evidence that there are sex differences in human capital investment aside from the lower

initial investment of women (the difference that obscures evidence of lower starting pay for

women in reduced-form wage regressions).

VI. Conclusions

       We explore key empirical regularities regarding the evolution of the sex gap in wages

over men's and women's careers: that there is little sex gap in wages at labor market entry,

but that much of the sex gap in wages emerges (and grows) with time in the labor market.

This evidence can be interpreted ­ and sometimes is ­ as indicating that there is little or no

sex discrimination in wages at labor market entry, and that the emergence of the sex gap in

wages over time in the labor market reflects, at least in part, lower human capital investment

by women.

       We show that this interpretation is potentially at odds with implications of the human


                                               24
capital model, and that without estimating structural models of wage equations embedding

parameters describing human capital investment, we can reach the wrong interpretation of

both the starting sex wage gap, and the evolution of the sex gap in wages with time in the

labor market. We estimate structural earnings equations using two alternative specifications

of the human capital investment profile, which help us identify the discriminatory sex gap in

wages when there can be sex differences in initial human capital investment, and which

provide estimates of sex differences in human capital investment profiles that one cannot

infer from estimated effects of experience (and its square) in standard log wage equations.

        Our most interesting finding, in our view, is that the data are more consistent with sex

discrimination against women at labor market entry, resulting in lower wages, than is

suggested by reduced-form wage equation estimates. The structural models we estimate are

most appropriate for women (and men) who work relatively continuously. And for the most

restrictive such subsample (women and men who never have children), and for one of two

specifications with a somewhat weaker sample restriction to those with relatively continuous

work, the evidence points to lower initial human capital investment for women and a larger

sex gap in starting wages. The point estimates of the starting wage shortfall for women in

these cases are approximately 10-14 percent, although in only one case is the estimate

significant (at the 10-percent level).

       Our estimates and conclusions are clearly based on stylized models of human capital

investment and earnings. More complex models could lead to different conclusions. Indeed,

prior work on human capital investment makes clear that discontinuous labor market

participation could imply quite different optimal human capital investment profiles

(Polachek, 1975; Blackburn et al., 1993). 38 We have addressed this issue in part by looking at


38
  Related to this issue, there are questions about how best to define "time in the labor market" in assessing
evidence like that we present. Most prominently, for example, there are open questions about the implications of
differences in job tenure for the same level of labor market experience for human capital investment and the




                                                      25
a subsample with relatively continuous labor market experience, but analyses that more

directly incorporate investment profiles associated with discontinuous employment could

provide additional (and perhaps different) evidence. Nonetheless, even if our models do not

accurately capture the underlying human capital investment profiles, our analysis highlights

the potential misinterpretation of the sex differences in both the intercepts and the experience

coefficients of standard Mincerian wage equations if one ignores the underlying human

capital investment decisions.




structural parameters that could describe its evolution, stemming in part from questions about whether the
returns to job tenure are causal and hence likely reflect specific human capital investment (e.g., Altonji and
Williams, 2005).


                                                        26
                                       References

Altonji, Joseph G., and Nicolas Williams. 2005. "Do Wages Rise with Job Seniority? A
Reassessment." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 58(3): 270-97.

Ben-Porath, Yoram. 1967. "The Production of Human Capital and the Life Cycle of
Earnings." Journal of Political Economy 75(4, Part 1): 352-65.

Bertrand, Marianne, Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2010. "Dynamics of the Gender
Gap for Young Professionals in the Financial and Corporate Sectors." American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics 2(3): 228-55.

Blackburn, McKinley, David E. Bloom, and David Neumark. 1993. "Fertility Timing, Wages,
and Human Capital." Journal of Population Economics 6(1): 1-30.

Dubner, Stephen J. 2016. "The True Story of the Gender Pay Gap." Freakonomics 232.
http://freakonomics.com/podcast/the-true-story-of-the-gender-pay-gap-a-new-freakonomics-
radio-podcast/.

Goldin, Claudia. 2014. "A Grand Gender Convergence: Its Last Chapter." American
Economic Review 104(4): 1091-229.

Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2016. "A Most Egalitarian Profession: Pharmacy and
the Evolution of a Family-Friendly Occupation." Journal of Labor Economics 34(3): 705-46.

Gronau, Reuben. 1988. "Sex-Related Wage Differentials and Women's Interrupted Labor
Careers--the Chicken or the Egg." Journal of Labor Economics 6(11): 277-301.

Hellerstein, Judith, and David Neumark. 2006. "Using Matched Employer-Employee Data to
Study Labor Market Discrimination." In Handbook on the Economics of Discrimination,
edited by W. Rodgers, 29-60. Great Britain: Edgar Elgar Publishing.

Kleven, Henrik, Camille Landais, Johanna Posch, Andreas Steinhauer, and Josef
Zweimueller. 2019. "Child Penalties Across Countries: Evidence and Explanations."
American Economic Review 109(5): 122-26.

Kunze, Astrid. 2018. "The Gender Wage Gap in Developed Countries." In The Oxford
Handbook of Women and the Economy, edited by S.L. Averett, L.M. Argys, and S.D.
Hoffman, 345-68. New York: Oxford University Press.

Kunze, Astrid. 2005. "The Evolution of the Gender Wage Gap." Labour Economics 12(1):
73-97.

Manning, Alan, and Joanna Swaffield. 2008. "The Gender Gap in Early-Career Wage
Growth." Economic Journal 118(530): 983-1024.

Mincer, Jacob. 1986. "Wage Changes in Job Changes." Research in Labor Economics 8(Part
A): 171-97.

Mincer, Jacob. 1974. Schooling, Experience, and Earnings. Cambridge: National Bureau of
Economic Research, Inc.
Mincer, Jacob, and Haim Ofek. 1982. "Interrupted Work Careers: Depreciation and
Restoration of Human Capital." Journal of Human Resources 17(1): 3-24.

Munasinghe, Lalith, Tania Reif, and Alice Henriques. 2008. "Gender Gap in Wage Returns to
Job Tenure and Experience." Labor Economics 15(6): 1296-316.

Murphy, Kevin M., and Finis Welch. 1990. "Empirical Age-Earnings Profiles." Journal of
Labor Economics 8(2): 202-29.

Neumark, David. 2018. "Experimental Evidence on Labor Market Discrimination." Journal of
Economic Literature 56(3): 799-866.

Neumark, David. 1988. "Employers' Discriminatory Behavior and the Estimation of Wage
Discrimination." Journal of Human Resources 23(3): 279-95.

Neumark, David, and Paul Taubman. 1995. "Why Do Wage Profiles Slope Upward? Tests of
the General Human Capital Model." Journal of Labor Economics 13(4): 736-61.

Polachek, Solomon W. 2008. "Earnings Over the Life Cycle: The Mincer Earnings Function
and Its Applications." Foundations and Trends in Microeconomics 4(3): 165-272.

Polachek, Solomon W. 1975. "Differences in Expected Post-School Investment as a
Determinant of Market Wage Differentials." International Economic Review 16(2): 451-70.

Stokke, Hildegunn E. 2016. "The Gender Wage Gap and the Early-Career Effect." WP No.
2/2016. Norwegian University of Science and Technology.

Weinberger, Catherine, and Peter Kuhn. 2010. "Changing Levels or Changing Slopes? The
Narrowing of the Gender Earnings Gap 1959-1999." Industrial and Labor Relations Review
63(3): 384-406.

Weiss, Yoram, and Reuben Gronau. 1981. "Expected Interruptions in Labour Force
Participation and Sex-Related Differences in Earnings Growth." Review of Economic Studies
49(4): 607-19.

Willis, Robert J. 1986. "Wage Determinants: A Survey and Reinterpretation of Human
Capital Earnings Functions." In Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 2, edited by O.C.
Ashenfelter and R. Layard, 525-602. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishers.
                                                       Figure 1: Predicted Log Wage Profiles
                                                                          Full Sample
                                   3.00
                                   2.90
                                   2.80
                                   2.70
                                   2.60
   Predicted Log Wage




                                   2.50
                                   2.40
                                   2.30
                                   2.20
                                   2.10
                                   2.00
                                          0             5                         10                         15               20
                                                                          Years of Experience
                                                       Male Wage Profile                         Female Wage Profile

                                                             Actual/Potential Experience  0.75
                                   2.90
                                   2.80
                                   2.70
                                   2.60
   Predicted Log Wage




                                   2.50
                                   2.40
                                   2.30
                                   2.20
                                   2.10
                                   2.00
                                          0   2   4          6            8       10        12          14        16     18   20
                                                                    Years of Experience
                                                      Male Wage Profile                           Female Wage Profile

                                                                    Never Had Children
                                   3.00
                                   2.90
                                   2.80
                                   2.70
                                   2.60
              Predicted Log Wage




                                   2.50
                                   2.40
                                   2.30
                                   2.20
                                   2.10
                                   2.00
                                          0   2   4          6            8        10       12          14        16     18   20
                                                                          Years of Experience
                                                       Male Wage Profile                           Female Wage Profile

Notes: The top panel is based on column (7) of Table 2, the middle panel on column (8), and the bottom panel on column
(9).
                                                                                 Figure 2: Predicted Training Profiles
                                                                                                   Full Sample
                                                    5


                                                    4
        Predicted Training (100s Hours)



                                                    3


                                                    2


                                                    1


                                                    0
                                                                 0           5                            10                      15                20
                                                                                               Years of Experience
                                                                             Male Training Profile                   Female Training Profile
                                                                                    Actual/Potential Experience  0.75
                                                       5


                                                       4
     Predicted Training (100s Hours)




                                                       3


                                                       2


                                                       1


                                                       0
                                                                 0   2   4          6         8           10      12         14        16      18   20
                                                                                              Years of Experience
                                                                                 Male Training Profiles            Female Training Profiles

                                                                                             Never Had Children
                                                      5


                                                      4
                               Predicted Training (100s Hours)




                                                      3


                                                      2


                                                      1


                                                      0
                                                                 0           5                            10                      15                20
                                                                                                  Years of Experience
                                                                             Male Training Profile                   Female Training Profile

Notes: The top panel is based on column (7) of Table 2, the middle panel on column (8), and the bottom panel on
column (9).
Table 1: Summary of Studies on Evolution of Sex Gap in Wages/Earnings
                                       Data                                                           Conclusion                                           Interpretation/explanation
Polachek        Luxembourg Income Study (many countries and years)          With female-married interactions included in model, estimated     For women, marriage and childbearing are
(2008)                                                                      wage gap for (single) women is sometimes very close to zero       associated with more intermittent labor force
                                                                            or even positive (varying from -20% to +4%). Sex wage gap         participation, which lower human capital
                                                                            is larger for men and women in families with more years           investment on the job by making it less valuable
                                                                            separating younger from older children.                           (and subject to depreciation).
Munasinghe      NLSY79 (1979-1994)                                          Lower effect of experience on wages of women; lower effect        Driven by higher turnover of women, less
et al. (2008)                                                               of tenure on wages for women.                                     training/lower intensity, and lower expectations of
                                                                                                                                              working at age 35.
Weinberger      U.S. Census 1959-2010, CPS 1962-1999                        Entry level wage differences vary by cohort (from 19% for         Explanations are mainly focused on explaining
and Kuhn                                                                    young cohorts to 43% for old cohorts). The sex gap does not       wage differences between and across cohorts.
(2010)                                                                      widen during the earliest years in the career, but it narrows     Additionally, the decline of discrimination against
                                                                            significantly during the life cycle for all cohorts of the U.S.   women is proposed as a complementary
                                                                            workers. About 32% of decrease in sex wage gap between            explanation for the recent decline in the U.S. sex
                                                                            1959-1999 is attributed to changes in slopes.                     wage gap. No explanations for the decline of the
                                                                                                                                              wage gap throughout the career were provided.
Manning         British Household Panel Study (BHPS), 1991-2002;            No pay gap on entry to the labor market, but a mean               Wage differences by sex are mainly due to sex
and             Labour Force Survey (LFS) and New Earnings Survey           unexplained wage gap of about 12.5% after 10 years. Even if       differences in on-the-job training and cumulative
Swaffield       (NES)                                                       women had continuous full-time employment, no children            experience.
(2008)                                                                      (and none desired), and the same personality as a man,
                                                                            women's wages are 8% lower than men's after 10 years.
Bertrand et     MBA survey, 1990-2006 graduating classes, matched to        Identical incomes at career outset; sex gap in earnings           Modest male advantage in training, and rising
al. (2010)      university administrative data                              expands, reaching 60 log points 10-16 years after MBA             returns to training with experience; sex
                                                                            completion.                                                       differences in career interruptions associated with
                                                                                                                                              large earnings losses; growing differences in
                                                                                                                                              weekly hours worked with post-MBA experience.
Goldin          Multiple datasets: U.S. Census 1970, 1980, 1990, 2000;      Within MBAs from Chicago Booth School, and law                    Heterogeneous (initial and growth) wage gaps
(2014)          American Community Survey 2004 to 2006 (for 2005),          graduating students from the University of Michigan Law           across occupations are explained because "hours
                2009 to 2011 (for 2010); MBAs from University of            School, no sex wage differences after graduating were found.      worked" are valued differently across
                Chicago Booth School; University of Michigan Law            This sex wage gap raises to about 55 log points after 15 years.   occupations. No explanation is given for the
                School Alumni Survey Research Dataset.                      In synthetic cohorts using Census and ACS data, men and           increase of wage gaps over the lifetime within
                                                                            women begin with fairly similar earnings, but sex gap grows       occupations.
                                                                            strongly afterwards.
Kunze           Employment statistics sample, Institute für Arbetitsmarkt   Pronounced gap at entry into first employment, which stays        Early wage difference attributed in part to higher
(2005)          und Berufsforschung (IABS), 1975-1990, West-German          virtually constant through the early career (less than 30 years   quality of training schemes for men and women
                workers with apprenticeship training                        old). Gender occupational segregation explains 52% of gender      having higher risk of labor market interruption
                                                                            wage gap. Males' training programs are longer than females'.      during the early career.
Stokke          Norwegian employer-employee register data, as of 2008.      No sex gap in wages at labor market entry; wage gap increases     None offered.
(2016)          Conclusions are drawn after comparing workers in the        quickly early in career (7% after 5 years, and 10% after 10
                same firm, with the same occupation, and other individual   years) and then stabilizes.
                characteristics.
Table 2: OLS Log Wage Regressions
                                                      Aggregations of 3-digit         Very detailed industry and
                                                     industries or occupations               occupation                                   Clustered industry and occupation
                                                                                                                                                         Actual/potential       Never had
                                                               Full sample                       Full sample                      Full sample            experience 0.75         children
Variables                                 (1)              (2)               (3)            (4)               (5)             (6)             (7)                (8)                 (9)
Female                                 -0.0854          -0.0481           -0.0463        -0.0024           -0.0014         -0.0125         -0.0000            -0.0025             -0.0144
                                      (0.0085)         (0.0085)          (0.0085)       (0.0085)          (0.0084)        (0.0083)        (0.0081)           (0.0094)            (0.0150)
Female x Experience                    -0.0088          -0.0077           -0.0068        -0.0094           -0.0094         -0.0102         -0.0093            -0.0084              0.0012
                                      (0.0037)         (0.0035)          (0.0035)       (0.0032)          (0.0032)        (0.0032)        (0.0031)           (0.0035)            (0.0063)
Female x (Experience2/100)              0.0495           0.0349            0.0386         0.0323            0.0431          0.0348          0.0418             0.0312             -0.0283
                                      (0.0293)         (0.0278)          (0.0276)       (0.0245)          (0.0249)        (0.0248)        (0.0249)           (0.0264)            (0.0526)
ln(w)/E (Female, E = 0)                 0.0616           0.0479            0.0440         0.0427            0.0371          0.0437          0.0372             0.0403              0.0472
ln(w)/E (Female, E = 1)                 0.0592           0.0463            0.0428         0.0411            0.0361          0.0420          0.0362             0.0388              0.0449
ln(w)/E (Female, E = 5)                 0.0495           0.0399           0.0380          0.0346            0.0321          0.0350          0.0321             0.0326              0.0356
ln(w)/E (Female, E = 10)                0.0375           0.0318            0.0320         0.0264            0.0270          0.0263          0.0269             0.0248              0.0239
Experience                              0.0704           0.0556            0.0508         0.0521            0.0465          0.0539          0.0465             0.0487              0.0460
                                      (0.0024)         (0.0023)          (0.0023)       (0.0022)          (0.0022)        (0.0022)        (0.0022)           (0.0024)            (0.0041)
Experience2/100                        -0.1702          -0.1154           -0.0984        -0.1137           -0.0934         -0.1218         -0.0931            -0.1086             -0.0880
                                      (0.0165)         (0.0159)          (0.0158)       (0.0151)          (0.0151)        (0.0149)        (0.0148)           (0.0154)            (0.0298)
ln(w)/E (Male, E = 0)                   0.0704           0.0556            0.0508         0.0521            0.0465          0.0539          0.0465             0.0487              0.0460
ln(w)/E (Male, E = 1)                   0.0670           0.0533            0.0488         0.0498            0.0446          0.0515          0.0446             0.0465              0.0442
ln(w)/E (Male, E = 5)                   0.0534           0.0441            0.0410         0.0407            0.0372          0.0417          0.0372             0.0378              0.0372
ln(w)/E (Male, E = 10)                  0.0364           0.0325            0.0311         0.0294            0.0278          0.0295          0.0279             0.0270              0.0284
Years of schooling                      0.0547           0.0368            0.0362         0.0351            0.0352          0.0347          0.0355             0.0358              0.0385
                                      (0.0016)         (0.0015)          (0.0015)       (0.0014)          (0.0014)        (0.0014)        (0.0013)           (0.0016)            (0.0028)
Black                                  -0.0562          -0.0427           -0.0447        -0.0481           -0.0476         -0.0514         -0.0484            -0.0481             -0.0627
                                      (0.0073)         (0.0065)          (0.0064)       (0.0061)          (0.0060)        (0.0063)        (0.0060)           (0.0068)            (0.0129)
Married                                 0.1013           0.0722            0.0675         0.0568            0.0534          0.0582          0.0534             0.0557              0.0563
                                      (0.0083)         (0.0073)          (0.0072)       (0.0067)          (0.0066)        (0.0067)        (0.0065)           (0.0075)            (0.0181)
Urban                                   0.0590           0.0584            0.0586         0.0597            0.0571          0.0574          0.0573             0.0545              0.0508
                                      (0.0069)         (0.0062)          (0.0061)       (0.0058)          (0.0057)        (0.0059)        (0.0056)           (0.0062)            (0.0115)
Union                                   0.2058           0.1916            0.1860         0.1709            0.1666          0.1644          0.1674             0.1628              0.1793
                                      (0.0097)         (0.0088)          (0.0089)       (0.0082)          (0.0082)        (0.0084)        (0.0081)           (0.0093)            (0.0167)
Constant                                1.4307           1.9037            1.8844         2.3050            2.2119          1.8917          2.1760             2.3113              2.2332
                                      (0.0193)         (0.0244)          (0.0475)       (0.1136)          (0.1193)        (0.0857)        (0.0837)           (0.0383)            (0.0984)
R2                                      0.2547           0.3419            0.3527         0.4082            0.4292          0.3987          0.4279             0.4585              0.3955
              N                         81,444           81,444            81,444         81,444            81,444          81,444          81,444             59,353              26,279
Industry FE                                                                   X                                X                               X                  X                   X
Occupation FE                                               X                 X              X                 X               X               X                  X                   X
N industry dummies                         0                0                20              0                262              0              50                 50                  50
N occupational dummies                     0               35                35             479               479             100             100               100                 100
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the individual level are in parentheses. The dependent variable is log real hourly wages. Years of schooling is based the highest grade completed by the
respondent. Experience is an hours-weighted measure, measured in years.
Table 3: NLLS Estimates of Log Wage Equation with Linearly-declining Investment
Profile (Quadratic Wage Equation)
                                                           Actual/potential experience
                                      Full sample                      0.75
                                  (1)              (2)         (3)              (4)
Model estimates                Women              Men       Women              Men
r                               0.0362           0.0320      0.0390           0.0328
                               (0.0016)         (0.0020)    (0.0021)         (0.0022)
k0                              0.3748           0.2605      0.2726           0.2141
                               (0.1018)         (0.0510)    (0.0743)         (0.0461)
T                              25.9502           8.3161     12.7280           5.7140
                              (18.2965)         (2.9784)    (7.3350)         (2.0616)
                                        0.1158                        0.0039
                                       (0.1777)                      (0.1172)
Constant                                2.3844                        2.3395
                                       (0.0731)                      (0.0634)
R2                                      0.4255                        0.4723
N                                       81,444                        59,353
ln(w)/E                        Women              Men       Women              Men
E=0                             0.0367           0.0507      0.0401           0.0547
E=1                             0.0356           0.0480      0.0384           0.0513
E=5                             0.0317           0.0383      0.0321           0.0394
E = 10                          0.0271           0.0281      0.0250           0.0270
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the individual level are in parentheses. The dependent variable is log real hourly
wages. The model also includes the other controls shown in column (7) of Table 2, entered linearly.
Table 4: NLLS Estimates of Log Wage Equation with Asymptotically Declining Investment
Profile (Gompertz Wage Equation)
                                                          Actual/potential experience
                                      Full sample                     0.75
                                  (1)              (2)        (3)              (4)
Model estimates                Women              Men       Women             Men
r                               0.0355           0.0301     0.0400           0.0343
                               (0.0016)         (0.0020)   (0.0021)         (0.0023)
k0                              0.4574           0.4584     0.3894           0.4327
                               (0.0538)         (0.0242)   (0.0339)         (0.0206)
                                0.0270           0.0501     0.0426           0.0578
                               (0.0115)         (0.0093)   (0.0138)         (0.0101)
                                        -0.0694                     -0.1412
                                       (0.1169)                    (0.0807)
Constant                                2.7238                       2.5782
                                       (0.0624)                    (0.0589)
R2                                      0.4203                       0.4683
N                                       81,444                       59,353
ln(w)/E                        Women              Men       Women             Men
E=0                             0.0390           0.0562     0.0427           0.0589
E=1                             0.0375           0.0519     0.0403           0.0539
E=5                             0.0322           0.0385     0.0322           0.0388
E = 10                          0.0269           0.0276     0.0247           0.0269
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the individual level are in parentheses. The dependent variable is log
real hourly wages. The model also includes the other controls shown in Table 2, entered linearly.
Table 5: NLLS Estimates of Log Wage Equation with Alternative Investment Profiles for
Subsamples of Childless Men and Women
                               Quadratic wage equation           Gompertz wage equation
                                  (1)              (2)             (3)                 (4)
Model estimates                 Women             Men           Women                 Men
 r                              0.0410           0.0379          0.0412              0.0384
                               (0.0036)         (0.0038)        (0.0036)            (0.0039)
 k0                             0.2055           0.2808          0.3980              0.4332
                               (0.1084)         (0.0841         (0.0575)            (0.0391)
 T                              6.2703           9.4229
                               (5.7201)         (5.7401)
                                                                 0.0517              0.0504
                                                                (0.0267)            (0.0175)
                                        -0.1499                           -0.1016
                                       (0.1781)                          (0.1402)
 Constant                                2.1729                           2.4565
                                       (0.1445)                          (0.1269)
 R2                                      0.3869                           0.3835
 N                                       26,279                           26,279
ln(w)/E                         Women             Men           Women                 Men
E=0                             0.0497           0.0521          0.0506              0.0552
E=1                             0.0467           0.0493          0.0470              0.0511
E=5                             0.0359           0.0393          0.0356              0.0385
E = 10                          0.0242           0.0286          0.0259              0.0279
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the individual level are in parentheses. The dependent variable is log real hourly
wages. The model also includes the other controls shown in Table 2, entered linearly. Estimates are reported for the
subsample of the full sample (from Tables 3 and 4) that never had children.
Table 6: OLS Regressions for Cumulative Training (100s of Hours)
                                                                     Actual/potential       Never had
                                              Full sample           experience  0.75         children
Variables                                          (1)                     (2)                  (3)
Female                                          0.0331                  -0.0915               0.1656
                                               (0.1162)                 (0.1050)             (0.2060)
Female x Experience                             0.1045                   0.0833              -0.0058
                                               (0.0535)                 (0.0552)             (0.0950)
Female x (Experience2/100)                     -1.3173                  -1.1298              -0.4563
                                               (0.4066)                 (0.4181)             (0.7314)
Training/E (Female, E = 0)                      0.5645                   0.5308               0.4789
Training/E (Female, E = 1)                      0.5061                   0.4785               0.4338
Training/E (Female, E = 5)                      0.2724                   0.2691               0.2535
Training/E (Female, E = 10)                    -0.0197                   0.0074               0.0280
Experience                                      0.4600                   0.4475               0.4847
                                               (0.0393)                 (0.0446)             (0.0723)
Experience2/100                                -1.6038                  -1.4871              -1.7981
                                               (0.2702)                 (0.2921)             (0.5956)
Training/E (Male, E = 0)                        0.4600                   0.4475               0.4847
Training/E (Male, E = 1)                        0.4279                   0.4178               0.4487
Training/E (Male, E = 5)                        0.2996                   0.2988               0.3049
Training/E (Male, E = 10)                       0.1392                   0.1501               0.1251
Years of schooling                             -0.2330                  -0.2122              -0.1961
                                               (0.0273)                 (0.0314)             (0.0392)
Black                                           0.5688                   0.3682               0.4127
                                               (0.1457)                 (0.1665)             (0.2255)
Married                                         0.4568                   0.4717               0.3142
                                               (0.1510)                 (0.1752)             (0.4046)
Urban                                           0.1495                  -0.0364              -0.0666
                                               (0.1204)                 (0.1442)             (0.1876)
Union                                           0.1654                   0.3441               0.1752
                                               (0.1732)                 (0.2092)             (0.2470)
Constant                                        3.0677                   2.1908               3.3929
                                               (1.0400)                 (0.6237)             (1.7438)
R2                                              0.0554                   59,353               0.0714
N                                               81,444                   0.0586               26,279
Industry FE                                                                  X
Occupation FE                                                                X
N industry dummies                                                          50
N occupational dummies                                                      100
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the individual level are in parentheses. The dependent variable is
100s of cumulative hours of training. The clustering if industry and occupation dummy variables is the
same as in Table 2, columns (7)-(9), and the subsequent tables.
Appendix Table A1: Descriptive Statistics, Full Sample
                    Mean         Standard error     25th percentile        75th percentile
Log(wage)           2.3845           0.0021             2.0719                 2.6774
Education          12.6076           0.0089            11.0000                14.0000
Experience          4.3362           0.0135             1.1365                 6.6688
Experience2/100     0.3359           0.0018             0.0129                 0.4447
Female              0.4994           0.0018                0                      1
Black               0.2471           0.0015                0                      0
Married             0.1793           0.0013                0                      0
Urban               0.7946           0.0014                1                      1
Union               0.0860           0.0010                0                      0
Note: Descriptive statistics of the NLSY97 analysis sample (N = 81,444).



Appendix Table A2: Descriptive Statistics, Restricted Sample, Actual/Potential
Experience  0.75
                    Mean         Standard error      25th percentile 75th percentile
Log(wage)           2.4384           0.0024              2.1019             3
Education          13.0885           0.0102                12              15
Experience          4.7961           0.0168            1.297596          7.4558
Experience2/100    39.6592           0.2392              0.0168          0.5559
Female              0.4943           0.0021                 0               1
Black               0.2144           0.0017                 0               0
Married             0.1883           0.0016                 0               0
Urban               0.7928           0.0017                 1               1
Union               0.0922           0.0012                 0               0
Note: Descriptive statistics of the NLSY97 analysis sample (N = 64,185).



Appendix Table A3: Descriptive Statistics, Full Sample of Childless Individuals
                         Mean         Standard error   25th percentile 75th percentile
Log(wage)               2.3790           0.0039            2.0687          2.6792
Education              13.0671           0.0156              11              15
Experience              4.0121           0.0228            0.9615          6.2399
Experience2/100         0.2971           0.0029            0.0092          0.3894
Female                  0.4108           0.0030               0               1
Black                   0.1992           0.0025               0               0
Married                 0.0605           0.0015               0               0
Urban                   0.8134           0.0024               1               1
Union                   0.0784           0.0017               0               0
Note: Descriptive statistics of the NLSY97 analysis sample (N = 26,279).
