                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  IS AIR POLLUTION REGULATION TOO STRINGENT?

                                       Joseph S. Shapiro
                                         Reed Walker

                                      Working Paper 28199
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28199


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2020




We thank seminar participants at Berkeley/Harvard/Yale, Chinese University of Hong Kong-
Shenzen, Colgate University, Fudan University, Georgia State, LSE, Monash, Stanford, UC
Berkeley, University of Hawaii, the Air & Waste Management Association, the Global Open
Series in Environmental Economics, and the Western Economic Association International
meetings and numerous colleagues for excellent comments, Brian Clerico, Charlie Fulcher, Robin
Langdon, John Palmisano, Nick Peirce, William Thompson, Dave Warner, and especially Mike
Taylor and Emission Advisors for explaining relevant institutions, and Jesse Wang and especially
Kenneth Lai for phenomenal research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Joseph S. Shapiro and Reed Walker. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Is Air Pollution Regulation Too Stringent?
Joseph S. Shapiro and Reed Walker
NBER Working Paper No. 28199
December 2020
JEL No. H23,Q52,Q53,R11

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper describes a novel approach to estimating the marginal cost of air pollution regulation,
then applies it to assess whether a large set of existing U.S. air pollution regulations have
marginal costs exceeding their marginal benefits. The approach utilizes an important yet
underexplored provision of the Clean Air Act requiring new or expanding plants to pay
incumbents in the same or neighboring counties to reduce their pollution emissions. These
"offset" regulations create several hundred decentralized, local markets for pollution that differ
by pollutant and location. We describe conditions under which offset transaction prices can be
interpreted as measures of the marginal cost of pollution abatement, and we compare estimates of
the marginal benefit of abatement from leading air quality models to offset prices. We find that
for most regions and pollutants, the marginal benefits of pollution abatement exceed mean offset
prices more than ten-fold. In at least one market, however, estimated marginal benefits are below
offset prices. Marginal abatement costs are increasing rapidly in real terms. Notably, our revealed
preference estimates of marginal abatement costs differ enormously from typical engineering
estimates. Some evidence suggests that using price rather than existing quantity regulation in
these markets may increase social welfare.


Joseph S. Shapiro
University of California at Berkeley
714 University Hall #3310
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
joseph.shapiro@berkeley.edu

Reed Walker
Haas School of Business
Department of Economics
University of California Berkeley
2220 Piedmont Avenue
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
rwalker@berkeley.edu
   A classic idea in economics is that firms may provide too much of an externality such as pollution
because they do not account for its full social costs. Policy designed to address this market failure
can maximize social welfare by regulating emissions until the marginal cost of complying with the
policy equals the marginal social benefit of reducing pollution emissions (Pigou 1932). In practice,
designing policies to limit negative externalities involves a delicate balancing act between the costs
to firms of complying with the policy and the benefits to society of reducing the externality. For
externalities including crime, innovation, smoking, and others, it can be difficult to estimate the
total costs and benefits to society of a given policy, let alone the marginal costs and marginal
benefits. Thus, it can be challenging to know whether existing policies maximize social welfare or
are more or less stringent than economic efficiency would require.
   These issues are especially important for air pollution. Some research estimates that over five
percent of premature U.S. mortality comes from air pollution, and a third to a half of measured
benefits of all recent federal regulations came from reducing a single type of air pollution, particulate
matter (Fann et al. 2012; Dominici et al. 2014). Cleaning up air pollution may also be costly--U.S.
air quality for some regulated pollutants has improved by more than 90 percent since 1970. The
marginal cost of pollution abatement typically increases with the quantity of abatement, so these
enormous decreases in ambient pollution levels naturally lead to the question of when the marginal
costs of increasing regulation begin to exceed its marginal benefits.
   Public debates have also questioned the optimal stringency of air pollution regulation. Two
law professors, for example, recently summarized, "[The Environmental Protection Agency's] ozone
standard is insufficiently stringent, not overly expensive" (Livermore and Revesz 2015). In contrast,
an air pollution official in The Trump Administration explained, "Some people like to believe we
should have the most stringent programs in the books that we possibly can . . . but I think that's
totally wrong" (King 2018).
   In part to help reconcile these disparate views, this paper develops a novel approach to estimat-
ing the marginal cost of pollution abatement separately by pollutant, county, and year. We utilize
an important yet underexplored provision of the Clean Air Act that forbids increases in pollution
emissions from large industrial sources in counties with poor air quality ("nonattainment areas").
Polluting plants that wish to enter nonattainment areas must offset their emissions by paying an
incumbent polluter in the same or neighboring counties to reduce their emissions. New plants can
spend millions of dollars on purchasing such pollution "offsets" from incumbents. Market partici-
pants describe expenditures on these offsets as one of or the largest environmental expenditures for
new or expanding polluting plants in offset market areas. We use newly available offset transaction
records from 16 U.S. states plus Washington, DC, obtained from public records and directly from
industry participants. Our data cover over 100 markets, including the seven largest metro areas of
the country. Our data collectively represent about 60 percent of economic activity from U.S. offset
trading areas.
   Clean Air Act regulations have created several hundred separate markets for pollution offsets




                                                   1
       across the U.S., which differ by pollutant and metro area.1 For example, there are separate offset
       markets for particulate matter in the San Francisco Bay Area, nitrogen oxides in the Bay Area,
       and nitrogen oxides in Houston. These offset markets differ in many ways from cap-and-trade
       markets. Beyond our setting, offset markets are common in Australia, Brazil, Canada, the EU, and
       elsewhere, for wetlands, fish, and other environmental goods (Stavins 2003).
          These offset markets provide information on the marginal cost of air pollution regulation for
       different locations, pollutants, and years. On the margin, an entrant should invest in pollution
       abatement until the marginal cost of additional abatement equals the market price of pollution
       offsets. For example, a new plant that will emit 100 tons of pollution per year must purchase 100
       tons of offsets from incumbents. Alternatively, this plant could spend more on pollution control
       equipment that lets it emit only 80 tons of pollution per year, and thereby only need to buy 80 tons
       of offsets. More generally, if the marginal cost of pollution abatement for a firm is cheaper than
       the market price of offsets, firms should abate more. Similarly, incumbent sources should invest in
       pollution abatement to generate offsets until the marginal cost of additional abatement for the firm
       equals the market price of offsets.
          We formally show that even in the presence of real transaction costs, efficient environmental
       policy should equate the price of pollution offsets to the marginal benefits of pollution abatement
       to society; the marginal benefits of abatement include health and other benefits from emissions
       reductions. The price of pollution offsets provides a revealed preference measure of policy stringency
       that captures the abatement and transaction costs that the regulation requires. Our results also
       provide a simple empirical test. In markets where offset prices exceed the marginal social benefits of
       emissions reductions, regulation is more stringent than efficiency would require. In markets where
       the marginal social benefits of emissions reductions exceed offset prices, regulation is more lenient
       than efficiency would require. We also describe a weaker set of assumptions under which offset
       prices provide an upper bound on the marginal abatement costs of incumbents.
          We find that regulation for most pollutants and markets where we have data is much less
       stringent than efficiency would require, though recent regulations in Houston appear to be an ex-
       ception. Nationally, we estimate that the marginal benefits of abatement for nitrogen oxides (NOx )
       and volatile organic compounds (VOCs) on average are about 10 times mean offset prices. We find
       similarly large ratios in each region of the country, in most individual markets, for other pollutants
       with more limited data availability (particulate matter and sulfur oxides), and in numerous sensi-
       tivity analyses. In the Houston market, however, the marginal benefits of abating VOCs are only
       about half of mean offset prices.
          While marginal benefits of abatement are far above offset prices overall, offset prices are increas-
       ing quickly over time, by more than 6 percent annually in real terms on average over the last 25
   1
    As subsequent sections discuss in more detail, the Clean Air Act sets air quality standards for six common "criteria
pollutants": particulate matter, ozone, sulfur oxides, nitrogen dioxide, carbon monoxide, and lead. Areas in which ambient
air quality of a given pollutant exceeds the regulatory standard are designated as "nonattainment" for the pollutant in
question. Each pollutant within a nonattainment area has a separate offset market.




                                                            2
       years. This implies that offset prices double in real terms every 13 years. Hence, if current patterns
       continue, offset prices would begin approaching the marginal benefits of pollution abatement in the
       medium-term future.
          Because these data provide new revealed preference estimates of the marginal cost of pollu-
       tion abatement, we compare them against the leading alternative method of estimating marginal
       abatement costs, engineering estimates. Using the exact engineering software and data that the
       Environmental Protection Agency and state regulators use to evaluate major changes in air pol-
       lution policy, we find that engineering estimates of marginal abatement costs differ systematically
       from air pollution offset prices. In many markets, offset prices and engineering estimates differ
       by a factor of ten or more for the same firms, pollutants, and years. In several cases, the offset
       prices and engineering estimates of marginal abatement costs differ enough to have non-overlapping
       support (e.g., the most expensive engineering estimate is less than the cheapest revealed preference
       offset price). We carefully discuss reasons for these differences, but broadly conclude they strongly
       underscore concerns about the accuracy of engineering estimates for measuring the economic costs
       that firms incur to comply with environmental policy.
          While the paper focuses primarily on using offset markets to assess whether the quantity of
       pollution emitted is efficient, we also briefly discuss whether offset markets are an optimal policy
       instrument. Some evidence suggests that the marginal abatement cost curves for the markets and
       pollutants we study have steeper slopes than the marginal abatement benefit curves. Building on
       the insight of Weitzman (1974), this would imply that price policies for air pollution, such as a
       tax, may produce higher expected social welfare than the existing quantity policies. Practically,
       this would imply that replacing offset markets with pollution emission taxes may increase expected
       social welfare.
          Our analysis uses data from 16 states plus Washington, DC. Together, the markets we study
       cover about 60 percent of the population, GDP, or manufacturing employment located in US offset
       markets. It is typically difficult to obtain data on contract terms for decentralized bilateral markets
       in any setting. We use publicly available data from two states which require public disclosure of
       contract terms, and we purchased additional data on fourteen other states from a leading firm that
       specializes in advising offset transactions. Most of these data have never been publicly analyzed or
       discussed in government or academic analyses.
          This research builds on several literatures. First, we provide a novel approach to measuring
       the marginal costs of air pollution abatement for different pollutants, locations, and years. This
       approach has advantages over existing methods, like engineering estimates or empirically estimated
       cost functions--it uses revealed preference, reflects both pecuniary and non-pecuniary abatement
       costs, obtains estimates that vary by pollutant, location, and time, and is transparent and simple
       to implement.2 This focus is especially useful given that economic research has focused more on
   2
    Researchers have used cost function estimates primarily to analyze sulfur dioxide abatement from coal-fired power
plants (e.g., Gollop and Roberts 1985; Carlson et al. 2000; Muller and Mendelsohn 2009). Other researchers have attempted
to estimate some components of total but not marginal costs of regulation (Greenstone 2002; Walker 2013). Other studies



                                                           3
      measuring the marginal benefits than the marginal costs of air pollution policy.3 Showing trends
      in offset prices also provides a novel way to measure how regulatory stringency is evolving; other
      studies have estimated trends in the shadow price of pollution, though through the lens of models
      requiring strong assumptions (van Soest et al. 2006; Shapiro and Walker 2018).
          This paper also provides the first comprehensive empirical analysis of U.S. air pollution offset
      markets. These markets are a central part of the Clean Air Act but have not been a focus of
      empirical research. Among market-based environmental policies, economists once described offsets
      and related policies as "by far the most important of these programs in terms of scope and impact,"
      (Cropper and Oates 1992), but the limited existing research mentioning offset markets mostly
      describes legal or policy details (Dudek and Palmisano 1988; Abbott and Brady 1990; Swift 2001;
      NRC 2006; Fraas et al. 2017; Leonard 2018; Stavins 2003). A narrow focus on offset markets is also
      relevant to policy since several governments are investigating reforms of offset markets, including
      the federal government plus state and local governments in Arizona, California, and Louisiana.
          Lastly, we contribute to a literature showing how engineering estimates of abatement costs
      can differ substantially from market-based revealed preference estimates (e.g., Carlson et al. 2000;
      Keohane 2007; Fowlie et al. 2018). The importance of this literature stems from a textbook concern
      that regulators typically use accounting or engineering estimates to measure abatement costs of
      existing or proposed policies, and this might miss important economic costs or fail to account for
      changes in firm behaviors like innovation. In a standard analysis, engineers calculate how end-
      of-pipe abatement technologies like catalytic converters or scrubbers affect pollution emissions.
      Accountants then calculate the technologies' capital, operating, and maintenance costs. Analysts
      then identify the technologies with the lowest predicted cost per ton of pollution abated. We add to
      this literature by comparing our estimates of marginal abatement costs by pollutant, location, and
      year to engineering estimates using the same software that the Environmental Protection Agency
      (EPA) and local regulators use.
          Before proceeding, a few clarifications may be useful. One natural question is whether offset
      prices represent the marginal cost of abating pollution, as opposed to some other measure of costs.
      We discuss a simple model in which offset prices equal marginal abatement costs. Intuitively, firms
      should abate pollution when the firm's marginal abatement cost differs from offset prices, since
      otherwise the firms are missing a profitable arbitrage opportunity and leaving money on the table.
      Under weaker assumptions, offset prices would represent an upper bound on marginal abatement
observe the market price of permits in cap-and-trade markets, though the U.S. has only a handful of cap-and-trade markets
for air pollution (Fowlie et al. 2012; Deschenes et al. 2017). While the cap-and-trade markets cover many states, they do
not separately identify marginal abatement costs in each location (only across the entire market), which makes it hard to
tailor to the existing reality of different regulatory stringency across cities and counties; and they cover a limited set of
pollutants and years. Estimating marginal abatement costs for greenhouse gas emissions is somewhat distinct because it
can boil down to estimating demand systems for fossil fuels (Kolstad and Toman 2005).
    3
      In five top general-interest economics journals, a review that we and a research assistant completed found 13 papers on
the marginal benefits of air pollution regulation and only 3 on the marginal costs of air pollution regulation, all on focused
settings such as sulfur dioxide emissions from coal-fired power plants or vehicle environmental inspections in developing
countries (see Appendix A for details).



                                                              4
       costs of incumbents. Because marginal abatement costs by definition represent the lowest cost of
       abating a pollutant in a region, most forces which could make offset prices differ from marginal
       abatement costs, such as market power or transaction costs, would make marginal abatement costs
       weakly lower than offset prices for sellers, which are incumbents.
          A related question is how the existence of other environmental regulations affects our inter-
       pretation. While other environmental policies do create costs for firms, they do not change the
       marginal decision for a plant--increasing expenditure on abatement decreases required expenditure
       on offsets, and an optimizing plant should equate these marginal costs. Moreover, abatement in
       offset markets is additional and beyond the abatement required by other environmental regula-
       tions, and given the typical assumption that marginal abatement costs increase with the quantity
       of abatement, abatement costs for other regulations may thus be weakly below abatement costs in
       offset markets. Thus, such frictions would tend to strengthen our finding that the marginal benefits
       of pollution abatement exceed the marginal costs of abatement.
          In extrapolating our estimates to other settings or policies, it is important to weigh external
       validity carefully. We study efficiency within the context of the Clean Air Act's National Ambient
       Air Quality Standards (NAAQS). The offset markets that are created and used in regions not in
       compliance with NAAQS are widespread, important, and understudied, but some care is warranted
       in generalizing. Offset markets can involve higher transaction costs than other market-based policies
       like pollution taxes or cap-and-trade markets, which would suggest that policies using other market-
       based instruments may have even lower abatement costs than offset markets. The abatement
       investments allowable in offset markets may also differ from investments allowed in other market
       designs. In addition, while the polluted "nonattainment" regions where offset markets operate
       represent a majority of U.S. economic activity, they may have different marginal abatement costs
       than less-regulated "attainment" regions. As we highlight in the conclusion, developing methods
       to calculate and compare abatement costs under different market designs, and in regions without
       offset markets, would be valuable for future work.
          Finally, since offsets are traded by a limited set of firms, and some offset markets or transactions
       are small, one may wonder whether much is to be learned from studying these markets. For
       example, some studies of the total or average cost of environmental regulation analyze every firm
       in an industry, the majority of manufacturing plants in the country, or all pollution emissions
       over large time periods. While we only analyze entrants and incumbents trading offsets, these
       are the marginal emissions decisions in a location. Although not every incumbent source trades
       offsets, because every incumbent has the opportunity to do so, these marginal costs represent the
       marginal costs for the entire population of plants and not merely for those plants which choose
       to trade offsets.4 In total we analyze numerous transactions, across 9 to 25 years per market,
   4
    Similarly, plants in cap-and-trade markets may hold allowances without buying or selling them. The decision of some
plants not to trade allowances in a cap-and-trade market does not change the standard interpretation that cap-and-trade
markets reveal marginal abatement costs for the population of plants. Analogously, many incumbent plants choose not to
trade in offset markets even when all plants are eligible to do so.




                                                          5
       involving four pollutants, and covering over 100 offset markets. These markets include the seven
       largest U.S. metro areas (New York, Los Angeles, Chicago, Dallas, Philadelphia, Houston, and
       Washington, DC) plus many others (Baltimore, Cleveland, Phoenix, Pittsburgh, San Francisco, St.
       Louis, etc.). We consider four separate air quality and valuation models, two quasi-experimental
       and four epidemiological estimates of the main health elasticity determining benefits (the PM2.5
       mortality-concentration response function), three different estimates of the value of a statistical
       life, and numerous subsets of the data by year, transaction size, and other characteristics. While
       any one market, year, or specification may not be fully representative, and while there is important
       heterogeneity across markets which we discuss in detail, together these estimates provide a broad
       and robust picture of emissions decisions for the country's largest offset markets.
           The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 describes the pollution offset markets.
       Section 2 explains the data. Section 3 provides a simple model of offset prices to guide our in-
       terpretation. Section 4 presents the main results and sensitivity analyses, Section 5 discusses the
       additional questions on trends in offset prices, comparison to engineering estimates, and price versus
       quantity instruments. Section 6 concludes.



       1     Design of Pollution Offset Markets
       This section summarizes the main design features of U.S. air pollution offset markets, drawing on
       existing descriptions (Dudek and Palmisano 1988; Fraas et al. 2017; Leonard 2018).5 Appendix B
       provides additional detail, including the history of these markets, and differences between offset
       and cap-and-trade market designs.
           Each year the EPA designates counties with air quality violating federal standards for a pol-
       lutant as a "nonattainment area" for that pollutant. Large polluting plants that are opening or
       undertaking significant modifications in these areas are subject to New Source Review, a policy
       which requires that firms meet certain environmental requirements.6 New Source Review also re-
       quires every large firm to offset any projected pollution emissions by paying other sources in the
       same area to decrease their emissions of the same pollutant.7
   5
     While we refer to these transactions as pollution offsets, formally they are called "Emission Reduction Credits." For
simplicity, we refer to sources that are new or undergoing significant modifications as entrants. While some pollution
sources are not factories, e.g., large oil and gas extraction operations, for simplicity in some cases we refer to pollution
sources generically as "plants."
   6
     Offsets apply only to plants and other "stationary" sources, which are an important though not the only source of air
pollution emissions. According to the EPA's estimates for 2019 from the National Emissions Inventory, stationary sources
account for about 60 percent of anthropogenic VOC emissions and 40 percent of NOx emissions; the main other sources
are transportation, miscellaneous emissions like agriculture and forestry, and (non-anthropogenic) wildfires.
   7
     Offsets are one of several emissions trading programs the EPA created in the 1970s. Another is "netting" (begun in
1974), which lets a plant offset a new emission source within a plant with decreases in emissions from other processes,
discharge points, or smokestacks within the same plant without requiring New Source Review regulations. "Bubbles,"
introduced in 1979, are similar to netting but allow trades between any different parts of a single plant, not merely between
new and existing parts. "Banking" is similar but allows incumbent firms to save emissions reductions for future use by the
same firm or for trading to another incumbent firm (Hahn and Hester 1987). Appendix B highlights differences between



                                                             6
          In practice, an incumbent may choose to decrease its emissions, then receive an "offset" certifi-
      cate from regulators which specifies the tons per year, pollutant, and nonattainment area. Installing
      more stringent abatement technology than is required, closing down a plant or part of it, and de-
      creasing total production can all generate offsets since they all decrease pollution emissions.
          The incumbent can then sell the offset to an entrant, or it can sell parts of the offset to different
      entrants. Although the state or air quality management district typically maintains a registry of
      offsets and records transactions, offset markets are decentralized and bilateral, so buyers and sellers
      directly write bilateral offset contracts (i.e., there is no central market operator like the Chicago
      Climate Exchange). Some transactions involve brokers who help expedite and manage the process.
          Polluting plants generally require an air quality permit to operate, and offsets are documented
      in the purchaser's air quality permit. The rules governing offset transactions differ by state and,
      in some cases, by air quality management district within states. Not all nonattainment areas
      have offset markets. State or air district regulators must set them up and determine associated
      regulations.
          The EPA requires an offset to satisfy four requirements: it must be surplus, federally en-
      forceable, quantifiable, and permanent. Surplus means "the reduction is not required by current
      regulations, relied on for state implementation plan planning purposes, and not used to meet any
      other regulatory requirement." Federally enforceable means the "reduction is enforceable through
      rule or permit" (USEPA 1980). Offsets and a plant's air quality permit thus may specify the plant's
      maximum permitted hours of operation, production rate, or input rate, and ways to guarantee com-
      pliance (Gauna 1996). Quantifiable means "the actual emissions reduced are able to be calculated."
      Permanent means the "reduction is unending or indefinite," which often requires installing or re-
      moving capital equipment that is documented in photographs and record keeping (Rucker 2018).
      Some offset markets, particularly for greenhouse gas emissions, suffer from concerns that the offsets
      are not additional or not legitimate. States and the EPA tightly enforce the requirements on the
      offset markets we study, and such concerns have not been prominent for these markets.8
          The supply of offsets reflects the availability of abatement opportunities. A region like Los
      Angeles has been in nonattainment for decades and has already exploited inexpensive abatement
      options from older sources. Hence, the supply of offsets in Los Angeles represents the remaining,
      relatively expensive potential abatement technologies from incumbents, meaning that we should
      expect high offset prices in Los Angeles. A county that recently entered nonattainment should
      have relatively more inexpensive abatement options for incumbents, and so we should expect lower
      offset prices, all else equal. The demand for offsets reflects the demand for entry or expansion of
the design of offset markets and cap-and-trade markets.
    8
      Although this practice is uncommon, incumbents can generate offsets by rewriting their air quality permits to perma-
nently decrease their permitted production level. This involves decreasing both a plant's production and pollution levels.
While this is not a textbook example of end-of-pipe abatement, it does involve optimizing economic choices that tradeoff
profits and pollution, and it is a source of abatement in cap-and-trade markets, pollution taxes, and other market-based
environmental instruments. The theory we describe accommodates this type of abatement and shows how it still allows
offsets to provide information on marginal abatement costs.




                                                            7
       polluting firms and associated pollution abatement costs.
          Appendix Figure 1 shows an example offset. The firm Scan-Pac manufactures high-friction
       products used in steel mills, food processing, and other industries. Scan-Pac has a plant in the
       Houston nonattainment area, and that plant emits VOCs from coating fabrics. In May 2013, that
       plant installed a thermal oxidizer, an abatement technology which decomposes VOCs into harmless
       compounds. The state certified that Scan-Pac decreased VOC emissions by 21.8 tons per year, then
       issued the offset pictured in Appendix Figure 1.9 In December 2013, Scan-Pac sold this offset to
       an oil and gas processing and transportation firm, Enterprise Products, for $3.6 million (=$165,000
       per ton). Enterprise used the offsets to build a $1.1 billion Houston-area facility that produces
       propylene, a common petrochemical, in the Houston area.
          These markets have a few potential transaction costs. In 1990, one industry consultant estimated
       that intermediation costs, including locating a seller, conducting engineering studies, and obtaining
       regulatory approval, account for 10-30 percent of a trade costs. Another source quoted typical
       intermediation fees of 4 to 25 percent, depending on the transaction's complexity (Dwyer 1992).
       Since that time, many regulators have tried to lower these costs by providing centralized information
       clearinghouses for offset purchases and relevant contact information of existing firms holding offsets.
       Today, a firm seeking to buy an offset can call potential sellers who are listed on a publicly-available
       and regularly-updated website that most markets operate.
          Some areas require an exchange rate or "offset ratio" between generated and sold offsets. In a
       county with an offset ratio of 1.1 to 1, an entrant which emits 10 tons of NOx per year would need
       to buy 11 tons of offsets. States have some discretion to choose the relevant offset ratios. We have
       lists of these offset ratios for some markets, and report sensitivity analyses accounting for them.
          Market power may be another wedge or friction in these markets. If markets have a small
       number of market participants, firms may buy or sell offsets at prices that differ from their marginal
       abatement cost. For example, an incumbent may try to deter entry of a new competitor in the
       same industry and market. Available evidence does not strongly support the idea that market
       power is a dominant force here. We have firm identifiers in two markets--Houston and South
       Coast (around Los Angeles), CA. In a typical snapshot where we have data from both markets,
       for June 2014, both regions show large numbers of firms who could generate offsets. This ranges
       from a minimum of 274 firms in Houston-NOx markets to a maximum of 828 firms in South Coast,
       CA. The number of firms with certified offsets available for sale ranges from 15 in Houston-NOx
       to 218 in South Coast-VOCs. In the presence of markups, incumbents would charge offset prices
       above their marginal abatement costs. However, entrants would still equate their own marginal
       abatement costs to offset prices. This would strengthen our paper's main finding--it would imply
       that the ratio of the marginal abatement costs to the marginal benefits of abatement is even smaller
       than we estimate, and so would suggest that regulation is even more lenient than is efficient.
   9
    All tons in the paper refer to short tons rather than metric tons, since short tons are the standard unit of denomination
for U.S. offset markets and for estimates of the marginal benefits of pollution abatement.




                                                             8
       2     Data
       This section describes key data; Appendix C provides additional details. We deflate all prices
       to 2017 dollars using the Federal Reserve's U.S. GDP Deflator. In describing average features of
       markets, we weight across transactions according to the number of tons transacted. We focus on
       data for the years 2010-2019, though we also discuss data from the 1990s and 2000s.


       2.1     Offset Markets
       To measure prices and quantities of pollution offset transactions, we obtain data from a few sources.
       For 14 states plus Washington, DC, we use records describing NOx and VOC offset transactions
       that we obtained from a leading emissions offset brokerage and advisor, Emission Advisors.10 These
       records list the average price in each market×year. They also describe the market size in one of
       four bins (0-350 tons total traded over the years 2010 to 2019; 351-600 tons, 601-1,150 tons, >1,150
       tons). In addition, we use transaction-level records from the California Air Resources Board over
       the period 1993-2018, and the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality over the period 2001-
       2019. The California data list price, quantity, and the air quality management district responsible
       for managing the offset. The Texas data also include the names of the selling and buying firms and
       a unique identifier code tracking the lifecycle of each offset. The analysis sample excludes intra-firm
       and temporary offset transactions (Appendix C.1 provides additional details).
           Table 1 describes all US air pollution offset markets and the set of markets in our data. Panel
       A shows that the U.S. has several hundred offset markets that together cover about 180 million
       people or $11 trillion in GDP; this represents about 60 percent of the U.S. population, GDP, or
       manufacturing employment. The market sizes are skewed, and a large share of markets represent
       low-population areas with few transactions. Panel B shows that our data cover about 60 percent
       of the population, GDP, or manufacturing employment of all US air pollution offset markets.
           Most reviews of market-based instruments mention a handful of U.S. environmental markets,
       such as the Acid Rain Program (Stavins 2003). This analysis of offset markets represents a far
       larger number of distinct environmental markets than has been previously analyzed. This is useful
       because the social costs of many pollutants regulated under the Clean Air Act are highly local-
       ized, and existing regulations differ by location, time, and pollutant. Efficiency requires equating
       marginal benefits and marginal costs of abatement by location, and by analyzing many markets
       simultaneously, we are able to have a more comprehensive picture as to the efficiency of existing
       stationary source regulations for different locations, pollutants, and time periods.
           Figure 1 maps the locations of these markets. These maps show counties that are in states with
       policies that set up offset markets and that have had been part of a nonattainment area at any
  10
     The 14 states are Arizona, Connecticut, Delaware, Illinois, Indiana, Maryland, Missouri, New Jersey, New York, Ohio,
Pennsylvania, Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming, plus Washington, DC. As discussed in Appendix C.1, we do not have
offset transactions directly from Delaware and Wisconsin, but we do have transactions from other states in offset markets
that are shared with these states.



                                                           9
       time over the period 1993 to 2019. Panel A of Figure 1 describes markets for NOx and VOCs,
       corresponding to nonattainment for ground-level ozone. More markets have existed for these pollu-
       tants than for any others. They cover most of California, the Northeast from Maryland to Southern
       New Hampshire, and large urban areas in the industrial Midwest, South, Pacific Northwest, and
       Southwest. Panel B shows areas with markets for other pollutants; the most common is for partic-
       ulate matter, but some of these markets also cover carbon monoxide, lead, and sulfur oxides; the
       coverage is similar as for ozone.


       Permanent Versus Temporary Values
       Most offsets represent the permanent right to emit a ton of pollution. Most estimates of the
       marginal benefits of abating local "criteria" pollution represent the marginal benefits of decreasing
       emissions of one ton of pollution in a single year. To compare permanent offset prices and temporary
       pollution abatement benefits in the same units, we infer what price offset transactions would have
       been if the offsets only lasted for one year.
          Some markets allow firms to sell temporary or "short term" offsets that last a single year.11 In
       such markets, a permanent offset for a given pollutant might sell one week, and a one-year offset for
       the same pollutant may sell in the same market the next week. These permanent and temporary
       offsets are similar but have different duration.
          In most of the paper, we divide permanent offset prices by 9.3 to obtain an estimate of the
       one-year value of offsets. This reflects our calculation that on average in our transaction-level data,
       permanent offsets sell at a price which is 9.3 times higher than one-year temporary offsets, for the
       same market, pollutant, and year. Henceforth all our references to "offset prices" or "annualized
       offset prices" refer to the one-year equivalent value of offset transactions. Although temporary and
       permanent offset are objectively comparable apart from duration, as a bounding exercise, we report
       sensitivity analyses which assume this ratio of permanent to temporary offset prices is 5.0, 7.0, or
       12.0.12
          What are the underlying economics which make permanent offsets sell at a price which is nearly
       ten times higher than temporary offsets? Firms should value the right to emit pollution in many
       years rather than just one year. Also, firms may discount future emissions rights according to their
       cost of capital or other prevailing discount rate. Firms may have expectations about future offset
       prices. Finally, offsets are a risky asset if the area where the firm is located exits nonattainment,
       then the firm no longer needs to hold or purchase offsets, and any offsets the firm holds lose their
  11
      These "temporary" offset programs provide firms with some year to year flexibility in complying with permitting
rules. In California these are called "short term emissions reduction credits" (STERC), and in Texas they are called
"discrete emissions reduction credits" (DERC). To maximize comparability among offsets, our main estimates in the rest
of the paper only analyze permanent offsets, though sensitivity analyses add back in the several hundred temporary offset
transactions. That sensitivity analysis does not discount prices of the temporary offsets.
   12
      If we include temporary offsets lasting more than a year, the ratio of matched permanent and temporary offset prices
is 9.1. Restricting to each pollutant implies ratios of 10.8 for NOx and 7.1 for VOCs. Looking separately at each time
period gives ratios of permanent to temporary offset prices of 9.0 for the 1990s, 6.6 for the 2000s, and 10.7 for the 2010s.



                                                            10
         value. If one interpreted the ratio of permanent to temporary offsets as reflecting firms' discount
         rates, it would imply a discount rate of about 10.6 percent, though the discount rate interpretation
         is not needed to apply the ratio of permanent to temporary offset prices.13 While 10.6 percent is
         a high discount rate for many economic settings, it partly reflects the high volatility and risk of
         offset prices, including the possibility that if an area exits nonattainment, offset prices fall to zero.


         2.2     Marginal Benefits of Pollution Abatement
         We use estimates of the marginal benefits of pollution abatement from a leading "integrated assess-
         ment" model, AP3, though also report sensitivity analyses using three other such models.14 AP3
         and its predecessor models are widely used in influential economics and policy research (Muller and
         Mendelsohn 2009; National Research Council 2010; Gowrisankaran et al. 2016; Fowlie et al. 2018).
         Using AP3, we calculate the benefit of a one-ton decrease in pollution emissions, separately for
         each county and pollutant.
             The AP3 model includes four main components. First, it uses an inventory of air pollution
         emissions from each US source. Second, it uses an air quality model translating emissions from each
         source county into ambient air quality in all counties. Third, it uses published elasticities linking
         air quality to outcomes like mortality. Fourth, it uses estimates of the value of these outcomes
         (e.g., the value of a statistical life, or VSL). We use the raw AP3 code generously provided by Nick
         Muller, though address one issue involving the functional form of mortality damages (see Appendix
         C.2.2); this correction increases the marginal benefits of abatement by about 7.5 percent.
             Appendix Figure 2 maps the marginal benefits of pollution abatement from AP3, which vary by
         pollutant and county. The marginal benefits of abatement are positively correlated with population
         density. For example, abating one ton of NOx in Queen's County, New York, creates benefits of
         $80,000 (2017 dollars), while abating one ton of the same pollutant in Aroostook County, Maine,
         creates benefits of only $1,500.
             We report several sensitivity analyses. Our baseline estimates use the USEPA (2010)'s preferred
         VSL of $8.8 million (2017 dollars). We consider one alternative estimate of $3.7 million, from
         the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD 2012), and also an age-
         adjusted VSL (Murphy and Topel, 2006; Carleton et al., 2019). Our baseline estimate of the
         PM2.5 concentration-adult mortality response function, which accounts for most estimated damages
  13
       We calculate this from the following standard annuity formula:

                                                                     1 - (1 + r)-n
                                          Ppermanent = Ptemporary                                                          (1)
                                                                       r/(1 + r)

Here, Ppermanent is the price of a standard offset, Ptemporary is the price of a temporary offset, r is the discount rate firms
implicitly use, and n is the duration that firms expect offsets to last. To calculate the implied discount rate, we follow
regulatory analyses of air pollution abatement in assuming a typical region will be in nonattainment for 20 years (n = 20).
  14
     The marginal benefits of pollution abatement are comparable to the marginal damages of pollution emissions. Tech-
nically the former represent a marginal decrease in pollution emissions and the latter represents a marginal increase.




                                                              11
from air pollution, is from Krewski et al. (2009). We also report five alternative estimates of
this parameter--from the 5th and 95th percentile of the confidence interval from Krewski et al.
(2009), from another epidemiological study (Lepeule et al. 2012), from a cross-sectional regression
discontinuity estimate from China (Ebenstein et al. 2017), and from a panel data estimate using
nonattainment designations as an instrumental variable for air quality (Sanders et al. 2020). We
also assess sensitivity to using three other air quality and valuation models--InMAP, EASIUR, and
AP2. The atmospheric chemistry underlying these models is sometimes described as a "source-
receptor" relationship or "reduced complexity" air quality model, since it seeks to approximate
chemistry models such much greater complexity, but using representative values for each county or
other geographic region (Kolstad and Williams 1989).
   Two clarifications on estimating marginal damages may be useful. One involves the potential
gap between damages and marginal willingness to pay. Estimates of the marginal damages of air
pollution may understate true marginal willingness-to-pay, since people may value clean air for
reasons not captured in the damage function approach (e.g., pure amenity value). In practice,
property value (hedonic) models have been economists' primary approach to estimating marginal
willingness to pay for clean air. Comparing hedonic estimates with those from integrated assess-
ment models' damage functions does not suggest that the damage function approach substantially
understates marginal willingness-to-pay; if anything, the hedonic estimates are smaller than the
damage function estimates (Smith and Huang 1995; Chay and Greenstone 2005; Bajari et al. 2012;
Holland et al. 2020). While there is uncertainty in each estimate from the literature, this suggests
that AP3 does not dramatically understate the marginal benefits of pollution abatement relative
to prevailing direct estimates of marginal willingness to pay for air quality.
   The other clarification involves interactions between pollutants. We calculate the marginal ben-
efits of abating one ton of each pollutant, evaluated at baseline emission levels of other pollutants.
The damages of one pollutant can depend on the levels of others--the obvious example is that
ground-level ozone formation depends on emission levels of both NOx and VOCs, though ozone
accounts for a small share of the damages we measure, and particulates count for the vast majority
of the damages. Evaluating damages from baseline levels fits the definition of marginal changes,
is the natural comparison in our setting, and is typically used in research. It also reflects tech-
nology--many leading abatement technologies used for the pollutants we study, such as selective
catalytic reduction or thermal oxidizers, primarily affect emissions of the pollutants they target,
while having limited effects on emissions of other pollutants. A related issue is the question of
how to quantify the benefits of policies that target one pollutant but affect others ("co-pollutants")
(Aldy et al. 2020). The air quality models we use account for ways in which each emitted pollutant
affects ambient concentrations of other pollutants (e.g., how NOx emissions affect ambient PM2.5 ).
At the same time, we believe the issue of co-pollutants is less important in our setting than in
other settings, in part for the same reason that the abatement technologies used in offset markets
primarily target one pollutant at a time. Much discussion of co-pollutants occurs with greenhouse




                                                 12
      gas emissions or toxic pollutants, neither of which we study; those other pollutants are cases where
      the abatement technologies used for one pollutant have large effects on emissions of others (e.g., the
      scrubbers used to comply with mercury regulations substantially decrease emissions of particulate
      matter).


      2.3      Engineering Estimates of Marginal Abatement Costs
      We obtain engineering (i.e., accounting) estimates of marginal abatement costs using software called
      the Control Strategy Tool (CoST; Appendix C.3 provides additional details). CoST is the standard
      tool that federal and local regulators use to estimate the cost of air quality regulations.
          CoST uses several inputs. It uses the EPA's National Emissions Inventory, which lists the
      emissions of each polluting plant in the U.S., separately by pollutant and year. Additionally, it
      incorporates lists of the abatement technologies currently used in each plant, which it takes from
      a variety of EPA reports and databases, regional planning organizations, and state environmen-
      tal agencies. It also uses data on the abatement technologies available for each plant, and their
      associated capital and operating cost.
          Given these inputs, CoST applies simple optimization software to find different sets of tech-
      nologies that a specific scenario would require. For example, CoST can estimate the least-cost way
      to decrease NOx emissions from the San Francisco Bay Area by 100 tons. For any such scenario,
      CoST outputs the specific plants' control technologies and costs that it recommends. We are not
      aware of previous use of CoST in academic economics research.



      3        Simple Model of Pollution Abatement
      This section describes a simple framework which helps guide our interpretation of offset prices. It
      resembles classic approaches in economics (Baumol and Oates 1988; Stavins 1995; Montero 1997;
      Muller and Mendelsohn 2009), except that we explicitly account for non-pecuniary transaction
      costs.
          Source i emits Xi tons of pollution. Let X = X1 , . . . , XN denote the vector of emissions.15 We
      consider three types of costs: control costs; transaction costs; and pollution damages.
          A source must pay control costs Ci (Xi ), which include all non-transaction costs that source
      i incurs in order to emit pollution level Xi . These may include lost profits from producing less
      output (e.g., curtailment), producing a different product, or capital and operating expenditures on
      pollution abatement technology.
          To achieve emissions X , agents must pay transaction costs T (Xi ). These may include search
      and matching costs; bargaining and decision costs; monitoring and enforcement costs; and uncer-
  15
     Many command-and-control policies regulate emissions rates, i.e., emissions per unit of output, which can create
an implicit output subsidy. Offset markets govern physical emissions in tons (not emission rates), so we describe firms
choosing pollution levels rather than emission rates.




                                                          13
tainty costs including delays. We assume that firms are aware of and make choices in response to
transaction costs, and thus that offset prices and quantities fully reflect transaction costs. Both
Ci (·) and T (·) exclude transfers that do not represent real resource costs, such as markups.
   The market design influences the transaction cost function T (·). We treat the market design as
fixed, so the planner does not choose the shape of the transaction cost function T (·). In other words,
conditional on choosing a particular set of offset requirements, the planner treats the function T (·)
as fixed (though the actual value of T (·) depends on the quantities of emissions Xi chosen). One
could think of this as choosing the level of abatement required in offset markets, hence, it is a
second-best problem.
   We refer to the sum of control and transaction costs as "abatement costs." In offset markets,
firms must pay both control and transaction costs in order to emit a given level of pollution. Much
of the environmental economics literature equates control costs with abatement costs and abstracts
from transaction costs. Equating control and abatement costs is not the most appropriate for offset
markets, where transaction costs may be more important than for other market designs.
   Emissions produce the pollution damages D(X ), which represent the external or social costs
of pollution. The damage function D(·) may be a nonlinear function of emissions X . Damages
include the monetized value of changes in mortality, morbidity, visibility, firm productivity, and
other externalities induced by emissions level Xi . We assume control and transaction costs decrease
with emissions but pollution damages increase with emissions (Ci (Xi )/Xi < 0, Ti (Xi )/Xi < 0,
and D(X )/Xi > 0).


3.1     The Planner's Problem
The planner chooses emissions from each source to minimize the sum of control costs, transaction
costs, and pollution damages:

                                 minX        Ci (Xi ) + T (Xi ) + D(X )                            (2)
                                         i

The planner faces a trade-off--allowing a plant to increase its emissions increases pollution damages
but decreases control and transaction costs. Differentiating the planner's problem gives

                                    Ci (Xi ) T (Xi )   D(X )
                                -           -        =       i                                     (3)
                                    Xi        Xi       Xi

   The first term in equation (3), the marginal control cost, describes how a marginal increase in
emissions affects control costs. The second term, the marginal transaction cost, describes how a
marginal increase in emissions affect transaction costs. The right-hand side of equation (3), the
marginal benefits of abatement, describes how a marginal increase in emissions affects the damages
from pollution. Equation (3) shows that the planner chooses emissions from each source so the
marginal benefits of abatement equal the marginal cost of emissions plus the marginal transaction



                                                   14
cost from additional emissions.
   In the textbook efficiency rule, the planner equates marginal abatement costs to marginal pol-
lution damages. This rule also holds in equation (3), except that we interpret marginal abatement
costs to reflect both transaction and control costs. The idea is that transaction costs are not a nui-
sance term which an analyst should seek to exclude or ignore when comparing the marginal costs
and benefits of a policy. Instead, transaction costs are a component of the true economist cost that
a firm incurs when complying with a policy, and thus they are part of the marginal abatement cost.
   While we primarily interpret equation (3) conditional on policy design (so the T (·) function is
fixed, though the level of transaction costs still depends on emissions Xi ), it is interesting to note
how the choice of this design affects efficient abatement. When transaction costs like broker fees
rise, holding marginal benefits of abatement constant, it is efficient for firms to abate less. Many
existing environmental policies have high transaction costs, like command and control regulations
that set prescriptive and inflexible rules for each firm, and can require litigation and uncertainty.
Equation (3) shows that policies with high transaction costs have a downside for the environment
because they decrease the efficient amount of abatement.


3.2     Decentralization
We assume firm i chooses its emissions to maximize profits:

                               maxXi Py Y (Xi ) - Ei (Xi ) - P Xi - Ti (Xi )                            (4)

The firm sells output Y (Xi ) at price Py . The firm must also purchase pollution offsets at the market
price P to cover its emissions, pay the operating, maintenance, and other engineering control costs
Ei (Xi ), and pay transaction costs for its offsets Ti (·).
   Differentiating equation (4) with respect to emissions Xi for an operating firm, and defining a
firm's marginal control costs as - C
                                   Xi
                                     i (Xi )
                                             = Py Y (Xi )
                                                  Xi -
                                                              Ei (Xi )
                                                              Xi ,       gives the condition for production
efficiency:
                                           Ci (Xi ) Ti (Xi )
                                       -           -         =P                                         (5)
                                           Xi        Xi
This says that for a firm's efficient choice of emissions, the firm should invest in abatement until
the sum of marginal control costs and marginal transaction costs equals the market price of off-
sets. Notably, abatement here includes various types, such as end-of-pipe abatement technology or
decreasing total output.
   Combining the planner's efficiency condition from equation (3) with the firm's production effi-
ciency condition from equation (5) shows a simple condition for efficient offset prices:

                                                     D(X )
                                               P =                                                      (6)
                                                     Xi

Equation (6) indicates that the efficient market price of offsets should equal the marginal social



                                                     15
damage from pollution emissions. This condition is similar to what one would obtain in a standard
frictionless cap-and-trade market, but is also true here in the presence of transaction costs.
    This suggests a simple test for the efficiency of offset prices. If the price of pollution offsets
exceeds the marginal social damage from pollution, the offsets are more expensive than is efficient.
In this case, social welfare would increase if regulation was less stringent, and equilibrium offset
prices were lower. Alternatively, Equation (5) shows the two additional classes of policy reforms that
could then increase welfare--decreasing marginal control costs Ci (·)/Xi or decreasing transaction
costs Ti (·)/Xi .
    One consideration is that changing the stringency of regulation in one location may encourage
polluting firms to emit more pollution in other locations. The additional emissions in other locations
are not relevant from the perspective of the local (county or municipal) social planner imposing
the regulation, but are relevant for a national social planner. The welfare consequences of this kind
of relocation depend on where firms relocate and how efficient the stringency of regulation is in
other locations. For example, if increasing offset prices in Los Angeles leads to emissions increases
in Reno, but pollution regulation in Reno is efficient, then the emissions in Reno do not affect
social welfare since their marginal costs and benefits are equal. Since we do not observe potential
entrants, our setting makes it difficult to observe where firms might relocate to (or to know the
efficiency of regulation in areas where firms might relocate), but we leave the interesting question
of spatial spillovers to future work.
    Another consideration is the presence of other environmental regulations. Polluting plants must
comply with other federal environmental policies, in addition to local policies, which can increase
their compliance costs. Offset requirements are in addition to these other policies. While these other
costs do increase the total cost of environmental policy, they do not change a plant's assessment of
its demand for offsets--the production efficiency condition (5) still shows that a plant should invest
in abatement until the marginal cost of abatement equals prevailing offset prices.



4     Results
4.1     Offset Prices Versus Marginal Benefits of Abatement
Table 2 compares the marginal benefits of pollution abatement to offset prices, using our full data
from 16 states plus Washington, DC, over the years 2010-2019. Columns (1) and (2) describe
transactions for NOx , and columns (3) and (4) for VOCs. Columns (1) and (3) show a mean
which is weighted by the tons of pollution it represents; columns (2) and (4) show a mean which
is weighted by the population it represents. Panel A pools all markets, while Panels B through
E describe the four regions of the US, as defined by the US Census Bureau. Within each panel,
row 1 shows mean marginal benefits of abatement divided by mean offset prices, row 2 shows the
p-value for the hypothesis test that this ratio equals one, row 3 describes mean marginal benefits




                                                 16
of abatement, and row 4 describes mean offset prices. Under the interpretation that offset prices
represent the mean marginal costs of abatement, row 1 would be interpreted as the ratio of marginal
benefits to marginal costs of pollution abatement.
   Table 2 shows that national mean marginal benefits of abatement are well above offset prices.
This provides our main finding that air pollution regulation in these markets is less stringent than
is efficient. This conclusion is statistically precise at greater than 99 percent confidence for all
pollutants and regions. On average for NOx , mean marginal benefits of abatement are $40,000 to
$51,000, depending whether the average is weighted by tons of pollution or population. Mean offset
prices, however, are $2,200 to $4,000. Thus, the ratio of mean marginal benefits of abatement to
mean offset prices is 13 to 18. Of course, this is far above a ratio of one. Similarly, for VOCs, we
obtain a ratio of 8 to 10.
   To interpret these ratios economically, consider an incumbent firm deciding whether to decrease
its NOx pollution emissions and thus generate offsets for sale. On average, the firm would receive
between $2,200 to $4,000 per ton for cleaning up pollution. At the same time, by decreasing
emissions, the firm would be creating $40,000 to $51,000 per ton in health and welfare benefits to
society. In this sense, regulation is giving less incentive to clean up pollution than is optimal, and
thus is too lenient.
   Table 2, Panels B through E, show similar patterns in all four regions of the country. For both
pollutants NOx and VOCs, both weighting schemes, and all four regions, the ratio of the marginal
benefits of abatement to offset prices is well above one. This would suggest that the regulations we
study are too lenient on average in all these regions. The ratios are largest in the Northeast and
Midwest, where the marginal benefits of abatement are more than fifty times mean offset prices. For
NOx in the Northeast, for example, the marginal benefits of abatement are approximately $44,000,
but mean offset prices are only about $500. The ratios are modestly lower in the West, at 7.1 to
9.2. The ratios are the lowest in the South, at 1.4 to 6.6.
   Figure 2 plots offset prices and the marginal benefits of abatement for all markets (Panel A)
and for each census region (Panels B through E), separately by year. The marginal benefits of
abatement vary year-by-year due to changes in population density and differences in baseline levels
of all pollutants. For example, the marginal damages of emitting NOx depend on the baseline
ambient levels of NOx , VOCs, and other pollutants in each market. Table 2 essentially shows
the mean value of these lines in the period 2010-2019, while these graphs show the underlying
year-by-year averages, for all years.
   A glance at the lines in Figure 2 shows the enormous vertical distance between the marginal
benefits of abatement and offset prices in most regions and pollutants. That gap reflects the finding
that the marginal benefits of abatement are much higher than mean offset prices. Once again, the
only exception is for the VOC market in the South, where the marginal benefits of abatement and
offset prices have been closer in the last decade. The year-by-year values in Figure 2 are similar to
the mean values over the entire last decade from Table 2.




                                                 17
   Table 3 shows more detailed geographical variation in the ratio of the marginal benefits of
abatement to offset prices. For each of the largest markets in our data, this table shows that
ratio separately for NOx and VOCs. These markets are heterogeneous--they include longstand-
ing industrial cities like Cleveland and Pittsburgh; faster-growing, high-education cities, like Los
Angeles and Washington, DC; and less urban areas like the Central Valley of California and the
Upper Green River Basin in Wyoming. Some are in areas with strong environmental regulation,
like Connecticut and New Jersey; others are in areas with weaker environmental regulation, like
Texas and Wyoming.
   Given this heterogeneity across markets, it is striking that the ratio of marginal benefits of
abatement to offset prices is high in so many markets. Across all markets in Table 3, the median
ratio is 40. In about three-fourths of the markets, this ratio exceeds 10. The only markets with
a ratio below 4 are a few large markets in California, the markets in Houston, and one market in
Wyoming. Even for these markets with lower ratios, only one of the forty markets listed in Table
3 has a ratio below one--the market for VOCs in Houston.
   What drives these differences? Figure 3 suggests that a larger proportion of variation across
individual markets is driven by variation in the marginal benefits of abatement, rather than by offset
prices. This can be seen because the marginal benefits of abatement (the hollow red diamonds in
the graph) vary widely between markets, from $1,000 per ton for VOCs in Wyoming to $100,000
per ton for NOx in Los Angeles. By contrast, offset prices (the solid blue circles in the graph) vary
less in dollar terms (though a more comparable amount in percentage terms), from $100 in many
markets to $10,000 for NOx in Los Angeles. Figure 3 also shows that in the Houston VOC market,
it is a relatively high level of offset prices rather than a low level of marginal benefits of abatement
which makes the marginal benefits of abatement be less than offset prices.
   Because the Houston market is anomalous, Appendix Figure 3 graphs the year-by-year patterns
in the marginal benefits of abatement and mean offset prices for this market. These graphs show
that VOC offset prices were fairly low until 2010, in the range of $1,000. Beginning in 2011, offset
prices skyrocketed, to well over $10,000.
   Why have Houston offset prices been so high over the last decade? The value of a one-ton VOC
offset in Houston over the last decade is more than six times the price of a one-ton VOC offset in
other markets. Houston offset prices for NOx are also high. Market participants have suggested
that offset prices in Houston are high due to substantial recent demand for petrochemical, energy,
and related industries to enter the Houston market, due in part to cheap natural gas prices spurred
by fracking, but limited opportunities for inexpensive abatement by incumbents.
   Figure 4, Panel A, investigates sensitivity to many alternative ways of summarizing offset prices.
The main results show mean marginal benefits of abatement divided by mean offset prices; we also
consider the mean of (benefits / offset prices). The main estimates assume that permanent offsets
sell at a price of about nine times the price of temporary offsets; Figure 4 shows alternative values
assuming the ratio of permanent to temporary prices is 7, 5, or 12.




                                                  18
   The additional rows in Figure 4, Panel A, show alternative estimates for the markets where we
have transaction-level offset prices. Figure 4 next shows a value of offset prices which is adjusted
by the required offset ratio between offset generation and use, discussed earlier in Section 1. The
next two rows show values for the tenth percentile of offset prices in each market, and the nineti-
eth percentile of offset prices. We then consider the ninetieth percentile of transaction sizes in
tons, which may be relevant if transaction costs are fixed rather than variable and thus the larger
transactions would less reflect transaction cost. The last few rows include data from 1993-2009,
include temporary offsets, and show results for a different pollutant with fewer offset transactions
(particulate matter or sulfur oxides).
   These alternative estimates generally change the ratio of offset prices to marginal abatement
benefits in intuitive ways. Despite this varying magnitude, most qualitative patterns persist. Nearly
all ratios are well above one; the main exception is the Houston VOC market, which means that
the ninetieth percentile of offset prices for VOCs exceeds the marginal benefits of abatement.
   Figure 4, Panel B, shows sensitivity to alternative estimates of the marginal benefits of pollution
abatement. We consider alternative estimates of the value of a statistical life (VSL); alternative
estimates of the PM2.5 mortality concentration-response function; we add in damages from capital
depreciation, crop yields, and other channels not included in the main AP3 model; we use the
original version of the AP3 model, without correcting the epidemiology discrepancy; and we consider
three alternative integrated assessment models. The AP2 model does estimate higher damages from
NOx , though the main improvement in AP3 involves redesigning the atmospheric chemistry through
which NOx transforms into particulate matter in ways that align better with leading atmospheric
chemistry models. Again, most of the conclusions with these different approaches are qualitatively
unchanged.
   We have also investigated a bounding exercise that asks what VSL would imply that regulation
is efficient, i.e., that the ratio of marginal benefits to offset prices equals one. For NOx , the implied
VSL is $0.5 million, and for VOCs, it is $1.1 million. These VSL bounds are considerably lower
than the EPA's $8.8 million estimate.


4.2       Trends in Offset Prices Versus Marginal Benefits of Abate-
ment
The results thus far suggest that most air pollution regulations we study are less stringent than is
efficient. We now ask how the costs of regulation have changed over time.
   Table 4 uses versions of the following statistical model to estimate the time trends in these
graphs:
                                       Ompy = yy + µmp +       mpy

Here O represents the ton-weighted mean log offset price for market m, pollutant p, and year y .
This variable is regressed on a linear year trend yy and market×pollutant fixed effects µmp . The



                                                   19
variable   mpy   represents the error term. The main coefficient of interest,  , is the mean change in
log offset prices each year, conditional on the fixed effects.
   Columns (1)-(3) of Table 4 present estimates of the parameter  from this model. Panel A
pools across pollutants and markets. These results suggest that offset prices are increasing by 6 to
8 percent per year in real terms. The pattern is similar whether we treat each offset transaction
as having equal weight (column 1), or weight by tons or population (columns 2 and 3). Panels B
and C show each pollutant separately. The two pollutants have similar trends. Table 4 includes
all years with data; limiting the sample to years 2010-2019 delivers smaller annual growth rates,
which may be in part due to the price volatility stemming from the Great Recession or the advent
of hydraulic fracturing.
   Table 4 shows rapid price increases that exceed inflation by 6 to 8 percent per year. At this
rate of increase, real offset prices in these markets are doubling every decade. For comparison, the
long-term rate of return on stocks and housing is around 7 percent per year, while the rate of return
on bonds and treasury bills is lower, at 1 to 3 percent per year (Jorda et al. 2019).
   Determining how the marginal cost/benefit ratio is changing also requires information on trends
in the marginal benefits of abatement. Columns (4) to (6) of Table 4 show this trend. The marginal
benefits of abatement are increasing by 2 percent per year, which is statistically larger than zero,
but is smaller than the positive trend in offset prices. Accordingly, columns (7) through (9) show
that log offset prices are growing by 4 to 8 percent per year faster than the log of the marginal
benefits of abatement.
   Why are offset prices increasing? One natural explanation is that the limit on pollution emissions
in these markets is fixed, while economic growth implies that the demand for pollution offsets is
increasing. Growing demand for an asset with fixed supply will increase its price.
   Motivated by this potential explanation, Appendix Figure 4 compares the pattern of offset prices
against the length of time a region has been in nonattainment. Each circle in the graph shows the
mean log offset price for areas that have been in nonattainment for the number of years indicated
in the x-axis. Appendix Figure 4 shows that offset prices are higher in areas that have been in
nonattainment for more years. Being in nonattainment for one additional year is associated with a
7 percent increase in real offset prices per ton.


4.3     Engineering Estimates Versus Revealed Preference
How do offset prices compare to prevailing estimates of marginal costs from the EPA's own model
and data? This comparison may be useful for a few reasons. Engineering estimates provide a
standard and widely used method for estimating marginal abatement costs, so this comparison
helps assess how revealed preference numbers from offset prices differ from accounting measures of
engineering costs. Additionally, comparing against engineering estimates separately for each market
and pollutant may provide some insight into where these estimates are more or less accurate.
   Table 5 compares engineering estimates and offset prices. Panel A describes all states in our



                                                    20
data, while panels B through E describe each census region. Within each panel, row 1 shows the
ratio of engineering estimates to mean offset prices; row 2 shows the p-value for a hypothesis test
that this ratio equals one; row 3 shows engineering estimates; and row 4 shows mean offset prices.
The first two columns describe NOx , while the last two columns describe VOCs. Columns (1) and
(3) are weighted by tons, while columns (2) and (4) are weighted by population.
   The engineering estimates in Table 5 are consistently far from actual offset prices, and the
estimates statistically reject the hypothesis of equality. For NOx in columns (1) and (2), engineering
estimates are on average too low, and on average are a third of actual offset prices. This obscures
regional variation. In the South and West regions, engineering estimates for NOx are far below
offset prices; in the Midwest and Northeast, engineering estimates for NOx are above offset prices.
For VOCs in columns (3) and (4), the opposite is true--engineering estimates are around six times
larger than offset prices. That ratio ranges from 22 in the Northeast to 2 in the South.
   The differences between engineering estimates of marginal abatement costs and mean offset
prices are economically large. In the Northeast, for example, the EPA's engineering software pre-
dicts that it costs over $10,000 per ton to abate VOCs, while offset prices are only about $600 per
ton. By contrast, in the West, the EPA's engineering software predicts that it costs $1,000 per ton
to abate NOx , while offset prices are well over $3,000 per ton.
   Figure 5 graphically describes the distribution of individual offset prices, engineering estimates,
and marginal benefits of abatement for four large markets where we have transaction-level data--the
South Coast market around Los Angeles, California, the Houston-Galveston-Brazoria market in
Texas, the San Joaquin Valley in California, and the San Francisco Bay Area. This helps nonpara-
metrically describe the distributions underlying the averages in Table 5. In these graphs, the red
dotted line describes engineering cost estimates, the blue solid line depicts the distribution of offset
prices, and the black dashed line describes the marginal benefits of abatement.
   Figure 5 shows large differences between offset prices and engineering estimates. For NOx
in Los Angeles, Figure 5, Panel A, shows that the engineering software predicts that abatement
opportunities are available at under $1,000 per ton, while offset pries range from approximately
$5,000 to $50,000. This is not just a difference in means or first order stochastic dominance--it is
actually non-overlapping support. Non-overlapping support also occurs for NOx in Houston, where
the engineering software predicts a distribution of prices under $2,000, but actual offset prices
exceed $2,000 per ton. For VOCs, the engineering estimates are far above offset prices in the Los
Angeles market, though closer in the Houston market.
   Given large differences between revealed preference and engineering estimates, which is more
accurate? While external validity may depend on the setting, for the markets we study, the offsets
describe firms' actual costs. Take an example a market participant described to us--a Korean man-
ufacturing firm was opening a plant in Houston that would emit substantial amounts of NOx . For
this firm's actual decisions, the engineering estimates of abatement costs from the EPA's software,
which predict the availability of abatement opportunities among incumbent firms for a few hun-




                                                  21
dred dollars per ton, are incorrect--the firm would have to spend over $10,000 per ton to purchase
offsets, regardless of what the engineering model predicts.
   Why do the engineering and revealed preference estimates differ so much? Discussing this
question with regulators, including some who helped create the engineering software, suggests
several possible explanations. First, the revealed preference estimates include economic costs that
the engineering estimates are unlikely to include, such as search and matching frictions. Second,
the two approaches measure different types of abatement. Offset markets require abatement to
be surplus, federally enforceable, quantifiable, and permanent. Some engineering estimates may
involve abatement technologies that do not satisfy these criteria. Third, industries may simply
have a tendency to overstate compliance costs, particularly when communicating to regulators
when there is the possibility that higher reported costs leads to weaker regulation.
   Fourth, engineering estimates can have incomplete and inaccurate data. Abatement costs for
industrial facilities can be site-specific and depend on available space for ductwork, technical spec-
ifications of existing technology, and other features. Federal regulators have not required firms
or local regulators to share updated lists of abatement technologies used at specific plants, and
thus the data the engineering software uses can be far out of date. Additionally, the engineering
software only has data on a single abatement technology at each plant. This may help explain
why the engineering model predicts the existence of inexpensive abatement opportunities for NOx ,
even when offset prices are far higher. One regulator highlighted that much of the data on VOC
abatement technology in the engineering cost model is over 30 years old.
   We believe the pattern across pollutants suggests an important role at least for the fourth
explanation. Offset transactions can involve tens of millions of dollars, and the engineering cost
estimates would imply that many of these transactions are mistakes. In these tightly regulated
markets, it is plausible that firms have already installed many of these control technologies, but
firms and regulators did not update the emissions inventories used in the engineering software.
   To provide additional evidence on the reasons for differences between CoST predictions and
offset prices, we attempted to compare CoST's estimates of the cost of an individual abatement
technology at a specific plant against an actual offset generated by the same plant. Identifying the
individual abatement technology used for an offset transaction then linking to the same technologies
in CoST is difficult due to data limitations and must be done by hand for each transaction. As a
way of providing some insight, we investigated 20 VOC offset transactions by hand. While all 20
incumbent plants appear in the CoST data, CoST was unable to recommend any VOC abatement
technology for 18 of the 20 plants, at any price, using any technology. CoST appears to lack any
information on the abatement technologies these 18 offset transactions actually installed, including
a vapor combustor unit, a vapor recovery pump, specific process or solvent changes, and a storage
tank floating roof landing. Cursory searches for these technologies on the internet suggests that
industry uses them widely and that regulators have written many documents discussing them;
however, they are not in the menu of abatement opportunities available to firms in the CoST




                                                 22
model.
   For the two of 20 plants where CoST successfully recommended an abatement technology,
CoST's estimated costs differed wildly from offset prices. In one case, a metal coating firm installed
a regenerative thermal oxidizer, then sold the offsets at $1,000 per ton. For this firm, the abatement
technology CoST recommends as the lowest-cost option is a permanent total enclosure, at $27,665
per ton. In other words, the least-cost technology CoST can identify is twenty eight times the cost
of the technology a firm actually installed. In the second case, an industrial solvents firm redesigned
part of its plant and routed emissions to a thermal oxidizer, then sold the offsets at $60,000 per
ton. For this firm, the lowest-cost abatement technology CoST recommends is a combination of
work practice standards, solvent substitution, and add-on controls, at negative $1,357 per ton (i.e.,
CoST predicts this abatement investment would more than pay for itself). In this second case,
CoST's recommendation is off from actual offset costs by a factor of negative forty four.


4.4      Prices Versus Quantities
When the marginal abatement cost and benefit curves are known with certainty, price policies
produce equivalent expected outcomes to quantity policies. When the marginal abatement benefit
curve (equivalently, the marginal pollution damage curve) is uncertain, this equivalence persists.
When the marginal abatement cost curve is uncertain, however, this equivalence fails. The relative
expected welfare consequences of price versus quantity policies then depend on the relative slopes
of the marginal abatement cost and benefit curves (Weitzman 1974).
   What is known about the slope of the marginal abatement benefit curve? Economists and
epidemiologists typically estimate nonlinear models to express damages in terms of relative risks,
and ambient pollution levels may not vary linearly with pollution emissions (Krewski et al. 2009;
Lepeule et al. 2012). Consensus is emerging within the fields, however, that the marginal abatement
benefit function for many criteria air pollutants is modestly sloped or fairly flat at pollution levels
near the Clean Air Act regulatory standards. Thus, the marginal benefits of abatement do not
typically change dramatically due to modest changes in emission levels (Apte et al. 2015). While
the marginal abatement benefit curve is nonlinear and does have larger slope for bigger changes
in pollution, in Figure 5, the marginal abatement benefit curves are so flat that they appear as a
completely horizontal line over this quantity of abatement. Figure 5 only shows eight markets, but
the marginal abatement benefit curve is similarly flat for other markets.
   Figure 5 also plots two descriptions of marginal abatement costs, one from engineering estimates
and the other from offset prices. In every graph, these curves have steep slopes (note the log scale).
The engineering data describe the marginal abatement cost curve, while the slopes in the offset lines
may reflect search frictions or local shocks to offset demand. We interpret engineering cost estimates
cautiously, given that they are not revealed preference numbers and subject to many concerns,
including substantial differences from offset prices. Offset prices vary substantially, though in this
setting we do not have scope to pin down to what extent this is due to a steep slope of the true



                                                  23
marginal abatement cost curve versus search frictions or volatility in market fundamentals.
    While we are cautious in this conclusion given the uncertainties involved in inferring the entire
marginal abatement cost curve, the steeper slope of the marginal abatement cost curve relative to
the marginal benefits curve in the available evidence would tend to suggest that price instruments
produce higher expected welfare than quantity policies in these markets. In this interpretation,
levying a tax equal to the marginal expected damages for new entrants (i.e., a price instrument)
would lead to larger expected welfare gains than capping the market level of allowable emissions and
letting firms trade offsets (i.e., a quantity instrument). Researchers have made similar arguments
for taxes versus cap-and-trade markets to address global climate change (Pizer 2002).
    Price policies in these markets could take different forms. Reforms could replace offset markets
with emissions taxes. Another possible approach is to use hybrid policies. Regulators could guar-
antee provision of additional offsets at a certain predetermined high price. In some settings, prices
are at the price ceiling or floor so often that hybrid instrument essentially becomes a tax (Boren-
stein et al. 2019). Many cap-and-trade markets have a price floor or ceiling, which in some cases
is imposed after episodes of extreme price volatility. We are unaware of any such policy proposals
for U.S. air pollution offset markets, though this paper provides economic reason to consider such
ideas.



5        Conclusions
This paper describes a novel approach to estimating the marginal cost of air pollution regulation.
This approach has several appealing features--it uses revealed preference, reflects both pecuniary
and non-pecuniary abatement costs, obtains estimates that vary by pollutant, location, and time,
and is transparent and simple to implement.
    We exploit policies that require firms opening or substantially retrofitting a polluting plant in
a region to offset their pollution emissions by paying incumbents in the same region to decrease
their emissions of the same pollutant. These policies create several hundred decentralized, bilateral
markets for pollution that existing research has largely not analyzed. Using data from 16 states plus
Washington, DC, that together cover 60 percent of the economic activity in all US air pollution offset
markets, we describe how offset prices can provide revealed preference measures of the marginal
cost of relevant air pollution regulations. We then compare offset prices against leading estimates
of the marginal benefits of emissions reductions. These conclusions are relevant to policy in general,
and also specifically to reforms that the EPA, think tanks, and state and local governments are
discussing for offset markets and associated regulations.
    Our main finding is that policy is more lenient than is efficient in most markets, though regula-
tion in one market, the Houston metro market for VOCs, may be moderately more stringent than
efficiency would require. In practice, stringency can change in various ways. One possible approach
to reforming policy would be for incumbents to face tighter pollution standards. Entrants in the




                                                 24
markets we study already face an extremely strict pollution standard, while incumbents face weaker
standards. Because cost-effectiveness requires equating marginal abatement costs across sources,
tightening standards for entrants further relative to standards for incumbents is not likely to be
efficient. Alternatively, charging a facility-specific pollution tax equal to the marginal damages
from their annual emissions would increase expected social welfare.
   Additionally, an important fraction of local pollution emissions come from mobile sources such
as cars and trucks. Abatement opportunities for mobile sources may be cheaper than stationary
sources in ways that could generate further improvements in air quality at lower costs. Appendix D
describes additional policies that could reform offset markets in ways to decrease marginal abate-
ment costs, such as allowing trades between markets. While these reforms would produce welfare
gains, in the absence of other policy reforms, they would actually expand the gap between marginal
abatement costs and benefits, so would not achieve efficient policy.
   Our conclusions about the stringency of environmental policy are not made in a vacuum. If
reforms reduced the compliance costs of the Clean Air Act, or if estimates of the marginal benefits
of emissions reductions increased, these changes would strengthen our conclusions. Alternatively,
if marginal abatement costs continue increasing at their rapid past rate, the costs of emissions
reductions could begin to exceed the benefits to society, and regulation would become more stringent
than is efficient. At the same time, as firms face increasing compliance costs, the incentive for
finding creative solutions to pollution abatement increases. New innovations in pollution abatement
technology would have also implications for the efficient level of environmental stringency for society.
   We believe this paper offers several questions for future work. Many countries use offset markets
for a variety of environmental goods. To what extent can the approach used here help identify
the marginal costs of environmental policy in other settings? More generally, what are other
revealed preference strategies that can be applied broadly to estimate the marginal costs of pollution
abatement? Such strategies could help compare abatement costs under different market designs
and in areas without offset markets. Research has had made extraordinary progress in measuring
the marginal benefits of pollution abatement, but comparatively less progress in measuring the
marginal costs of pollution abatement, even though both parameters are essential to designing
optimal environmental policy.


References
Abbott, A. F. and G. L. Brady (1990). Innovation-induced rent-seeking: The case of air quality
  management. Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics 146 (2), 328­344.

Aldy, J., M. Kotchen, M. Evans, M. Fowlie, A. Levinson, and K. Palmer (2020). Deep flaws in a
  mercury regulatory analysis. Science 368, 247­248.

Apte, J. S., J. D. Marshall, A. J. Cohen, and M. Brauer (2015). Addressing global mortality from
  ambient pm2.5. Environmental Science & Technology 49, 8057­8066.




                                                  25
Bajari, P., J. C. Fruehwirth, K. il Kim, and C. Timmins (2012). A rational expectations approach to
  hedonic price regression with time-varying unobserved product attributes: The price of pollution.
  American Economic Review 102(5), 1898­1926.

Baumol, W. J. and W. E. Oates (1988). The theory of environmental policy (2nd ed.). Cambridge
  University Press.

Borenstein, S., J. Bushnell, F. A. Wolak, and M. Zaragoza-Watkins (2019). Expecting the un-
  expected: Emissions uncertainty and environmental market design. American Economic Re-
  view 109 (11), 3953­77.

Carleton, T., M. Delgado, M. Greenstone, T. House, S. Hsiang, A. Hultgren, A. Jina, R. Kopp,
  K. McCusker, I. Nath, J. Rising, A. Rode, H. K. Seo, J. Simcock, A. Viaene, J. Yuan, and
  A. Zhang (2019). Valuing the global mortality consequences of climate change accounting for
  adaptation costs and benefits. Mimeograph, University Of Chicago.

Carlson, C., D. Burtraw, M. Cropper, and K. L. Palmer (2000). Sulfur dioxide control by electric
  utilities: What are the gains from trade? Journal of Political Economy 108(6), 1292­1326.

Chay, K. Y. and M. Greenstone (2005). Does air quality matter? evidence from the housing market.
  Journal of Political Economy 113(2), 376­424.

Cropper, M. and W. E. Oates (1992). Environmental economics: A survey. Journal of Economic
  Literature 30(2), 675­740.

Deschenes, O., M. Greenstone, and J. S. Shapiro (2017). Defensive investments and the demand
  for air quality: Evidence from the nox budget program. American Economic Review 107 (10),
  2958­89.

Dominici, F., M. Greenstone, and C. R. Sunstein (2014).         Particulate matter matters.     Sci-
  ence 344 (6181), 257­259.

Dudek, D. J. and J. Palmisano (1988). Emissions trading: Why is this thoroughbred hobbled?
  Columbia Journal of Environmental Law 13 (217), 218­256.

Dwyer, J. P. (1992). California's tradable emissions policy and greenhouse gas control. Journal of
 Energy Engineering 118 (2), 59­76.

Ebenstein, A., M. Fan, M. Greenstone, G. He, and M. Zhou (2017). New evidence on the impact of
  sustained exposure to air pollution on life expectancy from china's huai river policy. Proceedings
  of the National Academy of Sciences 114 (39), 10384­10389.

Fann, N., A. D. Lamson, S. C. Anenberg, K. Wesson, D. Risley, and B. J. Hubbell (2012). Estimating
  the national public health burden associated with exposure to ambient pm2.5 and ozone. Risk
  Analysis 32 (1), 81­95.

Fowlie, M., M. Greenstone, and C. Wolfram (2018). Do energy efficiency investments deliver?
  evidence from the weatherization assistance program. Quarterly Journal of Economics 133 (3),
  1597­1644.




                                                26
Fowlie, M., C. R. Knittel, and C. Wolfram (2012). Sacred cars? cost-effective regulation of station-
  ary and nonstationary pollution sources. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4(1),
  98­126.

Fraas, A., J. D. Graham, and J. Holmstead (2017). Epa's new source review program: Time for
  reform? Environmental Law Reporter 47 (1).

Gauna, E. (1996). Major sources of criteria pollutants in nonattainment areas: Balancing the goals
  of clean air, environmental justice, and industrial development. Hastings Environmental Law
  Journal 3 (3), 379­404.

Gollop, F. M. and M. J. Roberts (1985). Cost-minimizing regulation of sulfur emissions: Regional
  gains in electric power. Review of Economics & Statistics 67(1), 81­90.

Gowrisankaran, G., S. S. Reynolds, and M. Samano (2016). Intermittency and the value of renewable
  energy. Journal of Political Economy 124 (4), 1187­1234.

Greenstone, M. (2002). The impacts of environmental regulations on industrial activity: Evidence
  from the 1970 and 1977 clean air act amendments and the census of manufactures. Journal of
  Political Economy 110(6), 1175­1219.

Hahn, R. W. and G. L. Hester (1987). The market for bads: Epa's experience with emissions
  trading. Regulation (3-4), 48­53.

Holland, S. P., E. T. Mansur, N. Z. Muller, and A. J. Yates (2020). Decompositions and policy
  consequences of an extraordinary decline in air pollution from electricity generation. American
  Economic Journal: Economic Policy 12 (4).

Jorda, O., K. Knoll, D. Kuvshinov, M. Schularick, and A. M. Taylor (2019). The rate of return on
  everything, 1870-2015. Quarterly Journal of Economics 134 (3), 1225­1298.

Keohane, N. O. (2007). Cost Savings from Allowance Trading in the 1990 Clean Air Act: Estimates
  from a Choice-Based Model. Oxford University Press.

King, L. (2018). As epa moves to relax clean air rules, trump administration praises progress under
  the law. USA Today .

Kolstad, C. D. and M. Toman (2005). The Economics of Climate Policy, pp. 1105­1618.

Kolstad, C. D. and M. D. Williams (1989). Aggregate source-receptor relations for economic analysis
  of ambient regulations. Journal of the Air & Waste Management Association 39 (6), 824­830.

Krewski, D., R. T. Burnett, M. S. Goldberg, K. Hoover, J. Siemiatycki, M. Jerrett, M. Abra-
  hamowicz, W. H. White, G. Bartlett, and L. Brodsky (2009). Reanalysis of the harvard six cities
  study and the american cancer society study of particulate air pollution and mortality. Technical
  report, Health Effects Institute.

Leonard, R. L. (2018). Air Quality Permitting. Routledge.

Lepeule, J., F. Laden, D. Dockery, and J. Schwartz (2012). Chronic exposure to fine particles and
  mortality: An extended follow-up of the harvard six cities study from 1974 to 2009. Environ-
  mental Health Perspectives .



                                                27
Livermore, M. A. and R. L. Revesz (2015). Epa's ozone standard is insufficiently stringent, not
  overly expensive. The Regulatory Review .

Montero, J.-P. (1997). Marketable pollution permits with uncertainty and transaction costs. Re-
 source and Energy Economics 20, 27­50.

Muller, N. Z. and R. Mendelsohn (2009). Efficient pollution regulation: Getting the prices right.
 American Economic Review 99(5), 1714­1739.

Murphy, K. M. and R. H. Topel (2006). The value of health and longevity. Journal of Political
 Economy 114(5), 871­904.

National Research Council (2010). Hidden costs of energy: Unpriced consequences of energy pro-
  duction and use. Technical report, NRC.

NRC (2006). State and Federal Standard for Mobile-Source Emissions. National Academies Press.

OECD (2012). Mortality risk valuation in environment, health and transport policies. Technical
 report, OECD.

Pigou, A. C. (1932). The Economics of Welfare. Macmillan.

Pizer, W. A. (2002). Combining price and quantity controls to mitigate global climate change.
  Journal of Public Economics 85 (409-434).

Rucker, S. (2018). Emission reduction credits. Technical report, Colorado Air Pollution Control
  Division.

Sanders, N. J., A. I. Barreca, and M. J. Neidell (2020). Estimating causal effects of particulate
  matter regulation on mortality. Epidemiology 31 (2), 160­167.

Shapiro, J. S. and R. Walker (2018). Why is pollution from u.s. manufacturing declining? the
  roles of environmental regulation, productivity, and trade. American Economic Review 108 (12),
  3814­54.

Smith, V. K. and J.-C. Huang (1995). Can markets value air quality? a meta-analysis of hedonic
  property value models. Journal of Political Economy 103 (1), 209­227.

Stavins, R. N. (1995). Transaction costs and tradable permits. Journal of Environmental Economics
  and Management 29, 133­148.

Stavins, R. N. (2003). Experience with Market-Based Environmental Policy Instruments. North
  Holland.

Swift, B. (2001). Emission reduction credit trading systems: An overview of recent results and an
  assessment of best practices. Technical report, Environmental Law Institute.

USEPA (1980). Emission reduction banking: An annotated slide presentation. Technical report,
  USEPA.

USEPA (2010).     Conversion factors for hydrocarbon emission components.      Technical report,
  USEPA.



                                               28
van Soest, D. P., J. A. List, and T. Jeppesen (2006). Shadow prices, environmental stringency, and
  international competitiveness. European Economic Review 50 (5), 1151­67.

Walker, R. (2013). The transitional costs of sectoral reallocation: Evidence from the clean air act
 and the workforce. Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(4), 1787­1835.

Weitzman, M. L. (1974). Prices vs. quantities. Review of Economic Studies 41(4), 477­491.




                                                29
                          Table 1--Prevalence of Offset Markets
                                                                          Manufacturing
                      Number of   Population (mn)          GDP (trn)     employment (mn)
                       markets    People      %            $      %      Workers    %
                         (1)         (2)      (3)         (4)     (5)       (6)       (7)
Panel A. National
 Any pollutant          553        182.1     59%         $11.09   66%      6.44       56%
 Ozone                  300        173.2     56%         $10.66   63%      6.09       53%
 Particulate matter     104        121.2     39%         $7.59    45%      3.97       34%
 Other                  149        109.9     36%         $7.19    43%      3.59       31%


Panel B. Full sample (16 states plus Washington, DC) as proportion of all national markets
 Any pollutant          115        108.4    60%      $6.99 63%             3.41      53%
 Ozone                   63        108.4    63%      $6.99 66%             3.41      56%
 Particulate matter      18         36.3    30%      $2.18 29%             1.21      31%
 Other                   34         42.2    38%      $2.57 36%             1.43      40%

Notes: This table describes all US air pollution offset markets. Percentages in Panel B
describe the sample as a share of all national offset markets. A market is a distinct
nonattainment area × pollutant in states with offset markets, designated for nonattainment in
any part of years 1992-2019. Ozone nonattainment areas have separate markets for
nitrogen oxides and volatile organic compounds. Nitrogen dioxide markets are included in
ozone. "Other" pollutants include carbon monoxide, lead, particulate matter, and sulfur
dioxide. Population, GDP, and employment represent the year 2010 and include any county
which has a market for at least one pollutant. Population data are from the Population
Census, county GDP data are from Bureau of Economic Analysis Regional Economic
Accounts, and manufacturing employment data are from the Bureau of Labor Statistics
Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages. "Trn" stands for trillion, and "mn" for million.
GDP is deflated to 2017 dollars using the GDP deflator.




                                                    30
      Table 2--Ratio of Marginal Benefits of Abatement to Mean Offset Prices, 2010-2019
                                                                      NOx                       VOCs
                                                                (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)
Panel A. Full sample (16 states plus Washington, DC)
   1. Marginal benefits of abatement / Offset price           17.99        12.99          7.88         9.82
   2. p-val: MBabatement / Offset price = 1                   [0.00]        [0.00]       [0.00]       [0.00]
   3. Mean marginal benefits of abatement                    $40,309      $51,172      $20,477      $20,389
   4. Mean offset prices                                      $2,241       $3,941       $2,599       $2,077

Panel B. Northeast
   1. Marginal benefits of abatement / Offset price           87.21        77.74        51.79        57.70
   2. p-val: MBabatement / Offset price = 1                   [0.00]       [0.00]       [0.00]       [0.00]
   3. Mean marginal benefits of abatement                    $44,777      $44,015      $29,169      $32,274
   4. Mean offset prices                                       $513         $566         $563         $559

Panel C. South
   1. Marginal benefits of abatement / Offset price            4.28         6.55         1.40         2.56
   2. p-val: MBabatement / Offset price = 1                   [0.00]       [0.00]       [0.00]       [0.00]
   3. Mean marginal benefits of abatement                    $29,481      $28,805      $13,315      $13,283
   4. Mean offset prices                                     $6,887       $4,395       $9,536       $5,198

Panel D. West
   1. Marginal benefits of abatement / Offset price            9.22         9.09         7.72         7.10
   2. p-val: MBabatement / Offset price = 1                   [0.00]       [0.00]       [0.00]       [0.00]
   3. Mean marginal benefits of abatement                    $35,202      $70,827      $10,336      $15,196
   4. Mean offset prices                                     $3,819       $7,788       $1,338       $2,141


Panel E. Midwest
   1. Marginal benefits of abatement / Offset price           95.69       101.25        50.08        53.43
   2. p-val: MBabatement / Offset price = 1                   [0.00]       [0.00]       [0.00]       [0.00]
   3. Mean marginal benefits of abatement                    $44,503      $48,581      $19,734      $22,215
   4. Mean offset prices                                       $30          $30          $40          $40

Weight:
  Tons                                                           X                         X
  Population                                                                 X                          X
Notes: Offset prices and marginal benefits of abatement (MBabatement) are in $ per ton of emissions. Row 1 in each
panel shows the ratio of marginal benefits of abating one ton of emissions to mean offset prices per ton of emissions. Row
2 shows the p-value for testing the null hypothesis that the ratio in Row 1 equals one. Rows 3 and 4 show the mean
marginal benefits of abatement and mean offset prices, respectively. Data represent years 2010-2019. Offset prices are
the mean price of pollution offsets per ton for the indicated census region, pollutant, and time period, weighted by
transaction amount in tons or by population in offset markets, and annualized using the price ratio between permanent
and temporary offset prices. Data on marginal benefits are available for years 2008, 2011, 2014, 2017, and linearly
interpolated between years. All currency are in 2017$, deflated using the GDP deflator. Abatement marginal benefits for
each region are weighted across counties within a market according to county population in 2010 Census, and weighted
across markets by transaction amount in tons or by population in offset markets.




                                                                31
       Table 3--Ratio of Marginal Benefits of Abatement to Offset Prices, by Market
                                                                           NOx       VOCs
                                                                            (1)        (2)

Arizona (Phoenix-Mesa)                                                       --      12.68
California (Imperial County)                                                1.90      7.71
California (Los Angeles-South Coast)                                        8.67      7.78
California (San Francisco Bay Area)                                         7.25      3.42
California (San Joaquin Valley)                                             3.99      5.18
Connecticut (Greater Connecticut)                                          44.61       --
Connecticut (NY-NJ-Long Island)                                            36.53       --
District of Columbia (DC-MD-VA)                                           105.28     81.08
Illinois (Chicago-Naperville, IL-IN-WI)                                   104.94     54.13
Indiana (Chicago-Naperville, IL-IN-WI)                                     63.09     25.61
Maryland (Baltimore)                                                       69.35     35.04
Maryland (Washington, DC-MD-VA)                                            58.75     38.10
Missouri (St. Louis-St. Charles-Farmington, MO-IL)                           --      83.96
New Jersey (NY-NJ-CT-Long Island)                                          58.43     45.30
New Jersey (Philadelphia-Wilmington-Atlantic City PA-NJ-MD-DE)            103.11     39.49
New York (NY-NJ-CT-Long Island)                                            85.41     70.67
Ohio (Cleveland-Akron-Lorain)                                              95.93     50.47
Pennsylvania (Philadelphia-Wilmington-Atlantic City PA-NJ-MD-DE)           92.30     67.78
Pennsylvania (Pittsburgh-Beaver Valley)                                   304.26     36.71
Texas (Houston-Galveston-Brazoria)                                          1.88      0.60
Virginia (Washington DC-MD-VA)                                             59.71     39.64
Wyoming (Upper Green River Basin)                                          42.94      1.40



Notes: The first column lists the state and, in parentheses, the specific market. The
numbers represent the ratio marginal benefits of abatement to mean offset prices in each
state and market, averaged over years 2010-2019. Offset prices are the mean price of
pollution offsets per ton for the indicated nonattainment area, pollutant, and time period,
weighted by transaction amount in tons, and annualized using the price ratio between
permanent and temporary offset prices. Marginal benefits of abatement are the marginal
external cost avoided per ton abated for the indicated nonattainment area and pollutant.
Data on marginal benefits are for years 2008, 2011, 2014, 2017, and linearly interpolated
between years. All currency are in 2017$, deflated using the GDP deflator. Abatement
marginal benefits for individual markets are weighted across counties within a market
according to county population in 2010 Census.




                                                    32
                         Table 4--Trends in Offset Prices and Marginal Benefits of Abatement
Dependent Variable                                                                             Offset prices - marginal
                                   Offset prices             Marginal benefits of abatement     benefits of abatement
                          (1)           (2)          (3)        (4)       (5)         (6)      (7)        (8)       (9)
Panel A. All pollutants
Year                    0.06***        0.08        0.06***    0.02***    0.02*     0.02***    0.04**     0.07     0.04**
                        (0.02)        (0.06)       (0.02)     (0.00)     (0.01)    (0.01)     (0.02)    (0.06)    (0.02)
N = 238

Panel B. Nitrogen oxides (NO x )
Year                   0.06***       0.09***       0.06***    0.03***   0.04***    0.03***     0.03      0.04     0.03*
                        (0.02)       (0.02)        (0.02)     (0.00)    (0.01)     (0.00)     (0.02)    (0.03)    (0.02)
N = 114

Panel C. Volatile organic compounds (VOCs)
Year                      0.05*    0.08     0.05              0.01***    0.00*     0.01***     0.04      0.08      0.05
                         (0.03)   (0.09)   (0.03)             (0.00)     (0.00)    (0.00)     (0.02)    (0.09)    (0.03)
N = 124

Weight                               Tons Population                    Tons Population                    Tons Population
Note: Each unit of observation is a market × pollutant × year. All estimates are restricted to use only the sample of
observations where both offset prices and the marginal benefits of abatement are observed. Dependent variables in
logs. Marginal benefits of abatement are only observed in years 1990, 1996, 1999, 2002, 2005, 2008, 2011, 2014, and
2017. For observations at the nonattainment area×pollutant×year level, offset prices are either mean weighted by tons
traded or by county population, as indicated by the last row. All estimates include market × pollutant fixed effects.
Standard errors are clustered within each market × pollutant. Asterisks denote p-value * < 0.10, ** < 0.05, *** < 0.01.




                                                                         33
      Table 5--Engineering Estimates of Marginal Abatement Costs Versus Offset Prices
                                                            NOX                        VOCs
                                                 (1)               (2)           (3)           (4)
Panel A. Full sample (16 states plus Washington, DC)
 1. Engineering est. / offset price             0.31               0.30         4.59          6.76
 2. p-val: engineering est. / offset price = 1 [0.00]             [0.00]       [0.00]        [0.00]
 3. Mean engineering estimate                   $798               $804        $9,401        $9,712
 4. Mean offset prices                         $2,586             $2,686       $2,050        $1,437

Panel B. Northeast
  1. Engineering est. / offset price                1.51           1.38         21.50        17.64
  2. p-val: engineering est. / offset price = 1    [0.00]         [0.00]        [0.00]       [0.00]
  3. Mean engineering estimate                      $773           $830        $12,110      $10,407
  4. Mean offset prices                             $513           $603          $563         $590

Panel C. South
  1. Engineering est. / offset price               0.18            0.28          1.94         3.02
  2. p-val: engineering est. / offset price = 1   [0.00]          [0.00]        [0.05]       [0.04]
  3. Mean engineering estimate                     $613            $659        $10,541       $8,449
  4. Mean offset prices                           $3,491          $2,395        $5,427       $2,795

Panel D. West
  1. Engineering est. / offset price               0.33            0.18          6.79         7.35
  2. p-val: engineering est. / offset price = 1   [0.00]          [0.00]        [0.00]       [0.00]
  3. Mean engineering estimate                    $1,117           $935        $11,470      $12,701
  4. Mean offset prices                           $3,351          $5,303        $1,690       $1,728

Panel E. Midwest
  1. Engineering est. / offset price                1.25           1.26         6.78          6.68
  2. p-val: engineering est. / offset price = 1    [0.00]         [0.00]       [0.00]        [0.00]
  3. Mean engineering estimate                      $580           $583        $2,672        $2,682
  4. Mean offset prices                             $465           $463         $394          $402

Weight:
  Tons                                               X                            X
  Population                                                        X                           X
Notes: Row 1 in each panel shows the ratio of mean engineering estimate of abatement costs to the offset
price in the specified census region. Row 2 in each panel shows the p-value for the test of the null
hypothesis that this ratio equals one. Rows 3 and 4 show the engineering estimate of abatement cost and
mean offset prices. Offset price data cover the years 2010-2019. Engineering estimates come from the
EPA's Control Strategy Tool (CoST), which we apply using EPA's National Emissions Inventory for point
sources for years 2011, 2014, and 2017. All currency are in 2017$, deflated using the GDP deflator.




                                                      34
                        Figure 1--Maps of Areas with Offset Markets
                         (A) Market areas for ozone (NOx and VOC)




                            (B) Market areas for other pollutants




Notes: Shaded blue areas are in nonattainment in any years 1993-2019, and in states with
offset markets. "Other pollutants" includes CO, PM, and SOx. States with markets are
identified by using a list from Emission Advisors (https://www.emissionadvisors.com/emissions-
markets/; Accessed 4/16/2020) and verifying internet market listings.


                                                  35
          Figure 2--Pollution Offset Prices Versus Marginal Benefits of Abatement, by Year

                          (A) Full sample (16 states plus Washington, DC)




                                           (B) Northeast




                                             (C) South




(Continued next page)




                                                    36
    Figure 2--Pollution Offset Prices Versus Marginal Benefits of Abatement, by Year (Continued)
                                              (D) West




                                             (E) Midwest




Notes: These graphs show pollution offset prices and the marginal benefits of pollution abatement by
year, with separate graphs for each pollutant and census region. Blue solid line shows mean offset
price in each market × pollutant × year; red dashed line shows marginal benefits of abatement. Offset
prices are the mean price of pollution offsets per ton for the indicated nonattainment area, pollutant,
and time period, weighted by transaction amount in short tons, and annualized using the obsered price
ratio between permanent and temporary offsets. Marginal benefits of abatement are the marginal
external cost avoided per short ton abated for the indicated nonattainment area and pollutant for years
2008, 2011, 2014, and 2017, and linearly interpolated between years. Marginal benefits of abatement
are weighted across counties within an offset market according to county population in 2010 Census.
All currency are in 2017$, deflated by Federal Reserve's US GDP deflator.




                                                      37
                        Figure 3--Offset Prices and Marginal Benefits of Abatement, Large Individual Markets




Notes: This figure compares offset prices and the marginal benefits of pollution abatement in individual market × pollutants, for a set
of large markets with data. Data represents years 2010-2019. The vertical axis lists the state that the data represent, then in
parentheses, the market's name. Offset prices are the mean price of pollution offsets per ton for the indicated census region,
pollutant, and time period, weighted by transaction amount in tons or by population in offset markets, and annualized using the price
ratio between permanent and temporary offset prices. Marginal benefits of abatement are the marginal external cost avoided per ton
abated for the indicated market and pollutant. Data on marginal benefits are available for years 2008, 2011, 2014, 2017, and linearly
interpolated between years. All currency are in 2017$, deflated using the GDP deflator. Abatement marginal benefits for each market
are weighted across counties within a market according to county population in 2010 Census. The Philadelphia-Wilmington-Atlantic
City area includes Delaware.




                                                                      38
 Figure 4--Ratio Marginal Benefits of Pollution Abatement to Mean Offset Prices: Sensitivity Analysis

Panel A. Alternative offset price specifications




Panel B. Alternative estimates of the marginal benefits of abatement




Notes. These figures present alternative ways of calculating the ratio marginal benefits of abatement to mean offset prices. 
Panel A presents alternate ways of calculating offset prices, while using the baseline estimates of marginal benefits of 
abatement. Panel B presents alternative ways of calulating marginal benefits of abatement, while using the baseline 
calculation of offset prices. Data represent years 20102019, except where otherwise noted. Ratio is calculated as mean 
offset prices divided by mean marginal benefits of abatement, except where otherwise noted. Offset prices are the mean 
price of pollution offsets per short ton for the indicated nonattainment area, pollutant, and time period, weighted by 
transaction amount in short tons, and annualized using the observed price ratio between permanent and temporary 
offsets, unless otherwise noted. Marginal benefits of abatement are the marginal external cost avoided per short ton 
abated for the indicated nonattainment area and pollutant. All currency are in 2017$, deflated using the GDP deflator. 
Marginal benefits of pollution abatement are weighted across counties within an offset market according to county 
population in 2010 Census. Horizontal axis uses logarithmic scale to make dispersion in values near one more easily visible. 




                                                              39
Figure 5--Offset Prices, Engineering Estimates of Marginal Abatement Costs, and Marginal
                         Abatement Benefits in Four Large Markets

                        (A) Los Angeles-South Coast, California




                        (B) Houston-Galveston-Brazoria, Texas




                           (C) San Joaquin Valley, California




(Continued next page)




                                                40
Figure 5--Offset Prices, Engineering Estimates of Marginal Abatement Costs, and Marginal
                         Abatement Benefits in Four Large Markets
                          (D) San Francisco Bay Area, California




Notes: Each graph shows three curves, all describing the period 2010-2019. The solid line in
each graph shows the ordered value of offset prices for the indicated market and pollutant.
The short-dotted line in each graph shows engineering estimates of the marginal abatement
cost curve, as estimated from EPA's Control Strategy Tool (CoST). The long-dashed line in
each graph shows the marginal benefit of abatement curve. The marginal benefit of
abatement curve is flat enough for these quantities of abatement that this curve appears
linear and horizontal in these graphs. All currency are in 2017$, deflated by Federal
Reserve's US GDP deflator. To pool estimated engineering costs, the amounts from control
measures are aggregated up to the amount of offset traded in each individual nonattainment
area. The engineering cost estimate line stops horizontally at the maximum quantity of
abatement that the CoST model is able to identify for the indicated pollutant and market.




                                                  41
             Online Appendix:
Is Air Pollution Regulation Too Stringent?
     Joseph S. Shapiro              Reed Walker
        UC Berkeley                 UC Berkeley
         and NBER                    and NBER
joseph.shapiro@berkeley.edu     rwalker@berkeley.edu




                          A-1
Contents
A Methodology for Counting References                                                                                             3

B Additional Institutional Details                                                                                                3

C Additional Data Details                                                                                                         4
  C.1 Offset Markets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   4
  C.2 Marginal Benefits of Abatement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   5
      C.2.1 Mortality Concentration-Response Function . . . . . . . .           . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   5
      C.2.2 Addressing One Discrepancy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   7
      C.2.3 Value of Statistical Life . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   8
      C.2.4 Other Inputs to Estimate Marginal Benefits of Abatement             . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   8
      C.2.5 Alternative Models for the Marginal Benefits of Abatement             .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   8
  C.3 Engineering Estimates of Marginal Abatement Costs . . . . . . .           . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   9

D Additional Policy Discussion                                                                                                    9




                                                  A-2
A      Methodology for Counting References
To count the number of economics journal articles that investigate the cost and benefits of air pollution,
we use the advanced search function on Google Scholar. We find articles that contains the exact
phrase "air pollution," limit to articles published in American Economic Review (excluding Papers
and Proceedings issues), Econometrica, Journal of Political Economy, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
Review of Economic Studies, and limit to articles published in years 2000-2020. We then tag whether
each article investigates the marginal cost of air pollution, the marginal benefit of air pollution, or both.
An article is counted as estimating marginal costs if the article provides estimates of the economic
cost to reduce a given unit of emission or ambient air pollution. Articles that estimate total economic
costs of regulation (e.g., Greenstone 2002; Walker 2013) are not counted as estimating marginal costs.
Similarly, an article is counted as estimating marginal benefits if the article estimates the benefits of
reducing a given unit of emissions or ambient air pollution. Articles that estimate total effects of a
regulation or large change (e.g., Currie et al. 2015) are not counted as estimating marginal benefits. We
perform a similar exercise on the set of articles presented in the NBER Summer Institute session on
environmental and energy economics for years 2000-2020 (see https://www.nber.org/summer-institute/;
accessed 08/07/2020)


B     Additional Institutional Details
The 1970 Clean Air Act (CAA) Amendments prohibit net increases in pollution emissions from station-
ary sources in nonattainment areas. The CAA initially forbid increases in pollution emissions from any
large sources in these areas, which essentially prevented large polluting plants from opening in cities.
Critics argued that this requirement was inhibiting economic development. In response, a 1976 EPA pol-
icy and the 1977 CAA Amendments began allowing large polluting firms to enter nonattainment areas
only if their increase in pollution emissions was offset by decreases in emissions of the same pollutants
from incumbent sources in the same areas.
    Offset trading before 1990 was limited due in part to fairly strict rules (Foster and Hahn 1995).
In the 1980s, regulators rejected some proposals to generate offsets due to inadequate documentation,
inadequate abatement, or other reasons (General Accounting Office 1982). Also in the 1980s, regulators
changed rules governing offsets in ways affecting their value. After 1990, these practices became less
common.
    The 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments liberalized these markets, and rules encouraged states and air
districts to create "offset banks," so that a firm which generates an offset could sell it in subsequent
years to other firms. The 1990 rules also encouraged states to organize formal certification programs
which would make offsets simpler to use, and allowed shutdowns to generate a complete set of offsets
(DuPuis 2000). Spurred by this increased flexibility, offset markets grew after 1990.
    Offset markets differ from cap-and-trade markets in several ways (Fort and Faur 1997; Ellerman
et al. 2003). Cap-and-trade markets regulate actual emissions; offset markets instead regulate emissions
limits as written into a source's air quality permit. Cap-and-trade markets require regulated sources to
submit allowances to regulators at the end of each year covering the year's emissions; offsets are instead
a one-time purchase, and the right to emit is guaranteed in perpetuity. Creating an offset to sell typically
requires installation of abatement technology and certification of reductions by a regulator. Cap-and-
trade markets allow some types of abatement that many offset markets do not, including temporary



                                                    A-3
process changes, management or productivity improvements, input substitution, and others. Most
cap-and-trade policies have a centralized market, whereas offset markets are decentralized and involve
bilateral exchanges, sometimes via broker. Cap-and-trade markets typically replace other pollution
standards (i.e., command and control requirements), while offset markets still require all sources to
comply with prevailing command-and-control regulations. Offset policies are fragmented, with hundreds
of separate markets, whereas the U.S. has only a few cap-and-trade markets, which are typically large
and each cover many sources and states.
    Ozone nonattainment requires two separate markets (one for NOx , one for VOCs, though some
markets allow trading between these two pollutants under stringent restrictions). We consider PM10
and PM2.5 to be a single market for particulate matter.


C     Additional Data Details
C.1     Offset Markets
We use two types of offset transaction data--market-average data for 14 states plus Washington, DC,
obtained from the firm Emission Advisors; and transaction-level data from California and Texas, ob-
tained from state regulators. In all these data, the main analysis sample excludes temporary offsets and
transactions between subsidiaries of the same firm or that in other respects are not at arm's length.
     The market-average data describe transactions in which Emission Advisors staff directly participated,
transactions where Emission Advisors staff learned of prices due to interactions with market participants,
and in a limited number of cases, prices where Emission Advisors staff knew sellers were ready to transact
at a given price in a market × year but no trades occurred in that market × year. In part to maintain
some confidentiality of individual transactions, many of these data are rounded to the nearest hundred
or five hundred.
     In the market-level data, in some cases the data separate a single offset market into multiple ob-
servations when the market spans more than one state. For example, the data contain three separate
data points per year for the New York-New New Jersey-Connecticut offset market, one for each of the
three states, even though the three states together represent a single integrated market. Similarly, the
data separate New York from Pennsylvania offset transactions in the Ozone Transport Region offset
market. Two of the states covered in these data, Delaware and Wisconsin, do not have directly reported
transactions, but these states are part of a multi-state offset market for which we have transaction prices
in other parts of the market For Wisconsin, we have transaction prices from Illinois for the Chicago-
Naperville, IL-IN-WI market; for Delaware, we have data transaction prices from Pennsylvania for the
Philadelphia-Wilmington-Atlantic City PA-NJ-MD-DE market.
     Most particulate matter offset markets regulate particulate matter smaller than 10 micrometers
(PM10 ), but most health damages and damage estimates involve the smallest component of that pol-
lution, PM2.5 . To accurately compare offset prices to the marginal benefits of abatement, we therefore
convert PM10 offset prices to what the corresponding PM2.5 offset prices would be, using the best avail-
able estimates as to compliance cost differences between PM10 and PM2.5 .
     Our results for particulates increase PM10 offset prices by a third in order to compare them with PM2.5
marginal benefits of abatement. We focus on this one-third comparison because common abatement
technologies and fuel switching achieve broadly similar percentage reductions of PM10 and PM2.5 (ECR
Incorporated 1998; van Harmelen et al. 2001). Hence, determining the abatement cost for PM10 versus



                                                    A-4
PM2.5 can be simplified to obtaining data on baseline PM2.5 emissions as a share of baseline PM10
emissions.
    Evidence indicates that industrial PM2.5 emissions are around a third less than industrial PM10
emissions. The EPA's National Emissions Inventory indicates that the ratio of PM2.5 to PM10 emissions
for industrial sources is 0.69. Across California offset markets, this ratio is 0.50 (South Coast), 0.68
(San Joaquin Valley), and 0.82 (Bay Area). Across some of the dirtiest industries, this ratio varies
from 0.42 (nonmetallic mineral manufacturing, including cement) to 0.90 (utilities including electricity
generation). In Europe and China, the ratio of PM2.5 to PM10 is about 0.61 (Klimont et al. 2002;
Zhou et al. 2016, p. 10).1 Research in environmental engineering calculates that the global ratio of
anthropogenic PM2.5 to PM10 emissions is 0.72 (Huang et al. 2014, p. 13836).

C.2     Marginal Benefits of Abatement
We calculate county-level marginal benefits of pollution abatement from the AP3 model (Holland et al.
2020). Most applications of AP3 calculate the social cost of a one-ton increase in pollution emissions.
Because the marginal effects of pollution in the AP3 model turn out to be fairly linear for small changes
in emissions, the effects of a one-ton increase or decrease in emissions in AP3 are practically identical.
    AP3 begins with emissions of all criteria pollutants from all sources, measured from the National
Emissions Inventory. AP3 then inputs these emission rates into the Climatological Regional Dispersion
Model (CRDM), an air pollution transport model, to calculate ambient concentrations of each pollutant
in each county. AP3 then applies concentration-response functions for each outcome it considers. AP3
calculates mortality in each of 19 different age groups used in the US census (0 years old, 1-4 years old,
5-9 years old, ..., 80-84 years old, 85+ years old). AP3 uses separate adult and infant concentration-
response functions. AP3 then monetizes the change in mortality using an estimate of the value of a
statistical life (VSL).
    To calculate the marginal benefits of abatement using AP3, we start from the raw data files and
programs that constitute AP3, which Nick Muller generously shared. To calculate the marginal benefits
of abating a pollutant in a given county, we decrease emissions of that pollutant by one ton in that
county and calculate the change in monetized damages.

C.2.1    Mortality Concentration-Response Function
The PM2.5 concentration-adult mortality relationship accounts for a large majority of air pollution
damages. Because we report several alternative versions of this relationship and fix a discrepancy in
how AP measures it, we discuss it in detail.
     Epidemiological studies typically report the relative risk of a health incident (e.g., death) for a given
change in pollution exposure. This is commonly implemented as a Cox proportional hazard regression,
i.e., a log-linear model of the relative risk. This assumes the relationship between the mortality rate
for the treated population r, the mortality rate in the baseline, r0 , depends on the change in exposure
  1
    Some regulators analyze PM10 and PM2.5 abatement interchangeably. In an interview, a California regulator said
that they use PM10 offset markets to comply with PM2.5 nonattainment since engineering estimates of PM10 abatement
are more widely available. Some EU analyses assume that PM10 and PM2.5 abatement are interchangeable (Smeets et al.
2007, p. 3-4). A report for UK regulators assumes that PM2.5 has an identical marginal abatement cost curve to PM10 ,
except that PM2.5 levels are half of PM10 levels (AEA 2001).




                                                        A-5
E = E1 - E0 , and the concentration-response parameter,  :
                                           r1
                                              = exp( × E )                                             (1)
                                           r0
The change in the number of deaths relates to changes in the mortality rate by

                                   r1 - r0 = r0 × exp( × E ) - 1                                       (2)

The change in incident rate relates to changes in mortality or morbidity cases by

                                   Deaths = Population × (r1 - r0 )                                    (3)

Substituting (2) into (3) gives the following response function:

                           Deaths = Population × r0 × exp( × E ) - 1                                   (4)

    Each epidemiological study reports the relative risk r      1
                                                               r0
                                                                  and the change in concentration E ; we
substitute these into equation (1) to recover the coefficient  . Given  , we can then use equation (4)
and data on the baseline incidence rate r0 and population to compute the additional deaths due to a
change in pollution.
    We report results from six different published estimates of the PM2.5 concentration-adult mortality
                                                            r1
response function. AP3's baseline uses the estimate of r     0
                                                               = 1.06 per E = 10µg/m3 of PM2.5 exposure,
from Krewski et al. (2009, p. 126, Commentary Table 4). For sensitivity analyses, we report estimates
based on the 5th percentile of Krewski et al. (parameter estimate 1.04) and the 95th percentile (1.08).
                                                                           r1
A separate sensitivity analysis uses an epidemiological estimate of r       0
                                                                              = 1.14 per E = 10µg/m3 ,
from Lepeule et al. (2012, p. 968, Table 2). We also report a sensitivity analysis using the spatial
regression discontinuity instrumental variable regression of mortality on PM10 from Ebenstein et al.
                                                         r1
(2017, p. 10388, Table 3), which estimates a ratio of r   0
                                                             = 1.08 per E = 10µg/m3 of PM10 exposure in
China. To translate PM10 to PM2.5 , we use estimates from Zhou et al. (2016), which suggests a ratio of
0.61 unit of PM2.5 per unit of PM10 in China. The final sensitivity analysis uses a mortality estimate
for the population aged over 65, from an instrumental variable regression of mortality on PM2.5 from
Sanders et al. (2020, p. 164, Table 3), who estimate a change of 0.006 in over-65 log mortality per
E = 1µg/m3 of PM2.5 exposure. The Sanders et al. study uses nonattainment as an instrumental
variable for pollution.
                                                                               r1
    To calculate infant mortality, we use an infant mortality hazard ratio of r 0
                                                                                  = 1.07 per E = 10µg/m3
of PM2.5 from Woodruff et al. (2006, p. 788), Table 3. In the 5th and 95th percentile sensitivity analyses,
we pair the 5th and 95th percentile adult mortality concentration response (described above) with the
5th percentile (0.93) and 95th percentile (1.24) infant mortality concentration response. We report
fewer sensitivity analyses for infant mortality since it is estimated to be a much smaller share than adult
mortality of total damages.
    None of these elasticity estimates is perfect. The epidemiological estimates have high-quality pol-
lution measurement and control for other determinants of cardiorespiratory health, but represent es-
sentially an observational comparison with potential for omitted variable bias. One quasi-experimental
estimate uses a more credible research design to deal with spatially correlated unobservables, but is set



                                                   A-6
in China, where the pollution-mortality elasticity might differ substantially from the U.S., and is mea-
sured in terms of PM10 , so requires translation to PM2.5 . Another quasi-experimental estimate focuses
on the U.S., but is limited to the population aged over 65.
    The main AP3 model computes only monetized damage from PM2.5 mortality. In an additional
sensitivity analysis, we compute damages from other channels not included in AP3 but that are included
in the precursor of AP3, APEEP (Muller and Mendelsohn 2009). The additional sources of pollution
damages include crop yields, timber yields, forest-system ecology, chronic bronchitis, acute mortality
from ozone, respiratory illness hospital admissions from ozone, asthma emergency visits from ozone,
chronic asthma morbidity from ozone, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease hospital admissions from
NOx and ischemic heart diseases hospital admissions from NOx . Although this sensitivity analysis
incorporates many additional channels of damages, it only slightly increases AP3's estimate of the
marginal benefits of abatement.

C.2.2   Addressing One Discrepancy
The original AP3 programs compute damages as follows. First, it computes the baseline number of
deaths D0 using the concentration response function  , baseline population, and baseline mortality rate
r0 at ambient level E0 :

                                                                 1
                               D0 = Population × r0 × 1 -                                            (5)
                                                             exp(E0 )
AP3 monetizes D0 by summing over all counties and multiplying by willingness to pay (WTP) to get
baseline damage D0 × W T P .
   The original programs then compute the new number of deaths with the ambient level E1 obtained
from the air transport model after increasing emissions by one ton in a specified county:

                                                                 1
                               D1 = Population × r0 × 1 -                                            (6)
                                                             exp(E1 )
The new damage is D1 × W T P .
   Equations (5) and (6) imply that in the original version of AP3, the change in deaths is calculated
as

                  Deaths = D1 - D0
                                                    1          1
                            = Population × r0 ×          -
                                                exp(E0 ) exp(E1 )
                                                     exp(E1 )          1
                            = Population × r0 ×                  -
                                                exp(E0 ) exp(E1 ) exp(E1 )
                                                    1
                            = Population × r0 ×          × exp( (E1 - E0 ) -1)                       (7)
                                                exp(E1 )
                                                                         E

Comparing equations (7) and (4) highlights the discrepancy. The original version of AP3 multiplies
damages by the term exp(1
                        E1 )
                             . In our California and Texas sample, this would make it understate
damages by about 7.5 percent. We correct this discrepancy and modify AP3 to apply equation (4)



                                                  A-7
everywhere, rather than equation (7), to calculate pollution damages.

C.2.3    Value of Statistical Life
Our baseline estimates use the USEPA (2010b)'s preferred VSL of $8.8 million (in 2017 dollars). This
estimate primarily reflects hedonic models of the labor market which assess how a worker's wage increases
as the worker's occupational fatality risk increases. An alternative specification is a VSL of $3.7 million,
which reflects a similar study covering all countries in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD 2012). The OECD includes many countries with lower GDP per capita than the
U.S., such as Mexico and Turkey, so it is perhaps unsurprising than a VSL estimate for the OECD is
lower than a VSL estimate for the U.S.
     One potential criticism of standard VSL estimates is that they monetize all mortality equally re-
gardless of the age of death. The EPA's VSL estimate is the same for all individuals, but the VSL for a
prime-aged worker may differ from the VSL for a 100-year old person. If air pollution causes premature
mortality primarily for older populations, monetizing mortality equally or differently across ages can
affect benefit estimates. We therefore conduct a sensitivity analysis where we adjust the monetary value
of mortality according to expected life years remaining.
     We implement this in a similar way as described in Appendix H.1 of Carleton et al. (2019), which in
turn is based on Murphy and Topel (2006). First, we take the VSL and divide by the expected life-years
remaining of a median-age U.S. person to obtain the value of life year. Then, for each death in each
age group estimated from the AP3 model, we calculate age-adjusted VSL by multiplying the value of
life-years by the expected life years remaining for a person in that age group.

C.2.4    Other Inputs to Estimate Marginal Benefits of Abatement
AP3's estimates use data on the baseline population and mortality rates in each county. We use popu-
lation data from the U.S. Census and mortality data from National Center for Health Statistics. AP3
distinguishes between marginal benefits of abatement from non-point and point sources, and between
point sources with different stack heights. Stack heights matter because the altitude at which a pollu-
tant is emitted influences the pollutant's ambient level and spatial distribution. Our analysis of offset
markets focuses on point sources in California and Texas. The source-level emission data from National
Emissions Inventory (NEI) shows that less than 0.01% of emissions come from stack heights over 250
meters. We apply AP3 assuming stack heights are lower than 250 meters.

C.2.5    Alternative Models for the Marginal Benefits of Abatement
We also show sensitivity analyses using the three main other integrated assessment models besides AP3
which estimate the marginal damages of emitting a ton of each pollutant in each U.S. county. The mod-
els are the Intervention Model for Air Pollution (InMAP; Tessum et al. 2017), Estimating Air Pollution
Social Impact Using Regression (EASIUR; Heo et al. 2016); and the Air Pollution Emission Experiments
and Policy Analysis Model, 2 (AP2; Muller 2014), which is the precursor of AP3. Atmospheric chemists
have developed extraordinarily detailed and computationally-intensive chemical transport models that
assess how one specific change in emissions, such as closing a specific power plant, affects air quality
everywhere. The models we use (AP3, AP2, InMAP, EASIUR) simplify the richer chemical transport
models models to instead assess how emissions from any source in a county affect air quality and dam-
ages everywhere. The journal articles cited above which described the simplified integrated assessment


                                                    A-8
models, in addition to Gilmore et al. (2019), compare the integrated assessment models against the more
detailed chemical transport models, and find strong though imperfect correspondence.

C.3     Engineering Estimates of Marginal Abatement Costs
The U.S. EPA uses a software system called Control Strategy Tool (CoST) to estimate engineering costs
of counterfactual emission scenarios. The EPA uses this software to perform benefit-cost analyses of
ambient pollutant standards (e.g., USEPA 2012, 2015).
    CoST was created in 2006 but replaced earlier programs, AirControlNet and the Alternative Control
Techniques Documents, which go back to at least the early 1990s.
    CoST has two main data inputs--a baseline emission inventory for emission sources (e.g. USEPA
2019), and a database of pollution abatement measures, collected by the EPA through various federal,
regional and local environmental agencies (USEPA 2010a). The software matches pollution sources
with applicable abatement technologies and finds the lowest cost-per-abatement result. The software
calculates the effectiveness of abatement technology based on source attributes such as flow rate and
combustion efficiency. The software also distinguishes capital, operating, and maintenance cost of abate-
ment investments.
    We obtain the engineering estimates from CoST for each nonattainment area × pollutant where we
have offset permit data, for the years 2011, 2014 and 2017. We use EPA's national emissions inventory
for years 2011, 2014, 2017, and restrict the emission sources that are eligible for offset permits that we
analyze. These typically includes electricity generation units, oil and gas facilities, and other industrial
and nonindustrial point sources.
    The CoST model requires users to pre-specify several choices about the characteristics of eligible
abatement technologies. We make these choices to resemble those used in existing regulatory impact
analyses that apply the CoST model (USEPA 2012, 2015), but adapted to reflect the setting of offset
markets. We limit CoST to sources that exceed 5 tons of emissions, which is a typical range for firms
trading offsets and is also the range at which the more stringent regulatory requirements under the Clean
Air Act become binding. We require additional abatement technologies in CoST to reduce emissions
by at least 0.1 tons (the minimum size CoST allows), since some offset transactions represent small
quantities. We require additional abatement technologies to exceed existing abatement technologies by
at least 10 percent, which is the standard setting in the CoST model; while we do not have detailed
data on the relevant quantities of this measure for most offset transactions, we believe it accurately
characterizes a reasonable share of offset transactions. To ensure that the control devices we analyze are
comparable to the devices mandated by up-to-date air pollution regulation, we also restrict the menu
of control devices selected by CoST to those used by EPA in their most recent benefit-cost analyses
of ambient pollutant standards (USEPA 2012, 2015). Finally, we analyze CoST assuming a 10 percent
discount rate, which corresponds with the discount rate used in the rest of the paper. In CoST, which
outputs annualized costs, the discount rate affects the share of expenditures due to operating versus
capital costs, but does not change the total annual cost.


D      Additional Policy Discussion
The main text describes policy reforms that would decrease pollution emissions for incumbents and
thereby bring marginal abatement costs and benefits closer. Here we discuss other reforms to offset



                                                    A-9
markets that may provide welfare gains by increasing the flexibility of offset markets.
    Regulations currently require offsets to come from other stationary sources within the same air
region, but there may be cheaper abatement opportunities available in other sectors. Some air quality
management districts are exploring the possibility of allowing offsets to come from mobile rather than
stationary sources (e.g., city buses converting from diesel to natural gas), marine sources (e.g., boats
arriving to a port being required to use ultra low-sulfur diesel), or agriculture. These reforms might
increase the pool of low-cost offsets, lowering the equilibrium price. To the extent that marginal benefits
of abatement vary across regions, trades between regions could also impose a trading ratio that is
proportional to marginal damages (Tietenberg 1980). While lower offset prices would likely be welcome
by producers, it also has implications for the optimal level of regulation and ambient pollution more
generally; namely, the efficient level of pollution emissions should fall further to the point where the
marginal benefits of emissions reductions are equal to the marginal cost of abatement.
    Another type of reform would increase the flexibility of offset requirements. Most market-based
instruments like taxes and cap-and-trade markets replace prevailing prescriptive standards. In offset
markets, by contrast, sources must continue following command-and-control standards while also com-
plying with offset requirements. Allowing sources to use offsets for achieving some of their regulatory
requirements, even if in excess of emissions that prescriptive standards would allow, could improve liq-
uidity and decrease prices in these markets. For example, a new source could emit more than prevailing
requirements would allow if it purchases additional offsets for the extra emissions (Abbott and Brady
1990; Swift 2001).
    A few air quality districts are experimenting with trades across pollutants, primarily between NOx
and VOCs. Trades between these two pollutants are complex, because they depend on the contribution
of each pollutant to ground-level ozone. But streamlining procedures to analyze and allow trades between
pollutants would also increase market liquidity.
    An additional possible reform would allow trading between nonattainment areas. Because the
marginal benefits of pollution abatement differ across markets, these inter-market trades would need
to respect trading ratios, in which one ton of a pollutant from a given market is treated as equal to
more than one ton of the pollutant from another market (Montgomery 1972). This may also generate
potential equity concerns.


References
Abbott, A. F. and G. L. Brady (1990). Innovation-induced rent-seeking: The case of air quality man-
 agement. Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics 146 (2), 328­344.

AEA (2001). The costs of reducing pm10 and no2 emissions and concentratoins in the uk: Part 1:
 Pm10. Technical report, AEA Technology.

Carleton, T., M. Delgado, M. Greenstone, T. House, S. Hsiang, A. Hultgren, A. Jina, R. Kopp, K. Mc-
  Cusker, I. Nath, J. Rising, A. Rode, H. K. Seo, J. Simcock, A. Viaene, J. Yuan, and A. Zhang (2019).
  Valuing the global mortality consequences of climate change accounting for adaptation costs and
  benefits. Mimeograph, University Of Chicago.

Currie, J., L. Davis, M. Greenstone, and R. Walker (2015). Environmental health risks and housing




                                                   A-10
  values: Evidence from 1,600 toxic plant openings and closings. American Economic Review 105(2),
  678­709.

DuPuis, E. M. (2000). Who owns the air? clean air act implementation as a negotiation of common
 property rights.

Ebenstein, A., M. Fan, M. Greenstone, G. He, and M. Zhou (2017). New evidence on the impact of
  sustained exposure to air pollution on life expectancy from china's huai river policy. Proceedings of
  the National Academy of Sciences 114 (39), 10384­10389.

ECR Incorporated (1998). Stational source control techniques document for fine particulate matter.
 Technical report, ECR Incorporated.

Ellerman, A. D., P. L. Joskow, and D. Harrison, Jr. (2003). Emissions trading in the u.s.: Experience,
  lessons, and considerations for greenhouse gases. Technical report, Pew Center on Global Climate
  Change.

Fort, J. C. and C. A. Faur (1997). Can emissions trading work beyond a national program: Some practical
  observations on the available tools. Pennsylvania Journal of International Economic Law 18 (2), 463­
  476.

Foster, V. and R. W. Hahn (1995). Designing more efficient markets: Lessons from los angeles smog
  control. Journal of Law and Economics 38 (1), 19­48.

General Accounting Office (1982). A market approach to air pollution control could reduce compliance
 costs without jeopardizing clean air goals. Technical report, GAO.

Gilmore, E. A., J. Heo, N. Z. Muller, C. W. Tessum, J. D. Hill, J. D. Marshall, and P. J. Adams (2019).
  An inter-comparison of the social costs of air quality from reduced-complexity models. Environmental
  Research Letters 14 (7), 1­13.

Greenstone, M. (2002). The impacts of environmental regulations on industrial activity: Evidence from
  the 1970 and 1977 clean air act amendments and the census of manufactures. Journal of Political
  Economy 110(6), 1175­1219.

Heo, J., P. J. Adams, and H. O. Gao (2016). Reduced-form modeling of public health impacts of
  inorganic pm2.5 and precursor emissions. Atmospheric Environment (134), 80­89.

Holland, S. P., E. Mansur, N. Muller, and A. Yates (2020). Distributional effects of air pollution from
  electric vehicle adoption. Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists .

Huang, Y., H. Shen, H. Chen, R. Wang, Y. Zhang, S. Su, Y. Chen, N. Lin, S. Zhuo, Q. Zhong, X. Wang,
 J. Liu, B. Li, W. Liu, and S. Tao (2014). Quantification of global primary emissions of pm2.5, pm10,
 and tsp from combustion and industrial process sources. Environmental Science & Technology 48,
 13834­13843.

Klimont, Z., J. Cofala, I. Bertok, M. Amann, C. Heyes, and F. Gyarfas (2002). Modelling particulate
  emissions in europe: A framework to estimate reduction potential and control costs. Technical report,
  IIASA.


                                                 A-11
Krewski, D., R. T. Burnett, M. S. Goldberg, K. Hoover, J. Siemiatycki, M. Jerrett, M. Abrahamowicz,
  W. H. White, G. Bartlett, and L. Brodsky (2009). Reanalysis of the harvard six cities study and
  the american cancer society study of particulate air pollution and mortality. Technical report, Health
  Effects Institute.

Lepeule, J., F. Laden, D. Dockery, and J. Schwartz (2012). Chronic exposure to fine particles and
  mortality: An extended follow-up of the harvard six cities study from 1974 to 2009. Environmental
  Health Perspectives .

Montgomery, W. D. (1972). Markets in licenses and efficient pollution control programs. Journal of
 Economic Theory 5, 395­418.

Muller, N. Z. (2014). Boosting gdp growth by accounting for the environment. Science 345 (6199),
 873­874.

Muller, N. Z. and R. Mendelsohn (2009). Efficient pollution regulation: Getting the prices right. Amer-
 ican Economic Review 99(5), 1714­1739.

Murphy, K. M. and R. H. Topel (2006). The value of health and longevity. Journal of Political Econ-
 omy 114(5), 871­904.

OECD (2012). Mortality risk valuation in environment, health and transport policies. Technical report,
 OECD.

Sanders, N. J., A. I. Barreca, and M. J. Neidell (2020). Estimating causal effects of particulate matter
  regulation on mortality. Epidemiology 31 (2), 160­167.

Smeets, W., W. Blom, A. Hoen, B. Jimmink, R. Koelemeijer, J. Peters, and W. de Vries (2007). Cost-
  effective abatement options for improving air quality in the netherlands. Proceedings of the symposium
  DustConf2007 , 1­11.

Swift, B. (2001). Emission reduction credit trading systems: An overview of recent results and an
  assessment of best practices. Technical report, Environmental Law Institute.

Tessum, C. W., J. D. Hill, and J. D. Marshall (2017). Inmap: A model for air pollution interventions.
  PLoS ONE 12 (4).

Tietenberg, T. H. (1980). Transferable discharge permits and the control of stationary source air pollu-
  tion: A survey and synthesis. Land Economics .

USEPA (2010a). Control strategy tool (cost) control measures database documentation. Technical
 report.

USEPA (2010b). Conversion factors for hydrocarbon emission components. Technical report, USEPA.

USEPA (2012). Regulatory impact analysis for the final revisions to the national ambient air quality
 standards for particulate matter. Technical report, USEPA.

USEPA (2015). Regulatory impact analysis of the final revisions to the national ambient air quality
 standards for ground-level ozone. Technical report.


                                                 A-12
USEPA (2019). 2017 national emissions inventory, august 2019 point release technical support document.
 Technical report.

van Harmelen, A., H. Kok, and A. Visschedijk (2001). Potentials and costs to reduce pm10 and pm2.5
  emissions from industrial sources in the netherlands. Technical report, Netherlands Organisation for
  Applied Scientific Research (TNO).

Walker, R. (2013). The transitional costs of sectoral reallocation: Evidence from the clean air act and
 the workforce. Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(4), 1787­1835.

Woodruff, T. J., J. D. Parker, and K. C. Schoendorf (2006). Fine particulate matter (pm2.5) air
 pollution and selected causes of postneonatal infant mortality in california. Environmental Health
 Perspectives 114 (5), 786­790.

Zhou, X., Z. Cao, Y. Ma, L. Wang, R. Wu, and W. Wang (2016). Concentrations, correlations and
  chemical species of pm2.5/pm10 based on published data in china: Potential implications for the
  revised particulate standard. Chemosphere 144, 518­526.




                                                 A-13
Appendix Table 1--Offset Prices Versus Engineering Estimates of Marginal Abatement
                                 Costs, by Market
                                                                     NOx      VOCs
                                                                     (1)        (2)

Arizona (Phoenix-Mesa)                                                --         --
California (Imperial County)                                         0.14        --
California (Los Angeles-South Coast)                                 0.05       4.96
California (San Francisco Bay Area)                                  1.04      12.77
California (San Joaquin Valley)                                      0.07      13.58
Connecticut (Greater Connecticut)                                    5.01        --
Connecticut (NY-NJ-Long Island)                                      1.32        --
District of Columbia (DC-MD-VA)                                      1.26       2.91
Illinois (Chicago-Naperville, IL-IN-WI)                              1.01       2.58
Indiana (Chicago-Naperville, IL-IN-WI)                               1.30       3.29
Maryland (Baltimore)                                                 0.76      19.47
Maryland (Washington, DC-MD-VA)                                      1.26       2.91
Missouri (St. Louis-St. Charles-Farmington, MO-IL)                    --       33.02
New Jersey (NY-NJ-CT-Long Island)                                    0.90      14.62
New Jersey (Philadelphia-Wilmington-Atlantic City PA-NJ-MD-DE)       1.79       9.18
New York (NY-NJ-CT-Long Island)                                      1.37      21.16
Ohio (Cleveland-Akron-Lorain)                                        1.71      12.54
Pennsylvania (Philadelphia-Wilmington-Atlantic City PA-NJ-MD-DE      1.04       8.22
Pennsylvania (Pittsburgh-Beaver Valley)                              5.60      47.60
Texas (Houston-Galveston-Brazoria)                                   0.05       0.63
Virginia (Washington DC-MD-VA)                                       1.34       3.09
Wyoming (Upper Green River Basin)                                    0.52        --


Notes: The left-most column lists the state that the data represent then, in
parentheses, the market. The numbers in the table represent the ratio of offset prices
to the engineering estimates of abatement in each market, averaged over the years
2010-2019. Engineering estimates come from the EPA's Control Strategy Tool (CoST),
which we apply using EPA's National Emissions Inventory for point sources for years
2011, 2014, and 2017. Table entries refer to quantity-weighted mean offset prices and
estimated per-short ton abatement costs. All currency are in 2017$, deflated using the
GDP deflator.




                                                 A-14
Appendix Figure 1--Example of a Pollution Offset




                          A-15
      Appendix Figure 2--Marginal Benefits of Pollution Abatement, by Pollutant and County

                                         (A) Nitrogen oxides (NOx)




                    0 - $9,032
                    $9,033 - $11,162
                    $11,163 - $13,896
                    $13,897 - $17,869
                    $17,870 - $124,862


                                 (B) Volatile organic compounds (VOCs)




                  $0 - $1,412
                  $1,413 - $2,319
                  $2,320 - $3,396
                  $3,397 - $5,417
                  $5,418 - $68,872


Note: Data shows the average marginal benefits over the years 2011, 2014 and 2017. Marginal
benefits of abatement are the marginal external cost avoided per ton abated for the indicated
nonattainment area and pollutant, as estimated by the AP3 model. Dollars are deflated to real 2017
values using the GDP deflator.

                                                     A-16
              Appendix Figure 3--Pollution Offset Prices Versus Marginal Benefits of Abatement in
                                     Houston-Galveston-Brazoria, Texas




Notes: This figure graphs pollution offset prices and the marginal benefits of pollution abatement by year for the
markets in Houston-Galveston-Brazoria, Texas. Blue solid line shows mean offset price in each
market×pollutant×year, and red dashed line shows marginal benefits of abatement. Offset prices are the mean
price of pollution offsets per ton for the indicated nonattainment area, pollutant, and time period, weighted by
transaction amount in short tons, and annualized using the obsered price ratio between permanent and temporary
offsets. Marginal benefits of abatement are the marginal external cost avoided per short ton abated for the
indicated nonattainment area and pollutant for years 1990, 1996, 1999, 2002, 2005, 2008, 2011, 2014, and 2017,
and linearly interpolated between years. Marginal benefits of abatement are weighted across counties within an
offset market according to county population in 2010 Census. All currency are in 2017$, deflated by Federal
Reserve's US GDP deflator.




                                                          A-17
         Appendix Figure 4--Offset Prices, by Years in Nonattainment




Note: This figure shows the relationship between offset prices and the time that
an air region has been designated as nonattainment. Each dot represents the
mean for all transactions occuring in areas that have been in nonattainment for
the cumulative number of years indicated on the x-axis. Y-axis shows the real
offset price per short ton. The figure averages across nonattainment areas,
pollutants, and years.




                                                 A-18
