                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DEEP INTEGRATION

                                       Giovanni Maggi
                                         Ralph Ossa

                                     Working Paper 28190
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28190


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2020




We thank Emily Blanchard and Michael Blanga-Gubbay for helpful comments. Maggi gratefully
acknowledges funding from the National Science Foundation grant No. 1949374. Ossa gratefully
acknowledges funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union's
Horizon 2020 research and innovation program (grant agreement No. 819394). The usual
disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Giovanni Maggi and Ralph Ossa. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Political Economy of Deep Integration
Giovanni Maggi and Ralph Ossa
NBER Working Paper No. 28190
December 2020
JEL No. F13

                                          ABSTRACT

Modern trade agreements no longer emphasize basic trade liberalization but instead focus on
international policy coordination in a much broader sense. In this paper we introduce the
emerging literature on the political economy of such deep integration agreements. We organize
our discussion around three main points. First, the political conflict surrounding trade agreements
is moving beyond the classic antagonism of exporter interests who gain from trade and import-
competing interests who lose from trade. Second, there is a more intense popular backlash against
deep integration agreements than there was against shallow integration agreements. And third, the
welfare economics of trade agreements have become more complex, in the sense that the insight
that "free trade is good" is no longer sufficient as a guide to evaluating the efficiency of
international agreements.


Giovanni Maggi
Department of Economics
Yale University
37 Hillhouse Avenue Rm 27
New Haven, CT 06511
and FGV EPGE
and also NBER
giovanni.maggi@yale.edu

Ralph Ossa
University of Zurich
Department of Economics
Schoenberggasse 1
8001 Zuerich
Switzerland
ralph.ossa@econ.uzh.ch
1    Introduction

The nature of trade agreements has changed fundamentally over the past decades, so much

so that the term itself has become somewhat misleading nowadays. Modern trade agreements

no longer emphasize basic trade liberalization but instead focus on international policy co-

ordination in a much broader sense. For example, they routinely deal with a wide range of

regulatory matters, o¤er special protections to foreign investors, strengthen intellectual prop-

erty rights, coordinate national competition policies, and constrain government procurement

activities. In trade economist lingo, trade agreements now pursue deep integration in the

sense of going far beyond the traditional shallow integration agenda of reducing import tari¤s

and constraining related policies.

    In this paper we focus on the politics and economics of deep integration. We purposely

invert the traditional sequence of "economics" and "politics" because we believe some of the

most interesting developments on deep integration, both in the real world and in academic

research, have been in the domain of special-interest and electoral politics. Thus we will ...rst

focus on the political aspects of deep integration agreements, and then on the design of such

agreements from an e¢ ciency standpoint.

    We argue that the political economy of trade policy has changed along three key di-

mensions. First, trade negotiations no longer align special interests in a way that naturally

pushes towards welfare-improving agreements: the old intuition that trade agreements neu-

tralize protectionist forces by pitting exporter interests against import-competing interests no

longer applies. For example, we now see international business alliances opposing international

activist groups on environmental regulation, or rich-country producers opposing poor-country

producers on intellectual property rights.

    Second, there is a more intense popular backlash against deep integration agreements than

there was against shallow integration agreements. Deep agreements seem to face stronger po-

litical opposition because they encroach on sensitive regulatory issues and connect to broader

ideological controversies about the power of `
                                             big business' and the importance of national

sovereignty. This new political activism started with the `
                                                          Battle of Seattle'in 1999, a series of

intense protests against the WTO, which had just expanded its scope into the areas of regula-



                                               2
tion and intellectual property rights, and continued with a powerful backlash in the streets of

Europe against the deep agreements between the European Union and the United States (the

Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, TTIP) and between the European Union

and Canada (the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement, CETA).

       Third, the welfare economics of trade agreements have become more complex. The insight

that "free trade is good" is no longer su¢ cient as a guide to evaluating the e¢ ciency of

international agreements. In a world of shallow agreements that focuses on tari¤ cooperation,

a good rule of thumb is that if an agreement leads to lower tari¤s, it has done a good job.

But in a world where governments strive to cooperate on regulatory policies, for example,

the ultimate objective of an international agreement is more complex, since regulations are

typically imposed for more than just protectionist motives. As a result, economists (should)

have a harder time assessing the merits of modern trade agreements.

       In this paper we o¤er our assessment of the emerging literature on the political economy of

deep integration, focusing particularly on the three developments outlined above.1 Our goal

is to take stock of what we have learned so far and point to fruitful areas for future research.

After decades of trade liberalization, shallow integration has largely run its course, so deep

integration is arguably the future of trade policy. This is an area characterized by complex

questions and intense controversies, which deserve the careful attention of trade economists.

Indeed, we believe that reservations against deep integration are an important driving force of

the broader `
            globalization backlash'seen today. And deep integration issues loom large even

in the ongoing trade war between China and the United States, which was fueled by American

frustrations over Chinese industrial policy and its (lack of) protection for intellectual property

rights.

       There have been other important developments a¤ecting the political economy of trade

policy that we do not cover in this paper. One such development is related to the disruptions

that Chinese import competition caused to local labor markets in the United States (Autor et

al, 2013) and their distributional consequences. We refer the reader to Rodrik'
                                                                              s (forthcoming)

chapter in this Review for an excellent overview of the implications of the China shock for
   1
    This emphasis also di¤erentiates our discussion of deep integration from an earlier review of the literature
on non-tari¤ barriers to trade by Ederington and Ruta (2016).




                                                       3
the political economy of trade policy. Another such development is the changing geopolitical

landscape, with the hegemony of the United States being increasingly challenged by a rising

China. We refer the reader to Mattoo and Staiger (forthcoming) for an inspiring ...rst take on

the relation between this trend and the outlook for international trade agreements.

    The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In section 2 we provide some real-

world background on deep integration, describing how it has progressed in practice and which

controversies it has brought about. In section 3 we turn to our discussion of the `
                                                                                  politics'

of deep integration, focusing ...rst on the changing nature of special-interest politics in this

area, and then on the popular backlash against deep integration. In section 4 we o¤er a brief

discussion of the new `
                      economics' of deep integration agreements, focusing on the design of

such agreements from a welfare point of view. Section 5 o¤ers some concluding thoughts.



2     Deep integration in practice

In this section we provide some background on deep integration, describing how it has pro-

gressed in practice and which controversies it has brought about. We organize our discussion

along two dimensions. First, we distinguish between the multilateral trading system as incor-

porated in the GATT/WTO and preferential trade agreements including plurilateral initia-

tives. Second, we emphasize what we believe to be the most salient deep integration issues,

namely regulation, foreign investment, and intellectual property rights.


2.1   The multilateral trading system

During the GATT years from 1947 to 1994, the multilateral trading system was squarely

focused on shallow integration. The idea of the GATT was to induce countries to exchange

market access concessions by reducing import tari¤s and to secure these market access con-

cessions by preventing countries from taking alternative protectionist measures. On the one

hand, this involved prohibitions of other trade policies such as quantitative restrictions (Arti-

cle XI) and export subsidies (Article XVI). On the other hand, this also implied constraints on

domestic policies by requiring "national treatment"(Article III) and allowing for non-violation

complaints (Article XXIII). National treatment simply means that imported products cannot


                                               4
be treated di¤erently than domestic products with respect to domestic taxes and regulations.

Non-violation complaints are complaints about measures that "nullify or impair" previously

made commitments even though the measures as such do not violate the GATT. The GATT

approach was therefore shallow not in the sense of not interfering with behind the border

measures at all, but rather in the sense of interfering with behind the border measures only

to the extent that they were used as substitutes for border measures (we sometimes refer to

this as `
        policed shallow integration'below).

       This changed with the inception of the WTO in 1995, which extended its reach into the

realm of domestic policies, such as regulation and intellectual property rights.2 As Mavroidis

(2016) explains, the WTO goes beyond the simple principle that regulatory policies be applied

in a non-discriminatory way to domestic and foreign ...rms (national treatment) and requires

that regulations meet a number of additional criteria. In particular, they must be transparent

and must not have unnecessary trade-restricting e¤ects. Some also have to be based on

science, be internally consistent, and follow other `good regulatory practices'
                                                                              . The Agreement

on Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT) and the Agreement on Sanitary and Phytosanitary

Measures (SPS) are the most relevant WTO agreements in this regard. One interesting feature

is that they include a presumption that regulatory measures do not present an unnecessary

barrier to trade if they are based on international standards, thus pushing countries toward

harmonization.3

       The WTO also includes the agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property

Rights (TRIPS), which has no counterpart in the GATT. As Saggi (2016) reports, the TRIPS

agreement was pushed through by the United States, the European Union, and Japan against

strong opposition from Brazil, India, and China. The proponents were dissatis...ed with the

state of intellectual property rights (IPR) protection in the global economy, particularly the

widespread imitation and piracy occurring in major developing countries. The TRIPS agree-

ment covers a wide range of IPR policies including patents, copyrights, industrial designs, and
   2
     The General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS) and the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing
Measures are other important WTO agreement that have deep integration elements. Staiger and Sykes (2019)
and Bagwell and Staiger (2006) analyze these agreements and we will come back to these papers below.
   3
     An interesting fact about standards is that many of them are actually voluntary. See Schmidt and Steingress
(2020) for a novel database on such voluntary standards and an estimation of their impact on international
trade.




                                                       5
trademarks. As in the case of regulatory policies, TRIPS not only requires that IPR protection

be o¤ered in a non-discriminatory way (thus imposing the most-favored-nation and national-

treatment rules), but goes further, for example requiring countries to o¤er patent protection

for foreign inventions for at least 20 years, thus bringing about a substantial strengthening

of IPR protection in most developing countries. India, for example, did not grant product

patents at all prior to TRIPS in some important sectors such as pharmaceuticals.

       These deep integration elements have provoked much controversy inside and outside the

WTO. Inside the WTO, the TRIPS agreement has been particularly contentious since it

essentially implies that developing countries have to adopt the IPR systems of developed

countries. A common concern is that stronger IPRs bene...t developed countries at the expense

of developing countries, and possibly at the expense of e¢ ciency, by allowing ...rms from

developed countries to charge higher prices and preventing ...rms from developing countries

from catching up. Some observers even see TRIPS as a key reason for the current stalemate

at the WTO.4

       Outside the WTO negotiation rooms, the above-mentioned Battle of Seattle was the kick-

o¤ event of a new kind of anti-globalization movement. The Atlantic recalls that "[t]he

organizers were a hodgepodge of groups ­unions worried about competition from cheap for-

eign labor, environmentalists worried about the outsourcing of polluting activities, consumer

protection groups worried about unsafe imports, labor rights groups worried about bad work-

ing conditions in other countries, and leftists of various stripes simply venting their anger at

capitalism."5 The overarching theme of the protests was that the WTO'
                                                                    s expanded mandate

would allow it to encroach on democratic decision-making in pursuit of a pro-business agenda.
   4
     The Economist, for example, noted in a commentary on the failure of the Doha Round over a seemingly
minor issue that "the shadow of the Uruguay Round arguably extended beyond this nettlesome detail. Many
developing countries believe that the earlier round was lopsided, doing little to constrain the farm policies of
the rich world even as it placed heavy obligations on the poor in areas such as intellectual property. In the
Doha Round they wanted to get their own back, by asking more of the rich world than they o¤ered in return"
(www.economist.com/...nance-and-economics/2008/07/31/the-doha-roundand-roundand-round).
   5
     The referenced article appeared in the Atlantic on January 6, 2014 and can be ac-
cessed at www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2014/01/the-dark-side-of-globalization-why-seattles-1999-
protesters-were-right/282831/




                                                       6
2.2      Preferential trade agreements

While the WTO has taken some signi...cant steps towards deep integration, the main push

has happened in preferential trade agreements (PTAs). This can be seen clearly in a recently

compiled database on the content of PTAs, which Hofmann et al (2017) constructed for

the World Bank. The database covers 279 PTAs among 189 countries and distinguishes

between 52 policy areas. Some of these policy areas are border measures (tari¤s, export

taxes, antidumping, etc.), but the majority are behind-the-border measures (including the

ones we focus on in this paper, namely regulatory policies, IPR protection, and investment

policies).

       Hofmann et al (2017) highlight some interesting patterns. They show that the average

number of provisions contained in PTAs has increased steadily starting from 1990, going

from an average of 11 provisions for PTAs signed between 1990 and 1994 to 23 provisions

for PTAs signed between 2010 and 2015 (pp. 14-15).6 Even though some of the policy areas

included in the PTAs are border measures, which are not in the domain of deep integration

as de...ned in our paper, there is an unmistakable increasing trend in the number of domestic

policies that are covered in PTAs. Another indication of the deepening of PTAs is that,

at the end of the sample period, a large share of the active PTAs covered the deep policy

areas that we focus on in this paper (regulations, IPRs, investment policies) through legally

enforceable provisions. For example, 152 of the 279 PTAs that were in force in 2015 included

legally enforceable provisions on technical barriers to trade, and the respective number for

sanitary and phytosanitary standards was 147. Finally, an interesting fact is that North-North

agreements are the ones with the highest average number of legally enforceable provisions

(almost 20), followed by North-South agreements (less than 15), and South-South agreements

(about 9).7

       At the same time, it must be noted that some of the most important deep PTAs have

failed. The proposed Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) between the
   6
     In part, the observed increase in the average number of provisions in PTAs also re        ects a bundling of
existing initiatives. A good example is investor protection, which was typically dealt with using bilateral
investment treaties but is now increasingly included in PTAs.
   7
     Mattoo et al (2020) present a complementary dataset that focuses more on the "vertical depth" (or "in-
tensive margin"  ) of preferential trade agreements. Their ...ndings are broadly consistent with the stylized facts
from Ho¤man at al (2017) that we have outlined in the text.



                                                        7
European Union and the United States has been put on ice over ...erce opposition from both

sides of the Atlantic. The United States also withdrew from the Trans Paci...c Partnership

(TPP) among Paci...c Rim countries, which eventually was reconstituted by the remaining

countries in a somewhat watered-down form. And even the Comprehensive Economic and

Trade Agreement (CETA) between the European Union and Canada was almost sabotaged

at the very last minute, when the Belgian province of Wallonia opposed rati...cation of the

agreement. These three agreements are often viewed as the archetypes of modern trade

agreements so it is important to note the ...erce opposition they provoked.

       E¤orts in the areas of investment and regulation are probably the most contentious ele-

ments of modern PTAs. Building on bilateral investment treaties, the investment provisions of

modern PTAs typically pursue two objectives. First, they aim to promote foreign investment,

for example by removing foreign equity caps or performance requirements, and by opening

markets such as ...nancial services or telecommunications to "mode 3" services trade.8 Sec-

ond, they aim to protect foreign investors from expropriation, including indirect expropriation

through regulatory takings. What is particularly controversial is that foreign investors are

usually given access to an investor-state dispute settlement system (ISDS), which allows them

to directly sue foreign governments for money damages in arbitration tribunals outside the

ordinary legal system.

       The provisions on regulatory cooperation also tend to pursue two goals. The ...rst goal

is to prevent a `
                race to the bottom' on issues such as worker or environmental protection.

The second goal is to reduce regulatory trade barriers, by promoting `
                                                                     good regulatory prac-

tices'similar to the WTO'
                        s TBT and SPS agreements and by reducing excessive regulatory

heterogeneity.9

       Political activism against deep PTAs has been particularly prevalent in Europe. For
   8
     For example, CETA chapter 8 "sets out measures to open up investment between the EU and Canada",
CETA chapter 13 "enables ...nancial institutions and investors in the EU and Canada to bene...t from fair, equal
access to each other's markets", and CETA chapter 15 gives "each other'     s businesses fair and equal access to
public telecommunications networks and services".
   9
     As examples of the ...rst goal, CETA chapter 23 "prevents either side from ignoring or lowering labour
standards to boost trade", while chapter 24 "prevents either side from relaxing their [environmental] laws to
boost trade". And as examples of the second goal, CETA'     s chapter 5 "ensures that measures by either side
to ensure food safety and animal and plant health do not create unjusti...ed barriers to trade [...]", chapter
12 "ensure[s] that domestic regulations in the other territory don'   t act as an unfair barrier to trade", and
chapter 21 "encourages regulators to exchange experiences and information, and identify areas where they
could cooperate".


                                                       8
example, an estimated 250,000 people took to the streets in Berlin in 2015 to oppose the

proposed TTIP and CETA deals, as part of a wave of continent-wide protests. While some

of the opponents criticized every form of economic globalization, the vast majority objected

speci...cally to the deep integration provisions on regulation and investment. As The Guardian

reported, they feared that the agreements would "water down important EU regulations" and

"give too much power to multinational companies at the expense of consumers and workers".10

         But deep PTAs are also controversial on the other side of the Atlantic, especially regarding

the ISDS issue. In a recent editorial, US Senator Elizabeth Warren succinctly summarizes

the ISDS controversy: "Conservatives who believe in US sovereignty should be outraged

that ISDS would shift power from American courts, whose authority is derived from our

Constitution, to unaccountable international tribunals. Libertarians should be o¤ended that

ISDS e¤ectively would o¤er a free taxpayer subsidy to countries with weak legal systems. And

progressives should oppose ISDS because it would allow big multinationals to weaken labor

and environmental rules."11

         In sum, deep integration has gained momentum since the 1990s when the WTO was

created and PTAs expanded in number and scope. But despite this momentum, the path to

deep integration has proven hard to travel, as evidenced by the slow progress of multilateral

and preferential initiatives. The WTO has not achieved much in this direction since its

foundation, and the most ambitious regional deep integration e¤orts have all experienced

major setbacks or failed. At the same time, deep integration is likely to remain the future of

trade cooperation, given that shallow integration has been all but completed.



3         The politics of deep integration

In this section we discuss the political economy of deep integration, and in particular the

change in the nature of special interest politics and the popular backlash against deep inte-

gration.
    10
      The referenced article appeared in The Guardian on October 10, 2015 and can be accessed using the
following link: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/10/berlin-anti-ttip-trade-deal-rally-hundreds-
thousands-protesters.
   11
      Her editorial appeared in the Washington Post on February 25, 2015.




                                                    9
3.1    Special interest politics

In this section we discuss our own work on the changing nature of special interest politics

(Maggi and Ossa, 2020) and relate it to the political science literature on this topic, and in

particular to the work by Young (2016, 2017).

    A central point of our theory in Maggi and Ossa (2020) is that the lobbying forces that

shape deep integration agreements are more complex and less benign than those that shape

shallow integration agreements. In particular, while the negotiation of shallow trade agree-

ments pits import-competing interests against exporting interests, which tends to enhance

e¢ ciency, the coalitions of special interests that emerge around the negotiation of deep agree-

ments do not necessarily push towards an e¢ ciency-enhancing outcome.

    We develop a theoretical framework to investigate the welfare impacts of shallow and deep

agreements when such agreements are negotiated under pressure from producer lobbies, build-

ing on the canonical model by Grossman and Helpman (1995). We depart from the canonical

model in three main ways. First, we go beyond the analysis of shallow integration and focus

on international regulatory cooperation, which is a particularly salient issue area for deep

integration. Second, in order to examine how politically-motivated agreements a¤ect global

welfare, we distinguish between the governments' "positive" objectives and a "normative"

criterion. Most existing models adopt the same government objective function to predict and

evaluate trade policy choices, thus they cannot address the widespread concern that trade

agreements bene...t special interests at the expense of society.12 And third, we consider a

world with many small countries, rather than the canonical large-country setting. This allows

us to put lobbying at the heart of trade negotiations, as small countries have no ability to

manipulate terms of trade.13

    With respect to shallow integration, our model con...rms the common intuition that trade

negotiations tend to enhance global welfare, because they trigger opposition between import-

competing interests and export-oriented interests, thereby bringing about bene...cial reductions
  12
     Notable exceptions are Grossman and Helpman (1995b) and Ornelas (2005, 2008), who discuss whether
politically-viable regional trade agreements are likely to cause more trade diversion or creation, and thus
whether they are likely to increase or reduce welfare. But these papers do not examine deep integration.
  13
     The feature that lobbying is key to the purpose of a trade agreement is present also in some domestic-
commitment models of trade agreements, e.g. Maggi and Rodriguez-Clare (1998) and Mitra (2002). But these
papers make very di¤erent points from the present paper, and they do not address deep agreements.



                                                    10
in trade barriers. Without trade negotiations, import-competing interests remain unchal-

lenged because there is little governments can do to increase their exporters'foreign market

access. But this changes with trade negotiations, since exporting interests can then ...nd a

voice by lobbying for reciprocal tari¤ cuts.14

       Rodrik (2018) was among the ...rst scholars to suggest that this logic of `
                                                                                 countervailing

lobbying'between import-competing and exporting interests may no longer work in modern

deep integration agreements. He argues informally that "[r]ather than reining in protection-

ists, trade agreements empower another set of special interests and politically well-connected

...rms, such as international banks, pharmaceutical companies, and multinational corporations.

Such agreements may result in freer, mutually bene...cial trade, through exchange of market

access. But they are as likely to produce welfare-reducing, or purely redistributive outcomes

under the guise of free trade" (pp. 75-76).

       In Maggi and Ossa (2020) we scrutinize Rodrik'
                                                    s intuition through a formal model of

regulatory cooperation. We argue that it is important to distinguish between two areas of

regulatory cooperation: product standards, de...ned as restrictions on the characteristics of

products sold in a given country, and process standards, de...ned as restrictions on the pro-

duction processes that take place on a country'
                                              s soil. Examples of product standards include

emissions standards for automobiles and safety standards for children's toys. As mentioned

earlier, some of the most famous controversies regarding deep integration have involved prod-

uct standards. Examples of process standards include environmental regulations for factories

and safety standards for workers. As we emphasized above, many modern trade agreements

include provisions on process standards, often with the stated motivation of preventing a

harmful `
        race to the bottom'
                          . And as we explain below, international cooperation on product

standards and on process standards can have dramatically di¤erent welfare implications.

       Standards can be used for legitimate welfare purposes, and in particular to address con-

sumption and production externalities. For example, product standards might cap the pollu-

tion emissions from automobiles sold in the local market, and process standards might cap the
  14
     It is important to note that this point holds only if export subsidies are not freely available, otherwise
governments would use export subsidies to directly cater to export-oriented interests without the need of trade
negotiations. In practice, the GATT has long prohibited export subsidies, so we take this restriction as a fact
of life.




                                                      11
pollution emissions from factories operating on the national territory. A government'
                                                                                    s choice

of standards balances producer surplus, consumer surplus and externality considerations.

   Following the canonical Grossman-Helpman approach to lobbying, we emphasize the role

of producer lobbies, in line with the idea that it is easier for producers to overcome collective-

action problems and get politically organized. We capture the inuence of producer lobbies

in a reduced-form fashion, by assuming that governments attach an extra weight to producer

groups in the various industries. The inuence of producer lobbies tends to distort the reg-

ulatory choices of governments in the non-cooperative scenario, and the question is whether

regulatory cooperation dilutes the distortionary inuence of lobbies, or rather intensi...es it.

This in turn depends crucially on whether the interests of lobbies in di¤erent countries are

aligned (a situation that we refer to as "co-lobbying"), or in conict (a situation of "counter-

vailing lobbying").

   In the case of product standards, we ...nd that co-lobbying prevails, so an international

agreement strengthens the overall inuence of special interests on regulatory policy. The

reason is that producers in all countries bene...t from de-regulation, since looser product stan-

dards imply lower local consumer prices, thereby boosting demand and raising the world-wide

producer price. This in turn implies that a deep agreement on product standards can reduce

global welfare, and this is more likely to happen if lobbies are more powerful.

   In the case of process standards, however, lobbying pressures have a much more benign

e¤ect. In this case, we ...nd that international cooperation increases welfare if lobbies are

su¢ ciently powerful. This is because international negotiations induce countervailing lobbying

between domestic and foreign producers, and hence dilute the overall inuence of special

interests on regulatory policy. Speci...cally, domestic producers now prefer weaker domestic

standards but stricter foreign standards, so that domestic costs are lower and foreign costs are

higher. In this setting, if lobbies are very powerful then non-cooperative process standards are

too loose ­a "race to the bottom"situation ­and regulatory cooperation leads to a tightening

of process standards, thus mitigating the welfare distortion.

   Our model focuses on non-discriminatory standards, since imposing discriminatory regu-

lations creates barriers to trade, and thus prohibiting discrimination can be viewed as part of

shallow integration. Indeed, recall that the GATT'
                                                 s "national treatment" principle requires


                                               12
that domestic policies be set in a non-discriminatory way. In practice, tackling discrimination

in regulatory policies is an un...nished job, not only in the GATT/WTO but also in recent

PTAs. Our analysis of shallow integration summarized above suggests that, to the extent that

the issue of discriminatory standards is on the international negotiating table, the inuence of

lobbies on the agreement should tend to be benign, because there should be counter-lobbying

between import-competing producers and exporters.

   One important takeaway of the Maggi-Ossa model is that the role of special interest

politics in deep integration agreements is more complex and potentially less benign than its

counterpart in shallow integration agreements. It goes beyond the classic antagonism between

import-competing and export-oriented interests, and can push trade agreements in a welfare-

improving or a welfare-reducing direction, depending on whether the interests of producer

lobbies within a given industry but across international borders are aligned or in conict.

   This argument has an interesting point of contact with the recent political science literature

on deep integration. For example, Young (2016, 2017) documents that, in the context of TTIP

negotiations, the global cleavages in special interest groups were very di¤erent from those that

are typical of shallow integration agreements. His main point is that the classic opposition

between import-competing and export-oriented interests has played almost no role in TTIP

negotiations. Instead, American and European business groups largely acted in a coordinated

way, both in supporting TTIP negotiations and in inuencing the content of TTIP. He argues

that these transatlantic business alliances were a new phenomenon in the history of trade

negotiations, and attributes this to the fact that TTIP negotiations were signi...cantly deeper

than any previous trade negotiations, particularly with respect to regulatory cooperation.

   Young (2016) reports that "[l]eading American and European manufacturing and services

associations from a diverse array of sectors - including automobiles, chemicals, pharmaceuti-

cals, ...nancial services, and insurance - have submitted joint proposals for easing regulatory

barriers and lowering tari¤s" (page 348). Analyzing submissions to the consultations of the

United States Trade Representative, among other things, he concludes that "there [was] an

almost complete absence of business opposition to the negotiations" (page 350). According

to Young, conict across business groups was observed only in the agricultural sector, were

no transatlantic alliances were formed.


                                              13
   It is important to note that the transatlantic business alliances documented by Young and

the fact that they strongly supported TTIP negotiations should not necessarily be interpreted

as evidence of harmful co-lobbying. The presence of these alliances is consistent with both

mechanisms highlighted by the Maggi-Ossa model, namely that international business inter-

ests should push for a tightening of process standards and a loosening of product standards

relative to their noncooperative levels. In either case, the model suggests that if lobbies are

su¢ ciently powerful they should support the agreement, because a key role of the agreement

is then to internalize the negative externalities exerted by a country's tightening of product

standards and a weakening of process standards on foreign producers. In our model, harmful

co-lobbying occurs when there is joint lobbying for looser standards, not when there is joint

lobbying as such.

   The Maggi-Ossa political economy approach to trade negotiations delivers some provoca-

tive messages. It portrays the welfare gains achieved during decades of GATT negotiations

as a lucky byproduct of an essentially political agenda, and it suggests that deep integration

may be good or bad for welfare depending on whether it intensi...es or dilutes the inuence

of special interests on trade policy. But it leaves open a number of theoretical and empirical

questions. At the theoretical level, it would be important to examine the welfare impacts of

international cooperation in other salient areas of deep integration, such as foreign investment

and IPR policies. The cleavages between special interests across country borders are clearly

issue-area speci...c, but our conjecture is that the basic logic outlined above will continue to

apply, namely that trade negotiations tend to enhance welfare if they dilute the overall inu-

ence of lobbies on policy-making, while tend to reduce welfare if they intensify such inuence,

at least if lobbies are su¢ ciently powerful.

   With respect to empirical work, we see two important and connected questions. The ...rst

one is just how bene...cial or harmful real-world trade agreements are for welfare, that is,

how the counteracting forces highlighted in the Maggi-Ossa model play out quantitatively.

The second question is just how good or bad lobbying is for welfare, that is, how the welfare

implications of real-world trade agreements would change in response to shifts in the polit-

ical inuence of lobbies. And while the basic Maggi-Ossa model focuses on a setting with

symmetric countries, an empirical implementation of the model would need to consider coun-


                                                14
try asymmetries, and therefore examine welfare impacts on individual countries in addition to

global welfare. These questions would be best addressed in the context of a quantitative model

of regulatory cooperation, but such work has to confront the challenge of modeling regulatory

policies in a reasonably realistic yet tractable way. One idea would be to follow Goldberg

and Pavcnik's (2016) advice of taking an industrial-organization approach to the problem and

focus on speci...c industries. A recent example of this approach is the work of Miravete et

al (2018), who demonstrate how EU fuel taxation and emissions policies systematically favor

diesel-powered vehicles which are made predominantly by EU car manufacturers.


3.2      Popular backlash

In the previous section we focused on how cleavages in special interest groups are changing in

response to the shift towards deep agreements. Here we focus on another important change

in the political economy environment, namely the backlash against deep integration from

consumer groups, environmental groups, and in some cases voters at large.15

       The popular backlash against deep integration has been more intense in Europe, but it

has occurred to some extent also in the United States. In Europe, the TTIP and CETA

negotiations triggered large street protests. As Young (2016) reports, in Europe more than 3

million people signed an online campaign against TTIP, and 90 EU-based NGOs signed a letter

to the European Commissioner for Trade expressing concern about proposals for regulatory

cooperation, arguing that they "could easily facilitate a roll-back of protection provided by

existing legislation" (p. 351). In the United States, the main episode of street protests

occurred in Seattle in 1999 against the WTO, but there was signi...cant civic opposition also

against TTIP: for example, 73 US-based NGOs signed a letter to the United States Trade

Representative which paralleled the one sent by the EU-based NGOs. And on both sides of

the ocean, civic interest groups also voiced opposition to the investor-state dispute settlement

provisions in the TTIP.16
  15
     Our discussion in this section will focus only on developed countries, both because the popular backlash
against globalization has been observed mostly in these countries, and because there is a paucity of empirical
and theoretical research on voters'attitudes toward globalization in developing countries.
  16
     It is interesting to note that in the United States there was some mobilization also against the TPP,
but only by labor unions, and speci...cally the AFL-CIO, which was worried mostly about labor standards in
low-wage countries.




                                                     15
       One might wonder whether the popular backlash against deep integration is simply part

of a broader reaction against globalization and trade. The answer is not obvious, but it leans

towards no. Opinion polls from the United States suggest that the overall share of voters

who support free trade has not diminished in the last 10-15 years, and if anything it has gone

up: see for example www.pollingreport.com/trade.htm.17 Also in Europe, we are not aware of

evidence that popular support for shallow integration has decreased, even in the UK, where

a majority of citizens voted to roll back on economic integration with the rest of Europe: in

fact, the Leave campaign was in favor of free trade and pushed Brexit as a way to achieve

freer trade with the rest of the world.

       At a minimum, it is safe to say that the popular opposition to deep integration has not

been matched by a comparable opposition to shallow integration. This raises a question:

why? We can think of two classes of reasons why citizens may feel more strongly about deep

integration than they do about shallow integration:

       Economic-utilitarian motives. One possibility is that the well-being of citizens is a¤ected

more by regulations, IPRs and investment policies than by trade barriers. Coupled with a

belief that industrial lobbies have a disproportionate inuence on deep agreements, this could

explain a popular backlash against deep integration.

       "Ideological" (or "cultural") backlash. Another possibility is that the popular reaction

against deep integration originates in psycho-sociological motivations, such as those that relate

to group identity. One can distinguish between two di¤erent versions of this mechanism.

The ...rst one is a "left wing" reaction against the capitalist elite, and in particular against

multinational corporations. The second one is a "right wing" nationalist backlash leading to

a blanket rejection of supranational authorities.

       In practice, the boundary between economic and cultural motives is not sharp: for exam-

ple, there may be a short distance between believing that immigration will hurt my economic

well-being and being culturally averse to immigrants. But in spite of this, the distinction

seems conceptually useful: we think of the ...rst case as falling into the domain of economic

rationality (de...ned broadly to allow for incomplete information and arbitrary prior beliefs),
  17
    It is important to note that these opinion polls do not contradict the empirical ...ndings, for example by
Autor et al. (2019), that the China trade shock caused a local anti-globalization backlash in the areas that
were hit by the shocks. More on these ...ndings below.


                                                     16
while the second falls at least in part outside of this domain.


3.2.1   Is it about economics?

A good example of the economic-utilitarian story is provided by Young (2016, 2017), who

focuses on the political-economy forces surrounding the TTIP negotiations. Young explains

the opposition to TTIP by civic interest groups (environmental groups, consumer groups and,

in Europe, citizens more broadly) based on the notion that people are more concerned about

safety and environmental standards than about tari¤s. He argues that in the case of the TTIP

the perceived stakes for citizen groups were su¢ ciently large that they exceeded the costs of

mobilization, whereas for the case of shallow integration the stakes may not have been large

enough to trigger mobilization. A similar argument is made by other scholars such as Evans

(2003) and Dur and Mateo (2014).

   According to Young, the observed di¤erences across the European Union and the United

States when it comes to TTIP are consistent with this stakes-based explanation. He notes

that civic engagement was signi...cantly stronger in Europe than in the United States, and

argues that the perceived stakes were higher for EU civic groups because the European Union

had stricter regulations than the United States. From the point of view of US civic groups,

there was an upside and a downside to the future of regulations under a TTIP agreement.

The upside was that, to the extent that TTIP would lead to regulatory convergence with the

European Union, this would create pressure toward more stringent regulations in the United

States. The downside was the possibility of pressure toward de-regulation on both sides of the

Atlantic, for reasons like the ones we discussed in the previous section. From the point of view

of EU civic groups, on the other hand, there was no upside whatsoever to the TTIP, since

they were worried not only about big business lobbying for de-regulation across the Atlantic,

but also about regulatory harmonization in itself, since `
                                                         meeting in the middle'would mean

less stringent regulations in the European Union.

   Young also argues that, in the area of foreign investment, the perceived stakes associated

with the investor-state dispute settlement (ISDS) component of TTIP negotiations were higher

in the European Union than in the United States. From the point of view of civic interest

groups, the main concern about ISDS was the possibility that multinational corporations


                                              17
could exert excessive inuence over host governments through a manipulable court system.

This concern is also related in important ways to the above-mentioned concerns about safety

and environmental regulations, since an ISDS system allows a corporation to sue a government

for imposing excessive regulatory burdens, so the ISDS issue was relevant not only for broad

consumer groups but also for environmental groups. Given the perceived power and inuence

of US-owned multinational ...rms, it is plausible that European civic groups were genuinely

more concerned about the ISDS issue than were US civic groups. Moreover, in the years

running up to the anti-TTIP protests, a large share of known ISDS complaints had been

brought against European member states, while comparably fewer cases had been brought

against the United States, with the US government winning all of the cases.


3.2.2      Is it about ideology?

Can the popular backlash against deep integration be explained entirely on the basis of eco-

nomic rationality? While the story outlined above has intuitive appeal and is probably an

important part of the explanation, especially as it relates to regulatory cooperation, it is

unlikely to be the whole story.

       For example, consider the Brexit movement. As mentioned above, this was a movement

against deep integration with the European Union, not against shallow integration. Recent

empirical studies suggest that it is hard to explain this phenomenon based on economic-

utilitarian considerations alone. For example, Colantone and Stanig (2018) ...nd that local

China-related trade shocks were a key factor driving the vote for Brexit, in spite of the fact

that the Leave campaign was in favor of free trade.18 Furthermore, local immigration shocks

were not correlated with the Brexit vote, while separate survey data shows that perceptions

about immigration were correlated with the Brexit vote. These ...ndings suggest that ideo-

logical/cultural factors play an important role in explaining the popular opposition to deep

integration.19
  18
     That trade shocks can be a powerful trigger for nationalistic/conservative sentiments is suggested also
by a number of other studies: Autor et al. (2020), Cerrato et al. (2018), Ballard-Rosa et al (2017) and
Steiner and Harms (2020) ...nd that the China trade shock caused a rise in nationalist attitudes, support for
conservative/authoritarian values, anti-immigrant sentiments and support for the GOP. Choi et al. (2020) ...nd
similar results for the impact of the NAFTA shock in the US in the 1990s.
  19
     The "cultural" explanation for the Leave vote is supported also by Margalit (2019), who ...nds that the
Leave vote was strongly correlated with support for cultural values such as social "closedness."


                                                     18
    In his recent piece in this Review, Rodrik (forthcoming) o¤ers a thought-provoking discus-

sion of the relation between the anti-globalization backlash and the rise in populism in recent

years. He notes that the populism that has taken hold in Europe and in the US has been pre-

dominantly of the cultural-nationalist (right wing) brand, even though the anti-economic-elite

(left wing) brand of populism was perhaps better positioned to take advantage of the eco-

nomic shocks that have a¤ected these regions. Rodrik'
                                                    s broad view is that the various types

of globalization shocks ­ in particular trade, immigration and international ...nance shocks ­

have deepened the divide between nationals and foreigners ("us" versus "them") by creat-

ing easy out-group targets, such as foreign exporters, immigrants and international banks.20

Furthermore, an important role has been played by the interaction between the demand and

supply sides of politics: populist politicians have strategically played up the economic anx-

ieties of voters and the latent cultural cleavages by depicting the "others" as threats to the

voters'economic well-being and cultural values. This is a very plausible idea, we believe, but

it is not clear whether it can explain why the ideological backlash against deep integration has

been much stronger than that against shallow integration.21 We will return to this question

below.

    In the formal literature there is a small but growing number of models that aim to explain

the backlash against globalization through mechanisms related to social group identi...cation.

We discuss three of these papers in turn.

    Mukand and Rodrik (2018) propose a model that emphasizes both the "demand" side

and the "supply" side of politics in triggering a rise of populism. A key ingredient of the

model on the supply side is that a political candidate can invest either in changing voters'

beliefs about their economic interests (what they call "worldview politics") or in changing
  20
     This view is consistent with empirical survey studies such as Mayda and Rodrik (2005), who ...nd that
voters'trade preferences are strongly correlated with nationalism and attachment to local communities.
  21
     Rodrik (2018) makes a point that relates to this question. He suggests one possible reason why populism
in Europe has not been characterized by anti-trade positions (for example this was very clear in the Brexit
campaign, as we noted above), in sharp contrast with the US: Europe has better compensation mechanisms
and safety nets in place, so that the gains from trade are better redistributed. In contrast, immigration shocks
can cause severe distributional problems even in Europe, because they can increase the ...scal burden on natives.
Note that this is a purely economic explanation: the idea is that European voters are not as concerned about
trade because they expect to be compensated in case of an adverse trade shock. But while this is likely to be
one of the forces at play, it cannot be the whole story. For one thing, this argument does not seem consistent
with the above-mentioned ...nding by Colantone and Stanig (2018) that in the context of Brexit the Leave vote
was explained by local trade shocks and not by local immigration shocks.




                                                       19
their cultural identities ("identity politics"). One of their insights is that a globalization

shock that generates an increase in income inequality can induce politicians to shift toward

cultural-identity strategies, which can in turn lead to a deepening of socio-cultural divides.

Furthermore, because of the interaction between identity politics and worldview politics, this

can also lead to a change of voters'beliefs regarding the policies that are in their best economic

interests.

       Grossman and Helpman (forthcoming) develop a model of identity politics where (even

small) shocks that increase income inequality can have dramatic e¤ects on social identi...cation

patterns and a shift toward anti-trade policies. In their model, low-income citizens can choose

to identify with their own income group, or with the nation as a whole, which includes high-

income citizens: the latter choice has a "status"bene...t (belonging to a group that is richer on

average) and a "cognitive dissonance" cost (feeling a divergence with respect to the average

member of the group). If an economic shock, such as a rise of imports from China, increases

the income gap between the groups, it becomes harder for a low-income individual to identify

with the broad nation, because of a larger cognitive-dissonance cost. And if low-income

voters stop identifying with the nation as a whole, this may cause a shift toward protectionist

policies. Furthermore, if there is also a non-economic dimension to social identi...cation, such

as an ethnic-racial cleavage, then an increase in the salience of such cleavage can trigger a

cultural segmentation of society and a rise in protectionism.

       Endogenous group identities are also key in Gennaioli and Tabellini (2020), but their

model emphasizes the role of belief distortions and stereotypes in generating cultural con-

icts and changes in equilibrium policies. In the trade policy application of their model,

they consider three underlying group cleavages: two are economic, namely low-income versus

high-income citizens and losers from trade versus winners from trade (import-oriented versus

export-oriented industries/regions), and one is cultural, say nationalists versus cosmopolitans

(or social conservatives versus progressives). Motivated by survey evidence, they assume a

positive correlation between trade exposure and conservative/nationalist inclinations.22 The

second key assumption is that a voter identi...es with the group of people that she perceives
  22
    As noted by Gennaioli and Tabellini, some scholars have explained this correlation based on a psychological
predisposition toward "closedness," and others have attributed it to a belief in "communal values."




                                                      20
as closest to her and is in starkest contrast with the out-group. The third main ingredient of

the model is that voters'beliefs are distorted by group identities, through group stereotypes

that exaggerate the distinctive features of a group. In this setting, Gennaioli and Tabellini

show that certain shocks, such as an increase in import from China or a rise of immigration,

can exacerbate cultural divides such as the one between nationalists and cosmopolitans, as

well as the cleavage between winners and losers from trade, while the traditional economic

cleavage between rich and poor becomes less salient.

   The above models can help explain a popular backlash against globalization, as well as a

concurrent rise in socio-cultural tensions within a society, but two subtle questions remain.

First, while these models can explain changes in the intensity of cleavages within a society,

they do not quite speak to the hostility between groups within that society and external

groups, or put simply, between nationals and foreigners, so they do not quite capture the

above-mentioned idea articulated by Rodrik (forthcoming). For example, in Grossman and

Helpman (forthcoming) the non-economic cleavages are those between racial-ethnic groups,

not between nationals and foreigners. And in Gennaioli and Tabellini (2020) one interpretation

of the cultural cleavage is in terms of nationalists versus cosmopolitans, which is related but

distinct from the cleavage between a country'
                                            s citizens and the country'
                                                                      s outsiders. One

reason why the role of the insider/outsider cleavage in identity politics is far from obvious is

simply that outsiders do not vote, so there is no obvious electoral bene...t to a politician from

exacerbating the nationals/foreigners divide.

   The second question is, even if one can argue that the political game in Europe and the

United States has deepened the divide between nationals and foreigners, can this explain the

di¤ erential backlash against deep integration versus shallow integration that we highlighted

above? This is not entirely clear. Consider for example a country that imports homogenous

goods or raw commodities: if the citizens of this country become culturally hostile to for-

eigners, they may be more reluctant to let other countries dictate their own domestic policy

choices, but they may still want to buy goods from them. When viewed from this perspective,

one can argue that a nationalistic backlash can lead to stronger opposition to deep integration

relative to shallow integration. But now suppose the same country imports goods for which

quality and safety are important and are not easily observable to the average citizen. Then


                                                21
a deepening of the cultural divide between nationals and foreigners ­especially if it involves

diminished trust in foreigners ­may a¤ect beliefs about the quality/safety of imported prod-

ucts, and thus may reduce popular support for shallow and deep integration alike. This seems

like an open question worthy of further theoretical and empirical research.



4    The economics of deep integration

In this section we o¤er our perspective on the literature that focuses on the e¢ ciency properties

of deep trade agreements. A key di¤erence with respect to the Maggi-Ossa approach discussed

in the previous section is that this literature evaluates e¢ ciency through the lens of the

governments' objectives, making no distinction between governments' political motivations

and normative criterions. We loosely organize our discussion by issue area, considering the

regulatory, investment, and IPR dimensions of deep trade agreements in turn.

    We begin our discussion with the work of Bagwell and Staiger (2001), which provides a

useful benchmark in this literature. They ask whether the WTO should include deep pro-

visions on environmental and labor standards in response to concerns that trade integration

could induce a harmful race to the bottom. They address this question in the context of a

standard neoclassical trade model in which countries can impose import tari¤s and standards.

Standards are modeled in a reduced-form fashion as shift parameters of the import demand

and export supply functions in a deterministic environment. While countries have direct pref-

erences over domestic standards, they only care about the trade e¤ects of foreign standards,

in keeping with the race-to-the-bottom focus of their analysis.

    Their main result is that tari¤ negotiations lead to an e¢ cient outcome if countries are

prevented from subsequently undoing their market-access concessions by adjusting their stan-

dards. The key intuition is that countries do not care about the foreign policy mix per se

but only the market access it gives them. And countries only use standards to manipulate

the market access of foreign producers if they are constrained in their tari¤ choices, since

tari¤s are a preferred instrument for this purpose. This result is a forceful endorsement of

an approach of `policed'shallow integration, in the sense of tari¤ commitments coupled with

market-access-preservation rules (such as national treatment and non-violation rules) ­which


                                               22
the authors argue was the core of GATT'
                                      s approach.

   A number of follow-up papers have pushed this message further, by arguing that some

real-world attempts towards deep integration are not only unnecessary but even harmful

for reaching e¢ ciency. One example is Bagwell and Staiger (2006) who analyze the WTO's

stricter disciplines on domestic subsidies. They argue that the WTO has constrained domestic

subsidies so much that some e¢ cient policy mixes can no longer be attained through trade

negotiations. Another example is Staiger and Sykes (2019) who consider the WTO's approach

to service trade liberalization under GATS. They argue that the GATS problems are rooted

in its focus on behind-the-border measures and suggest that countries should instead engage

in shallow negotiations over discriminatory taxes imposed against foreign service providers.

   However, it has become clear that Bagwell and Staiger'
                                                        s (2001) argument does not extend

to a number of alternative trade environments. First, as pointed out by Maggi (2014), even

in a standard competitive setting where trade agreements are motivated by terms-of-trade

externalities, a shallow integration approach may not work well if international agreements are

subject to contracting frictions. Suppose that trade volumes are a¤ected by demand and/or

supply shocks, and a country observes the realization of these shocks before choosing its

domestic policies. Then a market-access-preservation rule would need to be state-contingent

in order to achieve e¢ ciency. But if state contingencies are not perfectly veri...able, so that the

international contract is incomplete, then a shallow integration approach will not be enough,

and imposing direct constraints on domestic policies is necessary to achieve e¢ ciency. A

similar point is made by Lee (2007) in a setting where governments can use domestic subsidies

to address a domestic externality, and the level of such externality is private information. In

related work, Horn et al (2010) show that a simple tari¤ agreement may be optimal when

trade volumes are small relative to contracting costs, while a deep agreement that imposes

direct constraints on domestic instruments becomes optimal as trade volumes increase, since

countries then have stronger incentives to use domestic instruments for protectionist purposes,

and hence the bene...ts of reining in these incentives exceed the associated contracting costs.

   Second, an approach of `
                          policed'shallow integration is not enough if the motives for trade

agreements go beyond the mere correction of terms-of-trade externalities. For example, a deep

integration approach is needed if there are domestic-commitment motives for international


                                                23
cooperation. This point is made by Brou and Ruta (2013) in a setting where governments

can choose trade policies and domestic subsidies.

       As another example, Antras and Staiger (2012) show that deep integration is necessary in

an environment in which there is o¤shoring of intermediate inputs. Their key departure from

Bagwell and Staiger (2001) is that intermediate inputs are relationship-speci...c so that their

prices are set by ex-post bargaining and not in competitive markets. This implies that there

is an international hold-up problem in addition to the standard terms-of-trade externality so

that the ine¢ ciency of the non-cooperative equilibrium is based on more than just market

access manipulation. As a result, the GATT'
                                          s shallow integration approach of exchanging and

securing market access concessions is no longer su¢ cient to bring about an e¢ cient outcome.

Instead, direct constraints on domestic policy instruments are needed.

       Grossman et al (forthcoming) similarly make the case for deep integration in the context of

a`
 new trade'model of regulatory cooperation. The key di¤erence from Bagwell and Staiger

(2001) is that they build on Venables' (1987) monopolistic competition model so that the

harmful international externality is a ...rm-delocation externality instead of a terms-of-trade

externality. They show that governments then have an incentive to use regulatory policy

for mercantilist objectives if their trade taxes are constrained by a trade agreement. They

also show that national treatment and mutual recognition are not enough to achieve global

e¢ ciency in their full model, and argue that it is hard to conceive of a workable version of non-

violation complaints. The bottomline is that a deep agreement involving explicit disciplines

on regulation is needed to implement an e¢ cient outcome.23

       Recent work has also begun to scrutinize the provisions on investor protection included

in most modern trade agreements. For example, Ossa et al (2020) consider an environment

in which a host government wants to make a commitment towards foreign investors not to

expropriate them once they have sunk their investments. They ask whether it makes sense on

e¢ ciency grounds to allow foreign investors to directly sue host governments for comprehensive

money damages in arbitration tribunals outside the ordinary legal system, as is the case under
  23
     The literature has also studied regulatory policy in oligopoly models emphasizing international pro...t-
shifting externalities; see Gandal and Shy (2001), Costinot (2008), Klimenko (2009), and Parenti and Van-
noorenberghe (2020). See also Battigalli and Maggi (2003) for an early analysis of international regulatory
agreements from an incomplete-contracting perspective.




                                                     24
ISDS. They identify conditions under which ISDS is indeed optimal but also make clear that

the case for ISDS is far from absolute. For example, if the investment provisions primarily

address market access instead of commitment issues ISDS would not be optimal, as might

plausibly be the case in North-North agreements such as TTIP or CETA.24

    The theoretical case for the particular formulation of the TRIPS agreement in the WTO

and related intellectual property rights provisions in PTAs is even weaker. The standard

reference in this context is Grossman and Lai (2004), who analyze non-cooperative and co-

operative patent policies in a simple model of expanding varieties. First, they show that

countries choose overly weak patent protection in the non-cooperative equilibrium since they

fail to internalize the e¤ects of their patent policies on foreign pro...ts. Second, they show that

international harmonization of patent policies is neither necessary nor su¢ cient for global

e¢ ciency, thus casting doubt on the institutional design of TRIPS. And in addition to ques-

tionable e¢ ciency implications, harmonization may have strong redistributive e¤ects in favor

of developed countries and at the expense of developing countries.25

    Overall, the literature leaves us with two main messages. First, explicit disciplines on

domestic policies are needed in many realistic economic settings: the GATT'
                                                                          s approach of

`
policed' shallow integration may not work in a world where international agreements are

subject to contracting frictions, where intermediate input trade is important, or where mar-

kets are imperfectly competitive. Second, many real-world attempts at deep integration are

probably suboptimal: the WTO'
                            s subsidy agreement may be excessive, the WTO'
                                                                         s GATS

agreement may have the wrong focus, ISDS may not be optimal in some contexts, and the

TRIPS agreement may be misguided.

    This takes us to our last point: the importance of quantitative evaluations of trade policy

institutions. The literature on the economics of deep integration has thus far remained largely

theoretical, with very few exceptions. One of these exceptions is Mei (2019), who builds on the

approach of Ossa (2014, 2016) to perform a quantitative analysis of regulatory protection and

cooperation using a model that shares many features with Grossman et al (forthcoming). He
  24
     See Aisbett et al (2010a,b), Horn and Tangeras (2020), Janeba (2019), Kohler and Stahler (2019), Konrad
(2017), and Stahler (2018) for other work in this area.
  25
     See Saggi (2016) for an excellent survey of the literature on the TRIPS agreement, and more generally on
trade and intellectual property rights, that has developed after Grossman and Lai (2004).




                                                     25
interprets real-world standards as non-cooperative standards subject to national treatment

and uses this interpretation to calibrate his model parameters. He then asks what would

happen in the worst-case and best-case scenarios, i.e. the non-cooperative equilibrium without

national treatment and the fully cooperative equilibrium that would result from e¢ cient

negotiations. His results suggest that the WTO'
                                              s national treatment clause is not particularly

e¤ective at curbing regulatory protectionism. Without national treatment, real incomes would

decline by 1.4 percent on average; with fully e¢ cient negotiations, real incomes would increase

by 12.6 percent on average. One of the limitations of Mei'
                                                         s (2019) work is the use of coverage

ratios to measure product standards. Echoing our point above, to overcome this kind of

limitations it would be valuable to explore a partial equilibrium approach that pays close

attention to the speci...cs of a particular industry.

    The approach of Ossa (2014, 2016) and Mei (2019) suggests a way forward for the quan-

titative evaluation of trade policy institutions. Real-world trade agreements are necessarily

incomplete contracts, since it is virtually impossible to negotiate over all policy instruments,

so the key question is not whether or not a particular trade policy institution is ine¢ cient,

but how close it gets us to the e¢ ciency frontier and whether there are other simple institu-

tions that could outperform it quantitatively. In particular, one question that has not been

su¢ ciently explored is, just how much could we potentially gain by moving from shallower

integration approaches ­ such as the ones that rely on national-treatment or market-access-

preservation rules ­to deeper approaches that impose direct constraints on the governments'

domestic policy choices?



5    Conclusion

Deep integration is the future of trade policy and this future is fascinatingly complex. In this

paper, we have highlighted three dimensions of this complexity and introduced the literature

on each. First, the political conict surrounding trade agreements is moving beyond the classic

antagonism between exporter interests who gain from trade and import-competing interests

who lose from trade. Second, producer lobbies and labor unions are no longer the only interest

groups mobilized by trade agreements, but other civic interest groups such as consumer rights


                                                26
or environmental protection advocates, and sometimes citizens at large, are now an active

part of the equation. And third, intuitions based on standard gains from trade are no longer

a good guide for assessing the merits of trade agreements, since modern agreements go far

beyond classic trade liberalization.

   To us, this seems like a great opportunity as well as an important responsibility for trade

economists. It is a great opportunity, because it requires us to rethink much of our conven-

tional wisdom on trade policy and will thus be a source of interesting research questions for

years to come. But it is also an important responsibility, because the relevance of our ...eld

will also depend on how much we have contributed to this crucial policy debate.




                                             27
References

 [1] Aisbett, E., L. Karp, and C. McAusland. 2010a. "Police Powers, Regulatory Takings and

    the E¢ cient Compensation of Domestic and Foreign Investors". Economic Record 86,

    September, 367­383.

 [2] Aisbett, E., L. Karp, and C. McAusland. 2010b. "Compensation for Indirect Expropri-

    ation in International Investment Agreements: Implications of National Treatment and

    Rights to Invest". Journal of Globalization and Development 1(2): 1-35.

 [3] Antras, P. and R. Staiger. 2012. "O¤shoring and the Role of Trade Agreements". Amer-

    ican Economic Review 102(7): 3140­3183.

 [4] Autor, D., D. Dorn, and G. Hanson. 2013. "The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market

    E¤ects of Import Competition in the United States". American Economic Review 103(6):

    2121-2168.

 [5] Autor, D., D. Dorn, G. Hanson, and K. Majlesi. 2020. "Importing Political Polarization?

    The Electoral Consequences of Rising Trade Exposure". American Economic Review

    110(10): 3139-3189.

 [6] Bagwell, K. and R. Staiger. 2001. "Domestic Policies, National Sovereignty, and Interna-

    tional Economic Institutions". Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(2): 519-562.

 [7] Bagwell, K. and R. Staiger. 2006. "Will International Rules on Subsidies Disrupt the

    World Trading System?" American Economic Review 96(3): 877-895.

 [8] Ballard-Rosa, C., M. Malik, S. Rickard, and K. Scheve. Forthcoming. "The Economic

    Origins of Authoritarian Values: Evidence from Local Trade Shocks in Great Britain".

    Comparative Political Studies.

 [9] Battigalli, P. and G. Maggi. 2003. "International Agreements on Product Standards: An

    Incomplete Contracting Theory". NBER Working Paper No 9533.

[10] Brou, D. and M Ruta. 2013. "A Commitment Theory of Subsidy Agreements". The BE

    Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 14 (1): 239-270.

                                             28
[11] Cerrato, A., F. Ferrara, and F. Ruggieri. 2018. "Why Does Import Competition Favor

    Republicans?". Mimeo.

[12] Choi, J., I. Kuziemko, E. Washington, and G. Wright. 2020. "Local Employment and

    Political E¤ects of Trade Deals: Evidence from NAFTA." Mimeo.

[13] Colantone, I. and P. Stanig. 2018. "Global Competition and Brexit". American Political

    Science Review 112(2): 201-218.

[14] Costinot, A. 2008. "A comparative institutional analysis of agreements on product stan-

    dards". Journal of International Economics 75 (1), 197-213.

[15] Dur, A. and G. Mateo. 2014. "Public Opinion and Interest Group Inuence: How Citizen

    Groups Derailed the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement". Journal of European Public

    Policy 22/8: 1199 1217.

[16] Ederington, J. and M. Ruta. 2016. "Non-Tari¤ Measures and the World Trading System".

    In: Bagwell, Kyle and Robert Staiger. 2016. Handbook of Commercial Policy. Elsevier.

[17] Evans, P. 2003. "Is Trade Policy Democratic? And Should It Be?" in N. Bayne and S.

    Woolcock (eds), The New Economic Diplomacy: Decision-Making and Negotiations in

    International Economic Relations, Farnham: Ashgate: 147-59.

[18] Gennaioli, N. and G. Tabellini. 2020. "Identity, Beliefs, and Political Conict". Mimeo.

[19] Goldberg, P. and N. Pavcnik. 2016. "The E¤ects of Trade Policy". In: Bagwell, Kyle and

    Robert Staiger. 2016. Handbook of Commercial Policy. Elsevier.

[20] Gandal, N. and O. Shy. 2001. "Standardization Policy and International Trade". Journal

    of International Economics 53: 363-383.

[21] Grossman, G. and E. Helpman. 1995. "Trade Wars and Trade Talks". Journal of Political

    Economy 103(4): 675-708.

[22] Grossman, G. and E. Helpman. Forthcoming. "Identity Politics and Trade Policy". Re-

    view of Economic Studies.



                                              29
[23] Grossman, G. and E. Lai. "International Protection of Intellectual Property". American

    Economic Review 94(5): 1635-1653.

[24] Grossman, G., P. McCalman and R. Staiger. Forthcoming. "The "New" Economics of

    Trade Agreements: From Trade Liberalization to Regulatory Convergence?" Economet-

    rica.

[25] Hofmann, C. A. Osnago, and M. Ruta. 2017. "Horizontal Depth: A New Database on

    the Content of Preferential Trade Agreements". World Bank Policy Research Working

    Paper No 7981.

[26] Horn, H., G. Maggi, and R. Staiger. 2010. "Trade Agreements as Endogenously Incom-

    plete Contracts". American Economic Review 100(1): 394-419.

[27] Horn, H. and T. Tangeras. 2020. "Economics and Politics of International Investment

    Agreements". Research Institute of Industrial Economics, IFN WP No 1140, revised.

[28] Janeba, E. 2019. "Regulatory Chill and the E¤ects of Investor State Dispute Settle-

    ments". Review of International Economics 27: 1172-1198.

[29] Klimenko, M. 2009. "Policies and International Trade Agreements on Technical Compat-

    ibility for Industries with Network Externalities". Journal of International Economics

    77: 151-166.

[30] Kohler, W. and F. Stahler. 2019. "The Economics of Investor Protection: ISDS versus

    National Treatment". Journal of International Economics 121.

[31] Konrad, K. 2017. "Large Investors, Regulatory Taking and Investor-State Dispute Set-

    tlement". European Economic Review 98: 341-353.

[32] Lee, G. M. 2007. "Trade agreements with domestic policies as disguised protection".

    Journal of International Economics 71(1): 241-259

[33] Maggi, G. and R. Ossa. 2020. "Are Trade Agreements Good for You?" NBER Working

    Paper No 27252.



                                            30
[34] Maggi, G. and A. Rodriguez-Clare. 1998. "The Value of Trade Agreements in the Presence

    of Political Pressures". Journal of Political Economy 106(3): 574-601.

[35] Maggi, G. and A. Rodriguez-Clare. 2007. "A Political Economy Theory of Trade Agree-

    ments". American Economic Review 97(4): 1374-1406.

[36] Maggi, G. 2014. "International Trade Agreements" in Gopinath, Helpman and Rogo¤

    (eds.). Handbook of International Economics, volume 4. Elsevier.

[37] Margalit, Y. 2019. "Economic Insecurity and the Causes of Populism, Reconsidered".

    Journal of Economic Perspectives 33(4): 152-170.

[38] Mattoo, A., N. Rocha, and M. Ruta. 2020. "The Evolution of Deep Trade Agreements."

    Policy Research Working Paper No. 9283. World Bank.

[39] Mattoo, A. and R. Staiger. Forthcoming. "Trade Wars: What do they Mean? Why are

    they Happening Now? What are the Costs?" Economic Policy.

[40] Mavroidis, P. 2016. "Regulatory Cooperation: Lessons from the WTO and the World

    Trade Regime." E15 Task Force on Regulatory Systems Coherence ­ Policy Options

    Paper.

[41] Mayda, A. and D. Rodrik. 2005. "Why Are Some People (and Countries) More Protec-

    tionist than Others?" European Economic Review 49: 1393-1430.

[42] Mei, Y. 2019. "Regulatory Protection and the Role of International Cooperation." Mimeo.

[43] Miravete, E. , M. Moral and J. Thurk. 2018. "Fuel Taxation, Emissions Policy, and

    Competitive Advantage in the Di¤usion of European Diesel Automobiles". Rand Journal

    of Economics 49(3): 504-540.

[44] Mukand, S. and D. Rodrik. "The Political Economy of Liberal Democracy". Economic

    Journal 130: 765­792.

[45] Ossa, R. 2014. "Trade Wars and Trade Talks with Data". American Economic Review,

    104(12): 4101-4146.



                                            31
[46] Ossa, R. 2016. "Quantitative Models of Commercial Policy". In: Bagwell, Kyle and

    Robert Staiger. 2016. Handbook of Commercial Policy. Elsevier.

[47] Ossa, R., R. Staiger, and A. Sykes. 2020. "Disputes in International Investment and

    Trade". NBER Working Paper No 27012.

[48] Parenti, M. and G. Vannoorenberghe. 2020. "A Simple Theory of Deep Integration".

    Mimeo.

[49] Rodrik, D. 2018. "What Do Trade Agreements Really Do?". Journal of Economic Per-

    spectives 32(2): 73-90.

[50] Rodrik, D. Forthcoming. "Why Does Globalization Fuel Populism? Economics, Culture,

    and the Rise of Right-Wing Populism". Annual Review of Economics.

[51] Saggi, K. 2016. "Trade, Intellectual Property Rights, and the World Trade Organization".

    In: Bagwell, Kyle and Robert Staiger. 2016. Handbook of Commercial Policy. Elsevier.

[52] Schmidt, J. and W. Steingress. 2020. "No Double Standards: Quantifying the Impact of

    Standard Harmonization on Trade". Mimeo.

[53] Stahler, F. 2018. "An Optimal Investor State Dispute Settlement Mechanism". Mimeo.

[54] Staiger, R. and A. Sykes. 2019. "The Economic Structure of International Trade-in-

    Services Agreements". NBER Working Paper No 22960.

[55] Steiner, N. and P. Harms. 2020. "Local Trade Shocks and the Nationalist Backlash in

    Political Attitudes: Panel Data Evidence from Great Britain". Mimeo.

[56] Venables, A. 1987. "Trade and Trade Policy with Di¤erentiated Products:               A

    Chamberlinian-Ricardian Model". Economic Journal, 97: 700-717.

[57] Young, A. 2016. "Not Your Parents' Trade Politics: The Transatlantic Trade and In-

    vestment Partnership Negotiations". Review of International Political Economy 23(3):

    345-378.




                                             32
[58] Young, A. 2017. "Intergovernmental policy makes transnational politics? The unusually

    transnational politics of TTIP". Cambridge Review of International A¤ airs 30(5-6): 527-

    548.




                                            33
