                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      A UNIFIED MODEL OF COHORT MORTALITY FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS

                                     Adriana Lleras-Muney
                                      Flavien E. Moreau

                                      Working Paper 28193
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28193


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020




The views expressed in this paper are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the
views of the IMF, its Executive Board, IMF management or the National Bureau of Economic
Research. We are very grateful to David Atkin, Andy Atkeson, David Cutler, Jeff Ely, Price
Fishback, Titus Galama, Patrick Heuveline, Bo Honoré and Wei Huang for their advice and to
seminar participants at Stanford University, University of British Columbia, University of
Connecticut, USC, and UCLA and the NBER Cohort meetings. We are also very grateful to
Hualei Shang and Wan Zhang for their outstanding research assistance. This work used
computational and storage services associated with the Hoffman2 Shared Cluster provided by
UCLA Institute for Digital Research and Education's Research Technology Group. This project
was supported by the California Center for Population Research at UCLA (CCPR), which
receives core support (P2C- HD041022) from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development (NICHD). All errors are our own.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Adriana Lleras-Muney and Flavien E. Moreau. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Unified Model of Cohort Mortality for Economic Analysis
Adriana Lleras-Muney and Flavien E. Moreau
NBER Working Paper No. 28193
December 2020
JEL No. I10,J11

                                         ABSTRACT

We propose a dynamic production function of population health and mortality from birth
onwards. Our parsimonious model provides an excellent fit for the mortality and survival curves
for both primate and human populations since 1816. The model sheds light on the dynamics
behind many phenomena documented in the literature, including (i) the existence and evolution
of mortality gradients across socio-economic statuses, (ii) non-monotonic dynamic effects of in-
utero shocks, (iii) persistent or "scarring" effects of wars and (iv) mortality displacement after
large temporary shocks such as extreme weather.


Adriana Lleras-Muney
Department of Economics
9373 Bunche Hall
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
allerasmuney@gmail.com

Flavien E. Moreau
700, 19th St NW
IMF
Los Angeles, CA 90025
Washington, DC 20431
fmoreau@imf.org
We propose a coherent framework to understand how population health and mortality evolve from
birth onwards, and how economic and other environmental factors early in life affect this evolution.
Statistical and economic models of health and mortality typically only concentrate on adults. Yet
a large literature now documents that events and investments in utero and throughout childhood
are powerful predictors of both economic and health outcomes later in life (Almond and Currie
2011, Almond et al. 2018). In the absence of such a quantitative model, it is difficult to predict how
shocks will affect population health at various ages, and even harder to design optimal investment
or compensation policies (Almond et al., 2018).
    We present a simple dynamic model of the production of health from birth to death for a het-
erogenous population. In the spirit of classic demographic work (Vaupel et al., 1979), the model
assumes that some individuals are born more frail than others and tend to die young. Subsequently,
the health distribution of the survivors evolves according to a simple law of motion that depends
on the level of external resources and their distribution.1 As in Grossman (1972), the health stock
deteriorates with age but can increase if resources are invested. But unlike Grossman (1972), re-
sources in our model are stochastic, a crucial distinction. In addition, individuals can die from
accidents unrelated to their health status. These "external" causes of death play an important role
in explaining the level of mortality during the adolescent years.
    Our quantitative model can account for several stylized facts documented in the literature. We
start by estimating the model separately for more than 100 birth cohorts born in the early 19th cen-
tury and later, using high quality data from the Human Mortality Database. Despite vast changes in
life expectancy throughout the period, the model provides an excellent characterization of the age-
profiles of mortality for each of these cohorts. The estimated model is consistent with the following
stylized facts: (1) the profile of log mortality rates by age has a J-shape, and (2) survival curves for
humans have "rectangularized" over the last two centuries, that is, survival curves have become
flatter thoughout life and then drop abruptly at older ages). We then show that simple extensions
of this model can be used to rationalize various well-documented mortality phenomena, including
(3) persistent gaps in log mortality rates across populations with different socio-economic status
that fall with age (aka "SES gradients"); (4) non-monotonic health impacts of in-utero shocks over
the lifetime; (5) scarring effects of short-term negative shocks such as wars and (6) harvesting or
displacement effects due to environmental shocks such as hot weather.
    The evolution of mortality over the lifetime is remarkably similar across human populations
and in fact across most primates. Because of this regularity, demographers have searched for a
"unified" model of mortality that would predict mortality from birth to death at least since the
early 19th century (Gompertz, 1825). Like much of the following literature (e.g. Li and Anderson,
2013) Gompertz's model accounts for mortality only after a certain age, focusing on the roughly log-
linear portion of the mortality curve after age 30-40. There are a few exceptions. An early model
proposed by Heligman and Pollard (1980) describes the probability of dying at a given age for all
ages. More recently Sharrow and Anderson (2016) and Palloni and Beltrán-Sánchez (2016) propose
alternative statistical models of survival rates that also fit observed lifetime survival curves well.
    The main contribution of this paper is to provide a production function that describes the evolu-
  1 The   model can be seen as formally similar to the stochastic processes used to model corporate defaults (Lando, 2004).


                                                              2
tion of a population's health and mortality starting at birth that is suited for tracking the long term
impacts of various insults and investments. To that end, our approach differs in one fundamental
aspect from the demographic approach. As in the seminal Grossman (1972) model, we model di-
rectly how the health stock of each individual evolves, rather than only modeling the mortality or
survival rates of the aggregate population. This approach is better suited for studying how various
shocks affect the health and mortality of the population overtime -- we can easily model inputs
into health directly and trace their effects as cohorts age by tracking the evolution of the distribu-
tion of health. We demonstrate this by studying the effects of increasing lifetime resources, and the
impact of negative in-utero shocks on a population's subsequent average health and mortality. We
also study the effects of temporary shocks such as wars or bad weather.
    Our basic model is more parsimonious than the original Grossman model, or its most recent
successors (Dalgaard and Strulik, 2014 or Galama and Van Kippersluis, 2018). We a focus on a
production process only and initially ignore maximzing behavior. Our main innovation relative to
these papers is to provide a unified framework for mortality at all ages, including childhood, and
to allow for heterogeneous endowments.2 Including this key childhood period allows us to match
the pattern of declining mortality among children (up to adolescence). Alternative state-of-the art
models, such as Dalgaard and Strulik (2014)'s accumulating health deficits model, or Galama and
Van Kippersluis (2018)'s theory of socioeconomics status and mortality, start with adults and thus
cannot account for this feature of the data. In our model, mortality declines during childhood due
to both selection effects and investments, both of which have consequences on adult mortality.
By allowing for heterogeneity and tracking the distribution of health, we can account for selection
effects due to mortality every period. To our knowledge, there is no other model that can accurately
predict the lifetime health and mortality of a population, while also providing a law of motion for
health at the individual level.
    We end by considering how optimization might affect our findings. We show that a benevolent
planner maximizing life expectancy would redistribute resources from middle ages to children and
to the elderly. The optimal health investment schedule is increasing with age among the elderly.
We also show that, despite this re-allocation, the basic profile of mortality by age remains similar.
Our estimates imply that optimization could lead to substantial gains in life expectancy, though
lower than what has been observed in the last two centuries. With additional data our model can
be easily extended to further account for optimizing behavior.
    This paper proceeds as follows. We start by describing the data and the stylized facts that
inform our model in section 1. We then describe the model and its qualitative properties in Section
2. In section 3 we show that the model does an excellent job at matching the mortality profiles
of many cohorts, and discuss which parameters in the model help rationalize the large increases
in life expectancy we observe throuhout the period. We also show that the model describes the
evolution of chimpanzee mortality well. In section 4 we then investigate how the model can be
used to understand the effects of permanent (in utero or SES) and temporary (wars and heat waves)
changes in the environment. Section 5 presents our optimization results, and section 6 concludes.
   2 Our model is also different in a number of other dimensions.   For example, we do not impose a maximum life expectancy
and we incorporate stochastic shocks.



                                                             3
1     Stylized facts: health and mortality over the lifetime
1.1    Mortality
We study the evolution of mortality for a given cohort using data from the Human Mortality
Database (hereafter HMD) . The HMD provides population and death counts by age, birth-year
and gender collected through vital registration systems (birth and death certificates) and censuses,
from 1816 up to 2015. Despite a few limitations, the HMD is the highest quality data available
for cohort analysis.3 We compute mortality rates by age for each cohort as the number of deaths
divided by the population at that age, and use these to compute survival rates.4 We also use these
rates to compute cohort life expectancy. We focus on French cohorts for two reasons: these cohorts
are large and the data goes back as early as 1816. While there are important differences across
countries, as we discuss below the overall profiles of mortality by age are very similar for other
countries.
    It is important to distinguish cohort mortality from period mortality, which is used more often.
Appendix Figure 14 summarizes the evolution of period and cohort life expectancy at birth by
gender in France. Recall that period life expectancy is a synthetic construct computed using the
cross-sectional mortality rates of all living cohorts in a given year. For example, to compute the 1850
period life expectancy, the mortality rates at age 70 are approximated using the observed mortality
rates of 70 year-olds in 1850. In contrast, cohort life expectancy is computed using the realized
mortality rates of a given cohort. To compute the 1850 cohort life expectancy, the mortality rates at
age 70 are those observed in 1920. In a stationary environment, with stable mortality rates by age
over time, the two measures are very close. For the 1816-1860 cohorts for whom life expectancy
at birth was stable around 40 for females and 39 for males, the environment would appear to be
close to stationary. But life expectancy increased substantially starting in the late 19th century, with
cohort life expectancy increasing more than period life expectancy, as would be expected when
environmental or medical factors results in lower age-specific mortality rates. Females born around
1920 lived around 69 years, and males around 59, which is substantially longer than cohorts born
a century earlier. Finally note that, although period life expectancy rose for men, several cohorts
of men (born roughly 1880-1900) experienced declines in life expectancy, likely due to WWI and
WWII.
    The logarithm of mortality has the shape of a "tick mark": high at birth, low among the young,
and high and rising almost linearly with age in late adulthood. This can be seen in Figure 1 which
shows the logarithm of mortality rates by age, for selected birth cohorts of women born between
1860 and 1940 for various European countries (panel a) and for France (panel b). Although the
    3 The HMD has some important limitations. Migration is not accounted for. Counts are not accurate for years during

which the territory changed, in 1861, 1869, 1914, 1920, 1939, 1943, 1945, 1946 ­ often corresponding to wars (see Appendix
6). Data is imputed for ages above 90.
    4 Technically, we compute annual probabilities of dying at a given age instead of rates. Since the HMD provides no

information on the distribution of births and deaths within a year, we make no adjustments for the fact that the deaths in the
first year do not correspond to individuals born that year. The HMD reports probabilities (qx ) that make adjustments based
on a series of standard assumptions in epidemiology and demography. In order to avoid introducing discrepancies, we
treat the data and the model symmetrically by computing death probabilities naively. These probabilities are very similar
to the ones HMD computes (See Appendix Figure 13).



                                                              4
level of mortality has changed subtantially over time, the basic evolution of mortality rates by age
is very similar across many countries. These patterns are similar, though not identical for men (see
Appendix Figure 15 and 16).

                                              Figure 1: Mortality rates across populations


                                      a. Six European countries                                             b. France
                      0




                                                                                       0
                      -1




                                                                                       -1
            Log(mortality rate)




                                                                             Log(mortality rate)
                   -2




                                                                                    -2
                      -3




                                                                                       -3

                                                                                                                                 1860
                                                                                                                                 1880
                                                                                                                                 1900
                                                                                                                                 1920
                                                                                                                                 1940
                      -4




                                                                                       -4




                                  0     20    40         60   80   100                             0   20   40         60   80     100
                                                   Age                                                           Age



Note: Human Mortality Database. Panel a shows the log10 of the mortality rates by age for women born in
1860 and in 1940, in six European countries (Belgium, Denmark, the Netherlands, Sweden, France, and
Norway). Panel b shows the mortality rates for women born in France in 1860, 1880, 1900, 1920 and 1940.

    Mortality curves also display an "adolescent hump," especially visible in cohorts born in the
19th century. Starting in adolescence, mortality rates jump up. Hormonal changes and other
changes associated with the transition into adulthood are thought to explain this adolescent hump
(Preston et al. 2000, Thiele, 1871). Finally, there are clearly visible spikes for some cohorts, corre-
sponding to wars and epidemics. These patterns are more visible when examining all the cohort
curves (Appendix Figure 15 and 16). These patterns are not unique to humans. Bronikowski et al.
2011 show, using longitudinal data from primates living in the wild, that these patterns of mortality
are very similar across all primates.


1.2   Health
A striking empirical pattern is that the distribution of health indicators is roughly gaussian, at
any given age after birth and before old age. Partial but continuous health measures like birth
weights and heights (which evolve until adulthood) are close to normally distributed too. For
example, Wilcox and T Russell (1983) show that the distribution of birth weights is normal. That


                                                                         5
adults heights are normally distributed was shown in the 19th century first by Quetelet and then
by Galton and Pearson, as discussed by Tanner and Tanner (1981).5
    How does the distribution of health evolve with age? Unfortunately, the HMD does not contain
any health measure­there is in fact no data we are aware of that tracks a consistent measure of
health from birth to death for a given cohort, but several studies provide partial descriptions of
this evolution. Mean health falls with age, peaking sometime in young adulthood. For example
Deaton and Paxson, 1998, Case and Deaton, 2005, Halliday et al. (2018) and Kaestner et al. (2020)
show that self-reported health status declines with age among adults. Contemporary data show
that hospitalization days (a proxy for morbidity or lack of health) are high in childhood, are at their
lowest among individuals 12-18 and then rise again among older adults (see table P-10 in Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention 2014). Deaton and Paxson (1998), Halliday (2011) and Halliday
et al. (2019) also report that the variance of health also rises with age, and then seems to level off
or fall among the oldest, though the data are less clear about what happens among the oldest. The
variance in organ function also rises with age (Steves et al. 2012). Lastly, both objective measures of
health and subjective measures of health are strong predictors of mortality (Benyamini and Idler,
1999; McGee et al., 1999).


2     A Unified Model of Aging and Mortality
In this section we present a simple model that can account for these basic "stylized facts" about
health and mortality. We will then show that our model fits mortality data well and investigate if
it can generate other mortality patterns in the literature.
    A basic model of natural mortality. Individuals are born with an initial health endowment H0 .
This initial health endowment differs across individuals in the population and has an unknown
distribution. Every period, the environment provides resources I to all individuals, which increase
H . In addition, individuals in the same environment are more or less lucky, and experience an
idiosyncratic shock a to their resources. For example I characterizes the per capita amount of food
that a country produces, but a given person might receive less if for instance rain was unusually
low in their location. The variance of a captures how unequal the distribution of resources within
the population is. These idiosyncratic shocks are assumed to be i.i.d. every period. Finally, the
health stock depreciates each period by an amount d(a), which is increasing with age a (d (a) > 0) :
every period there is a "user cost", reflecting, for example, errors in the epigenome, the system that
translates genes into proteins, or damage to chromosomes occuring during cell division. Together
these forces determine the evolution of the health stock, which is an unobserved latent variable.
    Individuals die when their stock of health dips below a threshold H , which is fixed throughout
the lifetime and identical for all individuals. Let Da = I(Ha  H, Da-1 = 0) denote the random
variable equal to one if the individual dies at age a. The population's health and mortality is
characterized by the following dynamic system:
    5 More   recently Limpert et al. (2001) show that either a normal or a log normal distribution fits female heights well.




                                                                 6
                                   
                                   H = Ha-1 - d(a) + I + a if Da-1 = 0
                                   
                                    a
                                   
                                   Da = I(Ha < H, Da-1 = 0),
                                   D = 0
                                        0

with I  R. Note that if Da = 1 then Ha is undefined ­ we do not observe the health of individuals
after they die. But we observe the mortality rate for the population at age a, which is given by
M Ra = P (Da = 1|Ds = 0 , s < a). Thus the distribution of health at any age is a function of
the entire history of shocks and investments, as can be seen from the definition of M Ra , which
conditions on survival in every previous period.
    We make three key parametric assumptions, in order to make the model more tractable and
consistent with the empirical evidence about the evolution of health with age. First, H0 follows
                               2
a normal distribution N (µH , H  ). Second, shocks to resources every period also follow a normal
                         2 6
distribution a  N (0,  ). Third, depreciation is a power function d(t) = a with   (0, ),  
(0, ).7 This aging process in the model starts directly at birth, consistent with evidence that aging
markers are evolving among children (Wong et al., 2010), and it increases with age, as in biological
models of senescence (Armitage and Doll, 1954; Pompei and Wilson, 2002).8 Figure 2 illustrates the
evolution of health and mortality in the first two periods. Initially, the health distribution is normal.
Then the health distribution shifts to the right during the first period (as long as I is positive and
larger than the aging term) and spreads out (because of the stochastic shock a ). Individuals who
were born too frail or who experience large negative shocks move to the left of the threshold and
die. Graphically, the infant mortality rate (the fraction of individuals who die in the first period)
corresponds to the area under the dashed red curve below the threshold. In the second period, this
truncated distribution moves right again (if I is large relative to d(1)), and the population receives
a new shock, generating mortality again among those with large negative shocks.9
    6 Conceptually, the model has no difficulty accommodating other distributions. But simulations with alternative assump-

tions (e.g. log normal errors) resulted in counterfactual mortality rates and a poorer overall fit.
    7 Our estimates for human populations find that  > 1 and the depreciation is therefore convex in age, as hypothesized

by Grossman. This is not imposed a priori by the model.
    8 See Gavrilov and Gavrilova (1991) and Weibull (1951) for attempts at biological micro-foundations drawing on reliabil-

ity theory from engineering.
    9 If, in the first period, depreciation were very large relative to investment, then mortality would rise from birth onwards

­ a theoretical possibility observed neither among humans nor primates.




                                                               7
                         Figure 2: Health and mortality in the first two years of life


         .4
         .3
         .2
         .1
         0




              -5                               0                                   5                             10
                                                          stock of health

                                               At birth               Age 1, before truncation
         .4
         .3
         .2
         .1
         0




              -5                               0                                   5                             10
                                                          stock of health

                                      At age 1 after truncation               Age 2, before truncation

       Data from simulations



   The stochastic term t therefore plays a key role. In its absence, there would be no deaths in
period 2 ­ nor in any subsequent period, until the depreciation term becomes large enough to push
the leftmost part of the distribution below the threshold.10 Then mortality would increase every
period. Eventually everyone dies­this is proved more formally in Appendix 6.11
  10 If I is less than aging, then one could also generate positive mortality in the second period without a stochastic term.

But then mortality would be rising from age 2 onwards, which we do not observe in the data.
  11 This feature is different from the standard Grossman model in which eternal life is possible, as noted by Case and

Deaton (2005) or Strulik (2015).




                                                                  8
                                                           Figure 3: Model behavior

                                 (a) The evolution of the health distribution over the lifetime




                                   .4
                                                                                                  Age 1              Age 40
                                                                                                  Age 90




                                   .3
                                   .2
                                   .1
                                   0




                                                  0              10                   20                   30                   40
                                                                                 Health stock




                                                  (b) Age profile of population health and mortality




                                                                                                                           12
                                           -.5




                                                                                                                           10
                                           -1
                                   Log of mortality




                                                                                                                                  8
                                           -1.5




                                                                                                                           Health
                                                                                                                           6
                                     -2




                                                                                                                           4
                                           -2.5




                                                                                                                           2
                                           -3




                                                      0     20              40            60             80          100
                                                                                    age

                                                                 Log of mortality               Variance of health
                                                                 Mean health




Note: Simulated data for a population of 500,000 individuals. For this simulation we use the following parameters:
I =0.3575753,  =0.0004789,  =0.8353752, =1.7883, µ0 =0.925079. Panel a shows the density of health for the population at
ages 1, 40 and 90. Panel b plots the average health, the variance of health and the mortality rates of the population over the
lifetime.


    This basic model matches the stylized patterns described above well. Figure 3b shows the evolu-
tion of the health distribution and the resulting mortality over the lifetime. Just like their empirical
counterparts, cohorts in our model exhibit the following characteristic patterns: (1) the distribution
of health is roughly normal in most periods; (2) mean population health increases and then falls
(conversely the model generates morbidity rates that are a U-shaped function of age)12 (3) the vari-
ance of health increases and then falls; and (5) mortality falls and then rises at a roughly log-linear
rate after middle age. There is only one feature of the data that we have not accounted for: the
increase in mortality around adolescence ("adolescent hump") which we consider next.
    External causes of death. Not all deaths have direct biological causes. Many deaths, like acci-
dents or homicides, strike individuals regardless of their health status. These "extrinsic" causes of
death can be integrated in the model by simply adding an i.i.d. "accident shock" that is indepen-
dent of the stock of health Ha .13 Then a constant fraction   [0, 1] of the population is randomly
  12 Morbidity   rate is the fraction of individuals with health below a health threshold but above the death threshold.
  13 Corporate   default models similarly complement the equation describing the evolution of firms' values with a "jump to



                                                                                    9
killed every period. This random accident rate places a floor in the level of mortality that is con-
stant across ages.14 Figure 4a shows what happens to health and mortality when we add a lifetime
accident shock. This extended model also replicates the basic shape of mortality well­a constant
accident rate increases the level of mortality but does not change its basic evolution, nor does it
affect the distribution of health among the living.

                                                  Figure 4: Adding accidents to the baseline model

                         (a) Adding accidents to the model                                (b) US Mortality rates per 1,000 in 1990, by cause of death
          -.5




                                                                                          100
          -1
  Log of mortality




                                                                                          10
    -2      -1.5




                                                                                          1
          -2.5
          -3




                                                                                          .1
                     0      20             40            60               80     100            0   10     20         30   40         50     60   70     80        90
                                                   age                                                                          Age

                         K = 0.004 after age 16               K = 0.004        K=0                   Overall deaths        Disease related        Violent deaths




Note: Figure a: The baseline parameters are the same as in Figure 3b. The red dashed line shows the mortality curve of a
population that experiences a 0.005 percent chance of dying every period due to an accident, unrelated to health. The dotted
green line shows the model which assumes the accident rate is zero at birth but jumps to 0.005 in adolescence. Mortality
rates are higher as a result of external deaths but more so in middle ages because of competing risks: older individuals
that are hit by an accident shock are also unhealthy and would die even in the absence of an accident shock. Figure b is
reproduced from Schwandt and Von Wachter (2019) who generously agreed to let us use it. The data come from period
(not cohort tables) so they are not directly comparable to ours. But we use it to demonstrate that the mortality rate from
non-disease related causes of death is well approximated by a step function that turns on in adolescence. Mortality rates are
shown in log(10) scale.


    Contemporary data however show that the mortality rate from external causes of death is not
constant throughout life. Instead, it is well approximated by a step function, with a major increase
around adolescence (Figure 4b).15 Based on this evidence, we assume that  starts at zero but be-
comes positive in adolescence at an arbitrary age (a ). Adding external causes of death in this
fashion adds two more parameters to the model. For simplicity, we assume that the onset of ado-
lescence is unaffected by health levels, and we take it to be exogenous throughout the paper ­ we
use historical data on the onset of menarche to identify the onset of adolescence instead.16 Figure
4a shows that adding this step function results in a profile of mortality that qualitatively matches
the main features we observe.17
default" component.
  14 If all health-related deaths were eliminated, this accident rate would uniquely determine the life expectancy of the

population (1/).
  15 The shapes in the two figures are not identical. However, the contemporary data is not cohort but period data. In

contemporary settings, the two profiles differ substantially, as discussed already. However there is no historical cohort
mortality data by cause of death, so we cannot create the more relevant cohort figure.
  16 This assumption could be relaxed. The onset of menarche, a proxy for adolescence in women, has declines from ap-

proximately age 16 to age 12 sin the last two centuries. This development has been linked to nutritional changes and might
be a function of health.
  17 Note that, regardless of whether the accident rate is constant or increases in adolescence, the distribution of health and




                                                                                     10
3     Explaining Mortality Patterns
We now assess whether the model can quantitatively match observed patterns of mortality. We do
this by estimating the parameters of the model and assessing the model's fit for both human and
primate cohorts.


3.1    Identification and estimation.
Identification. Two out of the nine parameters of the full model cannot be identified. To see this,
note that the expression for mortality in the first period M R1 = P (D1 = 1) = P (µH - a1 + I + 1 <
H ) is the standard Probit model. We can subtract H and divide by H on both sides of the expres-
sion that determines the probability of dying, and leave the mortality rate unchanged. Therefore
the threshold H and the standard deviation of the initial distribution H are not identified. Without
loss of generality, we set H = 0 and H = 1.18 After normalization, all the parameters are expressed
in "standard deviation" units, except for  and , which are "scale free"­ they do not depend on the
initial distribution. For example, we interpret µH as the distance from the threshold of the initial
distribution, in standard deviations of the initial distribution.
    The rescaled model characterizes the biological evolution of health and mortality of a cohort
using 7 (rescaled) parameters: one for the mean initial health (µH ), two governing the aging process
(, ), two characterizing the effects of resources, in the form of average investments (I ) and the
                                            2
variance of these investments or shocks (     ), and finally one () capturing the accident rate increase
occurring in adolescence occurring at a. We do not estimate this last parameter. For humans, we
assume adolescence starts at age = (- 0.0175 x calendar year) + 47.4 for all women, based on the
estimates provided in de La Rochebrochard (2000) who estimated the equation using historical
data from multiple sources. Adolescence is assumed to start one year later for men, as observed
in contemporary settings. We test the robusteness of the results to alternative assumptions. For
chimpanzees we use two alternative start dates, age 8 and age 14, which span the ranges described
in the literature.19
    Estimation. Despite the model's conceptual simplicity, the mortality rate at a given age cannot
be expressed in closed-form.20 We therefore estimate the parameters using the simulated method
of moments. We matched the annual age-specific survival rates, and thus implicitly, life expectancy.
We construct survival curves using the population and mortality counts by gender, year of birth
and year of death for France. Appendix A has the data and estimation details.
its evolution over the lifetime remain unchanged and follow the patterns shown in panel b of Figure 3b. This is because
these deaths are random and do not depend on health status.
   18 More precisely, we need to normalize 2 out of three parameters. We find it more intuitive to normalize the threshold

rather than the initial mean, but this choice is arbitrary.
   19 Bronikowski et al. 2011 report the onset at age 14, other sources (Behringer et al. (2014)) place the onset at age 8.
   20 Our discrete model is similar to a class of models used for corporate default probability and securities pricing. This

literature has established that, except for the particular case of a constant or linear drift, these models do not admit closed-
form solutions (see Lando, 2004).




                                                              11
3.2    Mortality rates over the lifetime
We start by estimating the model for the 1816 cohort. The model very closely matches the 1816
cohort's mortality rates at every age (Figure 5a shows results for females). For females, the pre-
dicted life expectancy is 38 years and 102 days compared to the actual life expectancy of 38 years
and 91 days.21 We estimate an initial mean health of about 0.86, so many individuals are born at
or below the threshold (Appendix Table 1). Absent any shocks or investment in the first period,
infant mortality would have been roughly 15% (instead of 17%). Mortality falls dramatically after
age 1 because there is selection (many frail individuals have already died), and because investment
is large relative to aging in the first period (I is estimated as 0.4 and  as 0.0006). The variance of
resources is large (estimated to be roughly 1) so a few unlucky individuals still fall below the death
threshold after age 2. We estimate an external mortality rate of roughly 9 per thousand for every
year after adolescence starts, lowering the 1816 cohort's life expectancy by about 7.6 years.22 This
provides an upper bound estimate of the effect of maternal mortality ­ the main cause of death for
women in the 19th century ­ on life expectancy in the past. Accounting for external deaths is im-
protant ­ the fits of the model improves very substantially when we do. The estimated parameters
also change substantially.
    Log mortality starts a steady increase after age 45. This occurs because while  is small (~
0.0006) the aging rate  is around 1.8, so that the aging function  t is increasing more than linearly
with age. Because health resources I are increasing only linearly, eventually all individuals die,
even lucky ones with many large positive health shocks.23 These results are robust to a number
of alternative estimation modifications including using alternative weights, using an alterantive
objective function, and allowing for truncation at age 90. We also estimates models where we
estimate the onset of adolescence is normally distributed, or where we estimate the distribution of
the onset of adolescence. These results are shown in Appendix Table 3 and they show that the fit is
not very sensitive to these alternatives.
    Gender differences. Appendix Figures 17a show the results for males born in 1816 and Ap-
pendix Table 1 shows the estimated parameters. Men born in 1816 lived shorter lives than women,
as has been documented before. Consistent with their greater frailty and higher infant mortality
rates, males' inital mean health is 19% lower than that of females' (Goldin and Lleras-Muney 2019,
Cullen et al. 2016). There is a substantial increase in deaths in adolescence for both males and fe-
males, but it is larger for men, consistent with their greater involvement in accidents and violent
deaths. However, because males have higher overall mortality rates, the elimination of accidental
deaths would increase their life expectancy by about 7.6 years, very similar to the predicted gains
for women.
    Accounting for the adolescent hump significantly affects the estimated parameters and drasti-
cally improves the fit, as was the case for women. After accounting for the adolescent hump (col-
umn 2 of Table 1), we find that males receive slightly larger annual investments (about 10% greater)
  21 Appendix   Table 1 shows alternative measures of fit and the estimated parameters.
  22 The fit of the model is poor around the time of adolescence. This can be improved upon by allowing the onset of
adolescence to be a normally distributed function and estimating its parameters. These results are shown in Appendix
Table 3.
  23 See Appendix 6 for a rigorous proof. This statement holds even in the absence of external deaths.




                                                        12
                                             Figure 5: Model fit for humans and primates

                            (a) French women born in 1816                           (b) Female chimpanzees
            0
            -.5
  Log(mortality rate)
    -1.5    -2  -1




                                                            Data 1816 cohort
            -2.5




                                                            Model

                        0    20       40         60         80           100
                                           Age



Note: Panel a shows the data and estimated curve for French women born in 1816. Panel b shows the data and
estimated parameters for female chimps. Appendix Tables 1 and 2 show the estimated parameters.


but also experience greater variance in investments. They also age faster in old age (though women
age a bit faster during prime ages). Overall, the model fit is excellent for both genders, though the
fit is slighter better for females.
     Primates. Human mortality patterns are very similar to those of other primates. Therefore our
basic model should be able to describe primate mortality well, particularly since they live in rela-
tively stable environments, experience no technological change and have few optimization oppor-
tunities. We estimate the model using the best available data on populations of female chimpanzees
living in the wild from Bronikowski et al. (2011). These populations are tracked in the wild from
birth to death and have been used to compare mortality rates across various primate populations.
We focus on chimpanzees because they are the closest primates to humans.
     Figure 1b shows the results for females chimps. We still obtain a very good fit, despite the
small populations and therefore much noisier estimates. The parameter estimates are provided in
Appendix Table 2. Compared to human females, female chimps are born in better health, consistent
with the observation that human infants are born frail relative to other species.24 We also estimate a
much lower rate of accidental deaths among female chimps starting in adolescence, in line with the
fact that maternal mortality is a uniquely important problem among humans (Rosenberg, 1992).25
But other parameters favor longevity among humans. In female chimps, the estimated annual
investment is about 20% smaller and the variance of this investment is 10% larger than among
human females. Most notably,  is much larger (0.06 v. 0.0006) than in humans, resulting in much
faster aging. As in humans, female chimps live longer than males, partly because males have larger
external causes of death than females.26 They also have larger annual investments, larger variance
  24 There are several theories for this­for a discussion, see Rosenberg and Trevathan (1995).
  25 AsRosenberg (1992) puts it, "most primates experience parturition as a simpler, shorter, and very likely less painful
process (than humans)." This difficulty is believed to have led to the use of birth attendants in almost all known human
cultures and times. Our estimates do not imply that external causes of death are unimportant among primates--neither
model estimates a baseline accident rate throughout.
  26 Not surprisingly, correctly timing the onset of adolescence is not important for females, but makes a substantial differ-




                                                                               13
in resources and larger aging () than females. But unlike humans, males have larger initial health.


3.3    The rectangularization of survival and the sources of increases in life ex-
       pectancy
Remarkably, the model is able to track the evolution of the mortality profiles for all the individual
cohorts since 1816. This evolution is characterized by a "rectangularization" of the survival curves,
which has accelerated over the last decades. Panel a in Figure 6 shows the rectangularization of the
survival curves of French women born between 1816 and 1947. Survival to age 1 has increased dra-
matically. The next section of the survival curve ­ roughly from age 1 to age 60 ­ has considerably
flattened. In addition, a steep downward slope has emerged among the oldest. As a result, more
than 70% of those born in 1940 live past age 70, whereas in the 1816 cohort fewer than 30% did.
Panel a in Figure 6 shows that the model captures this rectangularization with great accuracy: the
observed (blue markers) and estimated (red dashes) survival curves are very similar. The model
can fit the data for the 1940 cohort almost as well as for the 1816 cohort. The results are similar for
men (Appendix Table 4) but we do not discuss them here for brevity.27
    What are the sources of increases in longevity according to our estimates? Panel b in Figure 6
shows the evolution of four of the estimated parameters from 1816 and 1923. Starting in the 1830s,
we see a constant and rather drastic decline in external causes of death, which is consistent with
the elimination of maternal mortality (a major cause cause of death among prime-age women in
the past (Loudon, 1988)), and with the steep decline in violent deaths as documented for instance
by Pinker (2011). Health at birth, µH , started to increase steadily only at the end of the century,
consistent with the timing of improvements in water, sanitation, and the elimination of epidemic
and infectious disease mortality, which greatly reduced infant mortality (Cutler et al., 2006; Preston
and Van de Walle, 1978).
    By contrast, health resources (I ) did not change much in the 19th century (they fall a bit and
rise again), consistent with the debate on the questionable benefits of the Industrial Revolution on
health and living standards. However, there is a steady decline in the variance of health resources
­ it is also unclear why this occurred, though it is possible food availability became less variable.
Alternatively it might be difficult for the model to separately identify the effects of I from the
effects of its variance because the data on mortality is only informative about the left tail of the
health distribution. Most interestingly, we observe a substantial decrease in the force of aging (see
Figure 6c), the causes of which are unclear. Since food consumption and heights were rising, this
suggests that nutrition is a possible determinant of the aging function (Fogel, 1994).28
    Appendix Figure 18 shows the performance of the model for each birth cohort born 1816-1923
(the last cohort with complete data up to age 90). The fit is in general excellent and is steady
throughout the 19th century, but it gets much worse for cohorts born after 1900. There are a few
reasons for this. First, for some of the more recent cohorts, there is still some potential bias due to
ence for males.
  27 A full examination of gender differences in the estimated time series is beyond the scope of this paper.
  28 There is unfortunately very little data to investigate what factors might affect the estimated parameters. This is an

interesting area for future research.



                                                           14
censoring. Second, three events in the early 20th century are likely to severely affect the cohort pro-
files: WWI, the 1918-1919 Spanish flu pandemic, and WWII. We discuss below how we estimated
these, but these events are difficult to model. The data during these episodes is also of significantly
lower quality, as changes in territory, for example, make the computations of death rates difficult.
Lastly, we are assuming that there is no inter-temporal optimization of health investments taking
place. The rise of social insurance programs throughout the 20th century suggests that this simpli-
fying assumption is likely to be violated for more recent cohorts. We discuss optimization and its
effects in the last part of the paper.

                     Figure 6: Evolution of survival for French females born 1816-1940

       (a) Observed and Estimated Cohort Survival Rates                                        (b) Parameter evolution




                                  (c) Estimated Aging Function for the 1816 and 1916 co-
                                  horts

                                   2.50


                                   2.00


                                   1.50


                                   1.00


                                   0.50


                                   0.00
                                          0   10   20   30   40     50          60   70   80    90

                                                             1816        1916



Note: Panel a shows the observed (blue markers) and estimated (red dashes) survival curves for four cohorts of French
women born about 40 years apart between 1816 to 1923. The y-axis shows the survival rate and the x-axis shows the age.
Panel b displays the evolution of estimated parameters, except for the aging parameters which are shown in Appendix
Figure 6c. On the left axis are the values for the three blue lines corresponding to resources (I ), the variance of the lifelong
shock ( ), and initial health at birth (µ). The accident rate  in red is on the right axis. The model is estimated separately on
each cohort. We treat the two World Wars as two independent negative resources I shocks as discussed in the next section,
see Appendix C for details. Panel c plots the estimated aging function   t for the 1816 cohort (0.0006 · t1.79 ) and the 1916
(0.0007 · t1.53 ) cohort. It shows that the aging rate has flattened dramatically due to a 15% decline in .




                                                               15
4     Understanding Mortality Dynamics
The evolution of the parameter estimates for each cohort suggests large, lasting changes in the
environment but does not identify their sources. In this section, we investigate how environmental
changes and their implications on mortality rates can be understood, through the lens of the model,
as proceeding from simple shocks to the model parameters. Although there is no data to estimate a
more sophisticated model that considers how environmental factors affect the model's parameters,
we conduct a series of qualitative exercises to demonstrate that the model can rationalize the effects
of temporary and permanent shocks in the environment.


4.1    Socio-Economic Status Mortality Gradient
A substantial literature documents health and mortality "gradients" ­ large and persistent differ-
ences across individuals with different levels of socio-economic status such as education, income
level, occupation or race (Cutler et al., 2012). For instance, Americans with a high permanent in-
come level at age 40 have lower subsequent mortality relative to those with lower incomes (Chetty
et al. 2016). Figure 7a reproduces Chetty et al. (2016)'s figure showing that the log mortality curves
partly converge in old age (implying smaller gaps at older ages in percentage terms). Similarly,
more educated individuals tend to have healthier behaviors (Cutler and Lleras-Muney 2010), re-
sulting in lower mortality rates throughout. In their review, Hummer and Lariscy (2011) write,
"analyses invariably show that educational disparities in mortality are narrower at older than at
younger adult ages."
    How can the model rationalize such gradients? Suppose that we extend our model so that lower
income leads to lower I throughout life. In other words, assume there exists a function I = I (Y, E )
with I > 0 for all inputs such as income Y or education E . What is the effect of increasing Y
thoughout the lifetime on mortality rates?
    We illustrate this by simulating the effect of lowering I by 50% on the 1816 French female cohort.
Figure 7b shows this results in higher and flatter log-mortality curves for the poorer population.
Moreover, the curves for the rich and the poor converge in old age, just as documented by Chetty
et al. (2016) and shown in Figure 7a, and consistent with the evidence of education. This occurs
because, although the frailest individuals are saved in the first period when Y increases, Y shifts
the distribution of health right for all individuals in the second and subsequent periods. Therefore
overall mortality rates fall throughout the lifetime.
    When looking at the profile over the lifetime, the narrowing of the mortality SES gradient (in
percentage terms) occurs in the model only after a certain age.29 To illustrate this, Figure 7c shows the
effect of greater I on the gap in mortality between the rich and the poor, expressed either in levels or
logs. Each point in the figure plots the difference between the rich and the poor at a given age -- this
is equivalent to plotting the age-specific coefficients from a regression of age-specific mortality (or
log mortality) on a dummy for the rich population. In log terms, this mortality gap initially grows
with age, as hypothesized by the cumulative advantage hypothesis (Lynch 2003, Ross and Wu
  29 Note that the gap in levels between the high and low I populations is hump shaped with age instead of U-shaped,

growing with age among older adults (Figure 7c).


                                                        16
1995), because greater I pushes the entire population further and further away from the threshold
every period. However, gradients eventually fall because of selection, as suggested by Crimmins
(2005): the population with lower I starts dying, leaving only the healthiest individuals alive. The
figure also shows that in levels, SES gaps in mortality rates are u-shaped, instead of hump-shaped,
with age. The reason the gap diminishes between childhood and adolescence is that, when I is
high relative to aging, fewer and fewer people are close to the death threshold. Thus SES gaps are
very small among prime adults, and possibly hard to detect in finite samples, but they rise with
age as illustrated by Kaestner et al. (2020) for education.
    Health. Lower income (or education) and thus lower I is also predicted to lower average health
at all ages. But the effect increases with age, and then declines once mortality starts rising in both
levels and percentage terms. (See Figure 7c.) These predictions match the evidence in Case et al.
(2002), Currie and Stabile (2003) and House et al. (2005), who show that the gaps in self-reported
health status and morbidity between those born in poor families and those born rich families grow
with age, but decline after 65.
    Resource scarcity or accelerated aging? Instead of affecting annual resources, higher SES could
instead lower rates of aging. SES is associated with more frequent physical exercise, lower exposure
to pollution or lower stress which could be conceptualized as affecting the rate of depreciation. In
the model, an increase in the aging parameters ( or ) and a decrease in I generate similar health
and mortality profiles among the old, as shown in Appendix Figure 19. Thus, with data from
(mature) adults only, it is not possible to infer whether SES is affecting annual resources I or aging
rates. But higher aging rates do not result in any visible health or mortality gaps among children,
whereas higher I does. Therefore, the evidence in Case et al. (2002) or Currie and Stabile (2003),
interpreted through the lens of the model, suggests that changing family income is equivalent to
changing I . It is possible to break this observational equivalence by relating measures of aging
to SES. Liu et al. 2019 find that education and race are associated with lower methylation rates (a
biomarker for aging), suggesting SES also affects aging rates.
    Before moving on, we note that it would be ideal to estimate our model using cohort data by
education or income -- however, there is no data that we know of that allows one to track cohorts
from birth (or age 25) to death by permanent income or education levels.30 Our simulations only
show that the model can rationalize the observed patterns in the data.


4.2    Non-Monotonic Effects of In-Utero Shocks
Detrimental events in-utero (famines, war, stress, etc.) result in large and persistent declines in
health that are visible in infancy and old age (Almond and Currie, 2011) and in elevated mortality
among the survivors.31 Suppose again that we allow for the initial mean of the distribution, µH ,
to be affected by outside forces. What is the effect of exogenously lowering initial health on the
  30 There are a few longitudinal data sets tracking individuals from birth onwards, but they do not provide annual data.
  31 Van den Berg et al. (2006, 2009) and Masters (2018) show that being born in a recession is associated with increases in
mortality rate later in life. Similarly, Lindeboom et al. (2010) show that children born during the Dutch Potato famine lived
shorter lives as a result of the famine. Bharadwaj et al. (2013) show that investments made immediately after birth among
low birth weight children result in lower mortality rates later in life.




                                                             17
                                                             Figure 7: SES gradients

   (a) Persistent SES Mortality gap in Chetty et al. (2016)                                                (b) Persistent SES Mortality gap in our model




                                                                                              -.5
                                                                                              -1
                                                                                     Log Mortality Rate
                                                                                       -2       -1.5
                                                                                              -2.5                                                                       High Income
                                                                                                                                                                         Low Income
                                                                                              -3

                                                                                                          40                50               60                 70                 80
                                                                                                                                            Age, y




           (c) Effects of decreasing I by 50% on mortality                                                     (d) Effects of decreasing I by 50% on health
  .4




                                                                                     0
                                                                          1.5




                                                                                                                                                                                   -.5
                                                                                     -2
  .3




                                                                                                                                                                                   -1
                                                                                     -4
  .2




                                                                          1




                                                                                                                                                                                   -1.5
                                                                                     -6
  .1




                                                                                                                                                                                   -2
                                                                          .5




                                                                                                                                                                                   -2.5
                                                                                     -8
  0




       0            20                   40         60               80                              0                 20                  40             60                  80
                                         Age                                                                                               Age

                      gap (right axis)         log gap (left axis)                                                      gap (right axis)             % gap (left axis)




Note: Panel a reproduces the results from Chetty et al. (2016). Panel b shows the predicted mortality rate for
the 1816 cohort (using the parameters from in Appendix Table 1 but setting the accident rate at 0 throughout
for simplicity) and the counterfactual mortality that results from a 95% decline in I for this population. The
baseline 1816 cohort is labeled "High Income" and the counterfactual population is labeled "Low Income."
Panel c shows the simulated effects of increasing the baseline level of I by 50% on mortality in both levels and
percentage terms. We plot the gap between the baseline and the affected population. This gap is computed as
MR(low)-MR(high), or H(low)-H(high). Panel d shows the effects of increasing the baseline level of I by 50%
on mortality on health. The baseline parameters are the same as in Figure 3b.




                                                                                18
                             Figure 8: The effects of negative in-utero shocks

       (a) Monotonic response in Grossman's model                                  (b) U-shaped decreases in health in our model




                                                                                                                                                              .4
                                                                         1
                                                                         .8




                                                                                                                                                              .3
                                                                         .6




                                                                                                                                                              .2
                                                                         .4




                                                                                                                                                              .1
                                                                         .2
                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                               0               20             40               60             80        100
                                                                                                                         Age

                                                                                                     gap (right axis)               % gap (left axis)




                               (c) Negative in-utero shocks increase lifetime mortality
                              .025




                                                                                                                   .1
                              .02
                              .015




                                                                                                                   .05
                              .01
                              .005
                              0




                                                                                                                   0




                                     0     20             40                  60              80             100
                                                                   Age

                                                gap (right axis)                   log gap (left axis)




Note: Panel a is reproduced from Almond and Currie (2011) and shows the decline in the health stock due to a
shock in utero that is predicted by the standard Grossman model. This effect is initially large but it fades over
time and will be close to zero among adults older than 30. Panel b shows the simulated effects of a 50% decline
in in-utero health for the 1816 French population in the model (setting the accident rate at 0 throughout for
simplicity). The figure plots the decreases in health, in either levels or percentage terms. Panel c shows the
effects on mortality in both levels and percentage terms. The figure shows mortality increases. The baseline
parameters are the same as in Figure 3b.




                                                                   19
subsequent health and mortality of the survivors? We use the 1816 parameters as a baseline to
simulate this effect.
    Our model rationalizes why the age-profile of these responses is non-monotonic, which canon-
ical models have been unable to explain. The empirical literature finds that the effects of various
shocks appear to "fade out" initially, only to re-appear later in life. (See Almond et al. (2018) 's com-
prehensive review.) They point out that, while the initial fading out is consistent with the canonical
Grossman (1972) model, the non-monotonicity of the effect is not. The Grossman model predicts
a large immediate decline in the population's health after an in-utero shock that becomes hardly
visible in adulthood (Figure 8a). Our model, by contrast, predicts exactly the U-shaped pattern
described by Almond et al. (2018). Figure 8b documents that lowering initial health µH by 50%
for the 1816 French cohort results in lower health among the survivors at all ages -- both in levels
and in percentages -- with a u-shaped pattern in age. This occurs without complementary or com-
pensating investments. The reason this happens in our model -- but not in Grossman's -- is that
depreciation in our model is not multiplicative in the stock.32
    These results also suggest it is not possible to identify the effects of in-utero shocks with health
data for adolescents or young adults only. Schiman et al. (2017), who study the effects of experienc-
ing WWII in utero and early childhood, find that its effects on health, disability, and employment
among adults are not visible for young adults, but grow with age, as predicted here.
    Mortality. Mortality at all ages also increases when initial conditions worsen but, interestingly,
displays markedly different patterns depending on the metrics used. When measured in levels, the
effects are again U-shaped. The intuition for this is simple. Among adolescents and young adults,
the average level of health is high and very few individuals are close to the threshold, so shifting the
distribution of health has very little impact on mortality. But shifts in the distribution will result in
higher death rates as the distribution gets closer to the threshold at older ages. When expressed in
percentage terms however, the predicted effects of negative in-utero shocks on mortality fall with
age (Figure 8c), though this pattern is not necessarily monotonic: in middle ages, when mortality
levels are low, the effects can rise and fall due to small samples. This occurs because the level of
mortality is U-shaped with age also. An important implication of this exercise for the empirical
literature is that the predictions for the dynamic effects of shocks on mortality are very sensitive to
the functional form one chooses to study its effects.


4.3     Scarring Effects of Wars
Wars have long-lasting detrimental health effects among survivors. Such "scarring" effects have
been documented in at least 13 European countries after WWII. Compared to less exposed sur-
vivors, individuals who were more exposed to the war experienced worse economic and health
outcomes several decades later (e.g. Kesternich et al., 2014, Havari and Peracchi, 2017).33 Figure
  32 Dalgaard et al. (2019)'s model of health deficits also predicts that in-utero shocks will result in health gaps that increase

with age starting in adulthood. But they do not model mortality or the effects of early childhood shocks on mortality before
adulthood. Furthermore, our model predicts a u-shape pattern of effects rather than a monotonically increasing effect. This
u-shape results from our having an early childhood period where investments move the distribution of health up.
  33 Costa (2012) documents scarring effects of the American Civil War on surviving soldiers.




                                                               20
9a Panel a (reproduced from Wilson et al. 2014) shows the survival rates of World War I on New
Zealand military personnel, comparing those that served in the war (1914 cohort) versus those that
did not (1918 cohort).
    The model successfully reproduces this survival pattern when the war is modeled as a tempo-
rary decrease in I . Figure 9b shows the survival curve obtained from estimating a model with a
4-year decline in I at age 18 (corresponding to WWI and the 1918 flu pandemic) and a 6-year decline
in I at age 43 (corresponding to WWII), and simulating the counterfactual curve if the I -shock due
to the war is eliminated.34 The model predicts what Wilson et al. (2014) observe in the data for their
counterfactual (1900) cohort: the survival curve for the affected cohort is lower than the survival
curve for the unaffected cohort, both during the war and after. The model predicts scarring: the
mortality rates for survivors remain elevated throughout their lives relative to the counterfactual
mortality that would have occurred in the absence of WWI. We estimate that WWI lowered life
expectancy by approximately 16 years for the male 1896 cohort, and WWII lowered it by another 2
years.35


4.4    Harvesting Effects
Extreme weather or pollution events appear to displace the distribution of deaths in the short term,
creating a sudden increase in the number of deaths followed by abnormally low mortality. In
demography, this phenomenon is known as "harvesting" and has been, for instance, documented
in France during the 2003 heatwave, as shown in Figure 10a reproduced from Toulemon and Barbieri
(2008).36
    Suppose that the death threshold H is mostly a function of the environment. Figure 10b shows
the simulated effect of a temporary increase in the threshold at ages 60 and 61 on the mortality of
the 1816 cohort. It results in very high mortality during the shock. But mortality starts dropping
before the shock ends because the frailest individuals have already died in the first period of the
shock, so later on only those that receive a large negative idiosyncratic shock die. Once the weather
disruption ends, and the threshold is restored to its original (lower) level, mortality falls substan-
tially because there are very few individuals close to the new (lower) threshold. This holds true for
a long time until the aging process naturally lowers health stocks again, closer to the new lower
threshold. Thus a change in the death threshold generates harvesting, and does so by killing the
least healthy individuals of the cohort. A key characteristic of a threshold change is that it does not
affect the health of the living.37
  34 This assumption is consistent with historical data for WWII. GDP declined substantially during the war and 20 to 55%

of it was appropriated by Germans during the occupation (Occhino et al., 2007). Food rationing began in 1940. We can
assume that the war is a different type of shock, but we do not obtain substantially better fit with these alternatives. Results
available upon request.
  35 These estimates can be improved upon. We impose an equal annual shock during wars. The fit for this cohort can be

improved substantially if we allow every year of the wars to have its own effect. But of course, this also lowers the degrees
of freedom. Interestingly, if we do this, we find that 1914 was a particularly bad year, with investment estimated to be -5.3
that year, instead of the 0.57 annual investment we otherwise estimate for the cohort. The results are shown in Appendix
table 5.
  36 See Schwartz (2000) or Zeger et al. (1999) for the effects of pollution, and Deschenes and Moretti (2009) or Deschênes

and Greenstone (2011) for the effects of very hot or very cold weather.
  37 It is unclear whether weather shocks have no effects on the health of those that do not die. See Deschenes and Moretti




                                                              21
                                             Figure 9: The effects of WWI on survival and mortality

                        (a) Effect of WWI among New Zealand soldiers              (b) Effects of WWI and WWII among French men born in 1896




                                                                                                100
                                                                                                                                           WWI
                                                                                                                                           WWII
                                                                                                                                           Data




                                                                                                80
                                                                                                                                           Model
                                                                                                                                           No WWI




                                                                                     Surviving Probability
                                                                                                                                           No WWII




                                                                                                   60
                                                                                                                                           No WWs




                                                                                        40      20
                                                                                                0


                                                                                                             0   20   40         60   80        100
                                                                                                                           Age




                            (c) Mortality rates French men born in 1896
            0      -1
   Log Mortality Rate
   -2




                                                                       WWI
                                                                       WWII
                                                                       Data
                                                                       Model
                                                                       No WWI
            -3




                        0          20        40         60        80        100
                                                  Age



Note: Panel a is from Wilson et al. (2014) and shows the scarring effect of WWI. It compares the survival curve
of the cohort of young New Zealand military personnel who left for the war in 1914, with the cohort who
left for the war in 1918 but did not see active combat. The median age in the sample is 24. Panel b shows
the scarring effect of WWI for men born in France in 1896 who turned 18 when WWI started in 1914 and
who would have served in the military. The model for this cohort includes one more parameter for WWI and
another for WWII: we allow for I to be different during each war. Instead of using a comparison group, the
model is used to compute counterfactual curves showing what survival profiles would look like in the absence
of either or both wars. Panel c shows the mortality rates by age for the 1986 cohort of French men.




                                                                                22
                     Figure 10: The effects of temporary increases in the threshold

     (a) Harvesting during the French 2003 Heatwave                                           (b) Harvesting in the model among the old




                                                                         2.5        2
                                                           Relative number of deaths
                                                             1         1.5
                                                                         .5
                                                                                         55                 60              65            70
                                                                                                                   Age




                                                                                          (c) Harvesting in the model among the young
                                                                           4         3
                                                             Relative number of deaths
                                                             1           2 0




                                                                                         0                  5               10            15
                                                                                                                   Age



Note: Panel a is is from Toulemon and Barbieri (2008) and shows the mortality displacement created by the
French 2003 Heatwave. The number of excess deaths in Summer 2003 is computed relative to the number of
deaths during the same period in 2000. The grey (hatched) area corresponds to an excess (deficit) of 15,000
deaths. These excess deaths are computed for the entire population. Panel b shows the simulated effects of
a temporary increase in the threshold (from 0 to 0.8) at ages 60 and 61 on the 1816 French cohort (setting the
accident rate to 0 for simplicity) which results in approximately 8000 excess deaths during the shock and fewer
deaths for the subsequent 2 years. Panel c shows the simulated effects of a temporary increase in the threshold
(from 0 to 0.8) at ages 3 and 4 on the 1816 French cohort (setting the accident rate to 0 for simplicity) which
results in approximately 40,000 excess deaths during the shock. The effect is much larger among the young
because many more children are close to the threshold as shown in Figure 3a.




                                                      23
    Heat waves and other forms of bad weather also generate excess mortality among children
(Figure 10c). However, the displacement effect is substantially more spread out among children. In
other words, the children who die as a result of the bad weather would not be dying immediately
right after the bad weather ends -- they would be living substantially longer lives. Thus the cost of
this event is much larger in terms of life expectancy when it affects children than the elderly. This
occurs because, among children, investment levels are high relative to depreciation and mortality
rates are falling. In contrast, depreciation among the elderly is much larger.


4.5    Other types of shocks
The previous two sections illustrate the effects of temporary decreases in I or increases in the
threshold, but do not compare their effects in the same scale because we aimed to reproduced ex-
isting published results. Figure 11 shows how log mortality rates respond to all types of temporary
shocks. Each shock leaves a unique imprint on mortality. Temporary investment and depreciation
decreases have similar scarring effects: mortality rises when the shock starts and then starts falling
after the shock ends but it does not return to its counterfactual level. On the other hand, only
changes in the threshold generate harvesting. Only variance changes results in a "cross over" in
mortality rates in old ages. And only accident increases leave mortality rates unchanged once the
shock ends. Appendix Figure 20 further reveals that the pattern of these responses over time is not
the same when viewed in logs or in levels.
    There are some important patterns that cannot be rationalized with these simple shocks. For
example, the literature has shown that recessions lower mortality in the short term but increase
it in the long term. To generate this type of pattern, one would need to assume that recessions
affect more than one parameter and consider combinations of possibly asynchronous shocks. For
example, it could be that during a recession accidents fall in the short term but lifetime incomes are
permanetly decreased as hypothesized by Schwandt and Von Wachter (2019).


5     Implications for optimal investments
5.1    Optimization in a stationary environment
So far we have considered a population that receives constant investments in its health, uniformly
over the lifetime. But is that behavior a reasonable approximation if resources are optimally allo-
cated over the lifetime? To answer this question, this section relaxes the simplifying assumption of
constant investment, and estimates the optimal investment profile that a social planner concerned
with maximizing the life-expectancy of a population would choose. Remarkably, while this opti-
mal investment profile indeed deviates from the constant investment rule studied in the previous
sections, it would result in very similar patterns of mortality. In other words, the optimal invest-
ment sequence does not fundamentally change the age-profile of mortality rates. We then evaluate
the life expectancy gains resulting from optimization.
(2009) or Deschênes and Greenstone (2011) for discussions of this.



                                                            24
                              Figure 11: Effects of temporary shocks on log mortality rates


                              a.Investment decline                 b.Variance increase                   c.Accident increase



                     0




                                                          0




                                                                                                0
                     -1




                                                          -1




                                                                                                -1
                     -2




                                                          -2




                                                                                                -2
                     -3




                                                          -3




                                                                                                -3
                     -4




                                                          -4




                                                                                                -4
                          0     20   40   60   80   100        0     20   40   60    80   100        0     20   40   60   80   100
                                       Age                                  Age                                   Age


                          d.Depreciation increase          e.Threshold increase to 0.8
                     0




                                                          0
                     -1




                                                          -1
                     -2




                                                          -2
                     -3




                                                          -3
                     -4




                                                          -4




                          0     20   40   60   80   100        0    20    40   60    80   100
                                       Age                                  Age



Note: Results from simulations using the 1816 cohort parameters and assuming no adolescent hump. Shocks
correspond to a 50% change in the parameter, except for the threshold, which is assumed to increase to 0.8
from 0. The shock starts at age 20 and lasts 10 years, ending at age 30.


    First we develop notation to describe the problem that a benevolent social planner would face.
We solve this problem under two key assumptions. The first key assumption is that the planner
has a fixed budget but has the ability to borrow and save costlessly -- in other words, the planner
knows exactly what the total lifetime resources are for a given cohort and can be redistribute these
resources across the lifetime at no cost.38 The second assumption we make is that the planner
wishes to maximize life expectancy.
    The survival function tracks the probability of surviving over time. It is naturally expressed
as a function of the cdf of health in the population. The probability of surviving until the end of
period a is Sa = 1 - Fa (0). Life expectancy at birth for a given cohort is conveniently related to the
survival function
                                                                             
                                                                   LE =             Sa
                                                                            a=1

   Several observations are in order. First, in practice, this is a finite sum. Second, this is the
cohort's life expectancy, not the "period" life expectancy which is usually reported. The social
planner now chooses an investment path I = {Ia }aN that is age-dependent, instead of keeping the
investment level I constant over the lifetime. The planner can move resources over time periods
costlessly, as if a perfect annuity were available, and faces a given lifetime budget, B . Then the
optimization problem takes the form
 38 This   is a standard set of assumptions in this type of models, for example see Murphy and Topel (2006).




                                                                          25
                                                                          
                                         maxLE (I )        =        max      Sa (I )
                                           I                     {Ia }
                                                                       a=1
                                                                 
                                               s.t.                   Ia · Sa (I )  B
                                                                a=1

  The social planner chooses an optimal path such that the marginal effect of increasing invest-
ment at a given age is equalized across all ages. The first order conditions are given by
                                                                               
                                                                
                                 Ss (I )                               Ss (I ) 
                                         -  Sa (I ) +               Is          = 0 , a > 0
                             s=a
                                 Ia                                    Ia
                                                               sa

                                                  1
where  is the Lagrange multiplier and therefore      represents the shadow cost for the social plan-
ner, starting from the optimal path, of an additional year of life expectancy. Both terms in the
bracket are positive, illustrating the key dynamic tradeoff in investment with a fixed budget. An
additional investment at one age increases the number of survivors at all subsequent ages, exerting
greater pressure on the budget at all subsequent periods. Intuitively, this channel gets weaker and
weaker at older ages because mortality rates are high at old ages even with investments. While we
were unable to formally makes this point analytically, we show numerically that this intuition is
valid in the range of parameters estimated from the data.


5.2     Timing of optimal investments, polynomials
To estimate the optimal investment, we follow a lower-dimensional sieves estimation method.39 We
start by approximating the investment profile over age with a first order function of age (adding
2 parameters) and then with a second order polynomial (3 more parameters). We impose the con-
straint that the total spending per cohort is the same as the budget resulting from our estimated
                                                 100
constant lifetime investment i.e. B =                  ^· Sa (I ). Given budget B we run a grid search to find the
                                                       I
                                                 a=1
quadratic investment profile that maximizes the life expectancy of the cohort.
    The results of this exercise are displayed in Figure 12. Relative to the case with a constant
function, an optimal linear investment function redistributes more resources to the young. If we
allow a quadratic term then we find that a U-shape investment profile is optimal to maximize the
average life-expectancy in the population (panel a). Our original model sets I to be constant in
levels. But in percentage terms, relative to the baseline level of health at a given age, I was already
U-shaped in the basic model. What we find then is that the optimal investment is even more U-
shaped -- it transfers additional resources to the young and the old, away from the middle-aged
individuals.
    These results show that optimal health investments are largest when health is at its lowest --
that is, at very young and very old ages. Interestingly, health care expenditures by age in most
  39 A fully nonparametric approach for the optimal investment profile over the lifetime would require optimizing over a

hundred or so parameters (one for each age) for each cohort. In the absence of a closed-form solution, this is impractical. It is
also not feasible since we have 100 data points: if we allow for a unique investment level at every age we are under-identified
(we would have 100 data points and at least 106 parameters to estimate).


                                                               26
                                 Figure 12: Optimal Investment Levels by Age




Note: The first panel represents the estimated investment path when investment is constrained to be constant
(blue line), linear (red line), or quadratic (yellow). In the second and third panel, 1816 cohort data is repre-
sented in blue. Both linear and quadratic optimal investment paths would devote more resources to younger
cohorts, reducing mortality rates in the early years.


countries actually follow this age-profile (Alemayehu and Warner, 2004). These findings are also
consistent with empirical findings which show that health and the demand for medical services
are negatively correlated (Wagstaff, 1986) and that medical expenditures rise sharply with age (e.g.
De Nardi et al. 2010).40
     Panel b shows the mortality curves before and after optimization -- they have the same basic
shape we have observed. Yhe resulting survival curves are flatter in adulthood and steeper in old
ages, suggesting the rectangularization of survival might be in part associated with the emergence
of optimal investments. Optimizing investment results in a gain of about 3 years of life expectancy
in the specific case we show in Figure 12, based on the estimated parameters for French women
born in 1816.
     Optimization when budgets depend on health. We have solved the optimization problem
under the assumption that stock of available resources is not influenced by the health of the pop-
ulation. But if food and other resources are produced rather than taken from the environment,
health is likely to impact resources by affecting the work capacity of the population. Indeed, nu-
trition levels and disease rates have been shown to affect productivity and wages (Thomas et al.,
  40 These results are in contrast with the predictions of the Grossman model which predicts that investments would decline

with age as individuals near death. See Wagstaff (1986)for an early discussion, or Strulik (2015) for a more recent discussion
of this issue.



                                                             27
2004). They also affect inputs into wages such as cognition and education (Field et al., 2009). Many
empirical studies report a correlation between income and health (Cutler et al., 2012, Chetty et al.,
2016) as noted above. While our baseline model embeds the effect of resources on health, a causal
link going in the other direction is also likely at play: people who get sick or are hospitalized suffer
a subsequent drop in income (Smith, 1999, Dobkin et al., 2018). With panel data on wages, it would
be possible to improve on our estimates to account for these effects.
    Overlapping generations. Another natural extension would be to embed our model in an over-
lapping generations setting to reflect the fact that most social insurace programs, including health
care insurance, involve transfers across cohorts at a given point in time, rather than within-cohort
transfers over time (as we have considered here for simplicity). An overlapping generation model
could also be used to link the health of the parents with that of their children, a mechanism that
has found some support in the empirical literature.


6    Conclusion
This paper proposes a parsimonious production function to study the evolution of health and mor-
tality over the life course of a population with heterogeneous health endowments. The basic model
can be easily estimated by using observed cohort mortality rates. Despite its simplicity, this model
tracks the evolution of the mortality profile of human cohorts born 1816 to 1940 as well as other
species, and it can explain many important mortality patterns documented in the literature, includ-
ing the rectangularization of survival curves and SES gradients in health. We also show how to use
the model to understand the dynamic treatment effects of in-utero shocks and other temporary
shocks like wars.
    The parsimony of the model relies on transparent but strong parametric assumptions. In par-
ticular, we assumed that the environment is stable and exogenously provides a constant level of
resources. This is reasonable for primates or early human populations before the rise of modern
medicine and other technical innovations, but not for contemporary human populations. We have
explored how to incorporate changes in the environment into the model and shown these changes
can qualitatively produce many patterns in the existing literature. We also assume that health
shocks are i.i.d and normally distributed. We argue that these assumptions are roughly consistent
with the evidence in the literature and with the patterns observed in the HMD data. Alternative
assumptions for this distribution of annual shocks could be further investigated to integrate the
mortality impact of contagious diseases such as the COVID-19 pandemic.
    The model can only be expanded further to consider the role of behavior and policy. At this
stage, our analysis suggests that, in the absence of financial frictions, optimal health expenditures
are U-shaped over the lifetime in this model. With systematic data on health inputs and shocks,
as well as prices and budgets over the life course, these implications could be fruitfully explored
further. The model can be used to investigate other interesting questions such as the origins of
gender or cross-country differences. We leave these to future research.




                                                  28
References
Alemayehu, Berhanu and Kenneth E. Warner, "The lifetime distribution of health care costs,"
  Health services research, 2004, 39 (3), 627­642.

Almond, Douglas and Janet Currie, "Killing me softly: The fetal origins hypothesis," The Journal
  of Economic Perspectives, 2011, 25 (3), 153­172.

  , , and Valentina Duque, "Childhood circumstances and adult outcomes: Act II," Journal of
  Economic Literature, 2018, 56 (4), 1360­1446.

Armitage, Peter and Richard Doll, "The age distribution of cancer and a multi-stage theory of
  carcinogenesis," British journal of cancer, 1954, 8 (1), 1.

Behringer, Verena, Tobias Deschner, Caroline Deimel, Jereon MG Stevens, and Gottfried
  Hohmann, "Age-related changes in urinary testosterone levels suggest differences in puberty
  onset and divergent life history strategies in bonobos and chimpanzees," Hormones and behavior,
  2014, 66 (3), 525­533.

Benyamini, Yael and Ellen L Idler, "Community studies reporting association between self-rated
  health and mortality: additional studies, 1995 to 1998," Research on aging, 1999, 21 (3), 392­401.

Bharadwaj, Prashant, Katrine Vellesen Løken, and Christopher Neilson, "Early life health inter-
  ventions and academic achievement," American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (5), 1862­91.

Bronikowski, Anne M., Jeanne Altmann, Diane K. Brockman, Marina Cords, Linda M. Fedigan,
  Anne Pusey, Tara Stoinski, William F. Morris, Karen B. Strier, and Susan C. Alberts, "Aging in
  the natural world: comparative data reveal similar mortality patterns across primates," Science,
  2011, 331 (6022), 1325­1328.

Case, Anne and Angus S Deaton, "Broken down by work and sex: How our health declines," in
  "Analyses in the Economics of Aging," University of Chicago Press, 2005, pp. 185­212.

  , Darren Lubotsky, and Christina Paxson, "Economic status and health in childhood: The origins
  of the gradient," The American Economic Review, 2002, 92 (5), 1308­1334.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, "Summary health statistics: National health inter-
  view survey," Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2014.

Chetty, Raj, Michael Stepner, Sarah Abraham, Shelby Lin, Benjamin Scuderi, Nicholas Turner,
 Augustin Bergeron, and David Cutler, "The association between income and life expectancy in
 the United States, 2001-2014," Jama, 2016, 315 (16), 1750­1766.

Costa, Dora L, "Scarring and mortality selection among Civil War POWs: A long-term mortality,
 morbidity, and socioeconomic follow-up," Demography, 2012, 49 (4), 1185­1206.

Crimmins, Eileen M, "Socioeconomic differentials in mortality and health at the older ages,"
  Genus, 2005, pp. 163­176.

                                                29
Cullen, Mark R, Michael Baiocchi, Karen Eggleston, Pooja Loftus, and Victor Fuchs, "The weaker
 sex? Vulnerable men and women's resilience to socio-economic disadvantage," SSM-population
 health, 2016, 2, 512­524.

Currie, Janet and Mark Stabile, "Socioeconomic Status and Child Health: Why Is the Relationship
 Stronger for Older Children?," The American Economic Review, 2003, 93 (5), 1813­1823.

Cutler, David, Angus Deaton, and Adriana Lleras-Muney, "The determinants of mortality," The
 Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2006, 20 (3), 97­120.

Cutler, David M., Adriana Lleras-Muney, Tom Vogl, S. Glied, and P. C. Smith, "Socioeconomic
 Status and Health: Dimensions and Mechanisms.," in "The Oxford Handbook of Health Eco-
 nomics," Oxford University Press, 2012.

Cutler, David M and Adriana Lleras-Muney, "Understanding differences in health behaviors by
 education," Journal of health economics, 2010, 29 (1), 1­28.

Dalgaard, Carl-Johan and Holger Strulik, "Optimal aging and death: understanding the Preston
 curve," Journal of the European Economic Association, 2014, 12 (3), 672­701.

  , Casper Worm Hansen, and Holger Strulik, "Accounting for fetal origins: Health capital vs.
  health deficits," Health Deficits (October 19, 2019), 2019.

de La Rochebrochard, Elise, "Age at puberty of girls and boys in France: Measurements from a
  survey on adolescent sexuality," Population: An English Selection, 2000, pp. 51­79.

Deaton, Angus S. and Christina H. Paxson, "Aging and inequality in income and health," The
 American Economic Review, 1998, 88 (2), 248­253.

den Berg, Gerard J Van, Gabriele Doblhammer, and Kaare Christensen, "Exogenous determi-
  nants of early-life conditions, and mortality later in life," Social science & medicine, 2009, 68 (9),
  1591­1598.

  , Maarten Lindeboom, and France Portrait, "Economic conditions early in life and individual
  mortality," American Economic Review, 2006, 96 (1), 290­302.

Deschenes, Olivier and Enrico Moretti, "Extreme weather events, mortality, and migration," The
 Review of Economics and Statistics, 2009, 91 (4), 659­681.

Deschênes, Olivier and Michael Greenstone, "Climate change, mortality, and adaptation: Evi-
 dence from annual fluctuations in weather in the US," American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
 nomics, 2011, 3 (4), 152­85.

Dobkin, Carlos, Amy Finkelstein, Raymond Kluender, and Matthew J Notowidigdo, "The eco-
 nomic consequences of hospital admissions," American Economic Review, 2018, 108 (2), 308­52.

Field, Erica, Omar Robles, and Maximo Torero, "Iodine deficiency and schooling attainment in
  Tanzania," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2009, 1 (4), 140­169.

                                                  30
Fogel, Robert W., "Economic Growth, Population Theory, and Physiology: The Bearing of Long-
  Term Processes on the Making of Economic Policy," The American Economic Review, 1994, 84 (3),
  369­395.

Galama, Titus J and Hans Van Kippersluis, "A Theory of Socio-economic Disparities in Health
 over the Life Cycle," The Economic Journal, 2018, 129 (617), 338­374.

Gavrilov, Leonid Anatolevich and Natalia Sergeevna Gavrilova, The biology of life span: a quantita-
 tive approach., Harwood Academic Publisher New York, 1991.

Goldin, Claudia and Adriana Lleras-Muney, "XX> XY?: The changing female advantage in life
 expectancy," Journal of health economics, 2019, 67, 102224.

Gompertz, Benjamin, "On the nature of the function expressive of the law of human mortality,
 and on a new mode of determining the value of life contingencies," Philosophical transactions of
 the Royal Society of London, 1825, 115, 513­583.

Grossman, Michael, "On the concept of health capital and the demand for health," Journal of Polit-
 ical economy, 1972, 80 (2), 223­255.

Halliday, Mark H, Alessandra N Garcia, Anita B Amorim, Gustavo C Machado, Jill A Hayden,
 Evangelos Pappas, Paulo H Ferreira, and Mark J Hancock, "Treatment effect sizes of mechan-
 ical diagnosis and therapy for pain and disability in patients with low back pain: a systematic
 review," journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy, 2019, 49 (4), 219­229.

Halliday, Timothy, "Health inequality over the life-cycle," The BE Journal of Economic Analysis &
 Policy, 2011, 11 (3).

  , Bhashkar Mazumder, and Ashley Wong, "Intergenerational health mobility in the US," 2018.

Havari, Enkelejda and Franco Peracchi, "Growing up in wartime: Evidence from the era of two
 world wars," Economics & Human Biology, 2017, 25, 9­32.

Heligman, Larry and John H. Pollard, "The age pattern of mortality," Journal of the Institute of
 Actuaries, 1980, 107 (01), 49­80.

House, James S, Paula M Lantz, and Pamela Herd, "Continuity and change in the social strati-
 fication of aging and health over the life course: evidence from a nationally representative lon-
 gitudinal study from 1986 to 2001/2002 (Americans' Changing Lives Study)," The Journals of
 Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 2005, 60 (Special_Issue_2), S15­S26.

Human Mortality Database. University of California, Berkeley (USA), and Max Planck Institute for
 Demographic Research (Germany). Available at www.mortality.org. Data downloaded in August
 2017.

Hummer, Robert A. and Joseph T. Lariscy, "Educational attainment and adult mortality," in "In-
 ternational handbook of adult mortality," Springer, 2011, pp. 241­261.


                                                  31
Kaestner, Robert, Cuiping Schiman, and Jason Ward, "Education and health over the life cycle,"
 Economics of Education Review, 2020, 76, 101982.

Kesternich, Iris, Bettina Siflinger, James P Smith, and Joachim K Winter, "The effects of World
 War II on economic and health outcomes across Europe," Review of Economics and Statistics, 2014,
 96 (1), 103­118.

Lando, David, Credit Risk Modeling: Theory and Applications, Princeton University Press, 2004.

Li, Ting and James Anderson, "Shaping human mortality patterns through intrinsic and extrinsic
  vitality processes," Demographic research, 2013, 28, 341­372.

Limpert, Eckhard, Werner A. Stahel, and Markus Abbt, "Log-normal distributions across the sci-
  ences: Keys and clues on the charms of statistics, and how mechanical models resembling gam-
  bling machines offer a link to a handy way to characterize log-normal distributions, which can
  provide deeper insight into variability and probability--normal or log-normal: That is the ques-
  tion," BioScience, 2001, 51 (5), 341­352.

Lindeboom, Maarten, France Portrait, and Gerard J Van den Berg, "Long-run effects on longevity
  of a nutritional shock early in life: the Dutch Potato famine of 1846­1847," Journal of health eco-
  nomics, 2010, 29 (5), 617­629.

Liu, Zuyun, Brian H Chen, Themistocles L Assimes, Luigi Ferrucci, Steve Horvath, and Mor-
  gan E Levine, "The Role of Epigenetic Aging in Education and Racial/Ethnic Mortality Dispari-
  ties Among Older US Women," Psychoneuroendocrinology, 2019.

Loudon, Irvine, "Maternal mortality: 1880­1950. Some regional and international comparisons,"
  Social history of medicine, 1988, 1 (2), 183­228.

Lynch, Scott M, "Cohort and life-course patterns in the relationship between education and health:
  A hierarchical approach," Demography, 2003, 40 (2), 309­331.

Masters, Ryan K, "Economic Conditions in Early Life and Circulatory Disease Mortality," Popula-
 tion and Development Review, 2018, 44 (3), 519­553.

McGee, Daniel L, Youlian Liao, Guichan Cao, and Richard S Cooper, "Self-reported health status
 and mortality in a multiethnic US cohort," American journal of epidemiology, 1999, 149 (1), 41­46.

Murphy, Kevin M. and Robert H. Topel, "The value of health and longevity," Journal of political
 Economy, 2006, 114 (5), 871­904.

Nardi, Mariacristina De, Eric French, and John B Jones, "Why do the elderly save? The role of
 medical expenses," Journal of political economy, 2010, 118 (1), 39­75.

Occhino, Filippo, Kim Oosterlinck, and Eugene N White, "How occupied France financed its
 own exploitation in World War II," American Economic Review, 2007, 97 (2), 295­299.




                                                 32
Palloni, Alberto and Hiram Beltrán-Sánchez, "Demographic Consequences of Barker Frailty," in
  "Dynamic Demographic Analysis," Springer, 2016, pp. 147­176.

Pinker, Steven, The better angels of our nature: Why violence has declined, Vol. 75, Viking New York,
  2011.

Pompei, Francesco and Richard Wilson, "A quantitative model of cellular senescence influence on
  cancer and longevity," Toxicology and industrial health, 2002, 18 (8), 365­376.

Preston, Samuel H and Etienne Van de Walle, "Urban French mortality in the nineteenth century,"
  Population studies, 1978, 32 (2), 275­297.

Preston, Samuel, Patrick Heuveline, and Michel Guillot, Demography: measuring and modeling
  population processes, Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 2000.

Rosenberg, Karen and Wenda Trevathan, "Bipedalism and human birth: The obstetrical dilemma
 revisited," Evolutionary Anthropology: Issues, News, and Reviews, 1995, 4 (5), 161­168.

Rosenberg, Karen R, "The evolution of modern human childbirth," American Journal of Physical
 Anthropology, 1992, 35 (S15), 89­124.

Ross, Catherine E and Chia ling Wu, "The links between education and health," American sociolog-
 ical review, 1995, pp. 719­745.

Schiman, Jeffrey C, Robert Kaestner, and Anthony T Lo Sasso, "Early Childhood Health Shocks
  and Adult Wellbeing: Evidence from Wartime Britain," Technical Report, National Bureau of
  Economic Research 2017.

Schwandt, Hannes and Till Von Wachter, "Unlucky cohorts: Estimating the long-term effects of
  entering the labor market in a recession in large cross-sectional data sets," Journal of Labor Eco-
  nomics, 2019, 37 (S1), S161­S198.

Schwartz, Joel, "Harvesting and long term exposure effects in the relation between air pollution
  and mortality," American journal of epidemiology, 2000, 151 (5), 440­448.

Sharrow, David J. and James J. Anderson, "Quantifying Intrinsic and Extrinsic Contributions
  to Human Longevity: Application of a Two-Process Vitality Model to the Human Mortality
  Database," Demography, 2016, 53 (6), 2105­2119.

Smith, James P., "Healthy bodies and thick wallets: the dual relation between health and economic
 status," The journal of economic perspectives: a journal of the American Economic Association, 1999, 13
 (2), 144.

Steves, Claire Joanne, Timothy D Spector, and Stephen HD Jackson, "Ageing, genes, environ-
  ment and epigenetics: what twin studies tell us now, and in the future," Age and ageing, 2012, 41
  (5), 581­586.




                                                  33
Strulik, Holger, "A Closed-form Solution for the Health Capital Model," Journal of Demographic
  Economics, 2015, 81 (3), 301­316.

Tanner, James Mourilyan and James Mourilyan Tanner, A history of the study of human growth,
  Cambridge University Press, 1981.

Thiele, Thorvald Nicolai, "On a mathematical formula to express the rate of mortality throughout
  the whole of life, tested by a series of observations made use of by the Danish Life Insurance
  Company of 1871," Journal of the Institute of Actuaries, 1871, 16 (5), 313­329.

Thomas, Duncan, Elizabeth Frankenberg, Jed Friedman, Jean-Pierre Habicht, Nathan Jones,
  Christopher McKelvey, Gretel Pelto, Bondan Sikoki, James P. Smith, Cecep Sumantri, and
  others, "Causal effect of health on labor market outcomes: Evidence from a random assignment
  iron supplementation intervention," California Center for Population Research, 2004.

Toulemon, Laurent and Magali Barbieri, "The mortality impact of the August 2003 heat wave
  in France: investigating the ?harvesting?effect and other long-term consequences," Population
  studies, 2008, 62 (1), 39­53.

Vaupel, James W., Kenneth G. Manton, and Eric Stallard, "The impact of heterogeneity in indi-
  vidual frailty on the dynamics of mortality," Demography, 1979, 16 (3), 439­454.

Wagstaff, Adam, "The demand for health: some new empirical evidence," Journal of Health eco-
 nomics, 1986, 5 (3), 195­233.

Weibull, Waloddi, "Wide applicability," Journal of applied mechanics, 1951, 103 (730), 293­297.

Wilcox, Allen J. and Ian T Russell, "Birthweight and perinatal mortality: I. On the frequency
 distribution of birthweight," International Journal of Epidemiology, 1983, 12 (3), 314­318.

Wilson, Nick, Christine Clement, Jennifer A Summers, John Bannister, and Glyn Harper, "Mor-
 tality of first world war military personnel: comparison of two military cohorts," Bmj, 2014, 349,
 g7168.

Wong, Chloe Chung Yi, Avshalom Caspi, Benjamin Williams, Ian W Craig, Renate Houts,
 Antony Ambler, Terrie E Moffitt, and Jonathan Mill, "A longitudinal study of epigenetic varia-
 tion in twins," Epigenetics, 2010, 5 (6), 516­526.

Zeger, Scott L, Francesca Dominici, and Jonathan Samet, "Harvesting-resistant estimates of air
  pollution effects on mortality," Epidemiology, 1999, pp. 171­175.




                                                 34
Appendix A1: Figures

                   Figure 13: Comparison of q-rate in the paper and HMD (1816)

                                       Survival curve                                                              Mortality rates
                        100




                                                                                         0
                                                        Data 1816 cohort
                                                        HMD




                                                                                         -.5
                        80




                        60




                                                                                                     -1
                                                                                 Log(mortality rate)
                    %




                                                                             -1.5
                        40




                        20



                                                                                         -2
                                                                                         -2.5



                         0
                              0   20    40         60     80           100                                0   20    40         60    80   100
                                             Age                                                                         Age




Note: The life expectancy is 38.25 years with the q we use, to be compared with 39.86 with the q in HMD
and 39.83 years for the life expectancy computed by the HMD itself following a more involved statistical
methodology.




                                                                           35
                 Figure 14: Cohort vs. Period statistics, French Women 1860 and 1940


                                             (a) Cohort vs Period Life Expectancy for French Females




                                 70    60
                       Life Expectancy
                              50 40
                                 30




                                            1820       1840        1860         1880            1900   1920
                                                                    Year/Cohort Born

                                                                    Cohort             Period



                                              (b) Cohort vs Period Life Expectancy for French Males
                               60     50
                      Life Expectancy
                             4030
                               20




                                            1820       1840        1860         1880        1900       1920
                                                                    Year/Cohort Born

                                                                    Cohort             Period

Note: Data from the Human Mortality Database. Panel a shows period and cohort mortality rates were almost
identical for the cohort born in 1860, suggesting that for these cohorts the assumption of stationarity holds. In
other words, the mortality rate at age 50 of a French woman born in 1860 is about the same as the one of a
French woman who is 50 year old in 1860. In 1940 a large gap has appeared and the cohort mortality rates is
significantly lower than the period rate. Panel b shows the period and cohort life expectancy of French women
since 1816. The two series are almost the same up to roughly 1860 and they diverge after, with the cohort life
expectancy exceeding the period life expectancy substantially byt the end of the period.




                                                                       36
                          Figure 15: Age profile of mortality of women born in France between 1860 and 1940, by decade




37
     Note: Human Mortality Data
                            Figure 16: Age profile of mortality of men born in France between 1860 and 1940, by decade




38
     Note: Human Mortality Data
                                           Figure 17: Model fit for humans and primates

                           (a) French men born in 1816                                    (b) Male chimpanzees
           0




                                                                               0
           -.5




                                                                               -.5
 Log(mortality rate)
               -1




                                                                               -1
    -1.5




                                                                               -1.5
           -2




                                                         Data 1816 Cohort                                        Data
           -2.5




                                                         Model                                                   Baseline




                                                                               -2
                       0   20       40         60          80           100           0           20               40
                                         Age                                                        Age



Note: Panel a shows the data and estimated curve for French men born in 1816. Panel b shows the data and
estimated parameters for male chimps. Appendix Tables 1 and 2 show the estimated parameters.




                                                                              39
                          Figure 18: Model fit for birth cohorts born 1816-1923

                        60


                        50


                        40


                        30


                        20


                        10


                         0
                          1800   1820     1840    1860        1880   1900   1920   1940

Note: this figure shows the fit of the model for each birth cohort. The fit is measured as the sum of quadratic
                                                                                                  2
errors between the estimated survival curve and the data at each age, defined as        S^a - Sa .
                                                                                     a




                                                         40
                    Figure 19: Increasing the lifetime depreciation rate by 50% by age

                                       a.Gap in mortality                         b.Gap in log mortality




                         .3




                                                                        .8
                                                                        .6
                         .2




                                                                        .4
                         .1




                                                                        .2
                         0




                                                                        0
                              0   20       40         60    80   100          0   20      40            60        80
                                                Age                                        Age


                                        c.Gap in health                            d.% Gap in health
                         1




                                                                        0
                         0
                         -1




                                                                        -.5
                         -2
                         -3




                                                                        -1
                         -4




                              0   20       40         60    80   100          0   20    40         60        80        100
                                                Age                                          Age



Note: The Figure shows the gap in mortality or health between a baseline population and a population with a 50% higher
depreciation rate  . Gap is computed as MR(low)-MR(high), or H(low)-H(high). The figures become very noisy after age 90
because there are almost no survivors, so we do not include these data points. Simulated data for two population of 500,000
individuals each. The baseline parameters are the same as in Figure 3b.




                                                                   41
                         Figure 20: Effect of exogenous temporary shocks at age 20

                                                                   (a) Gaps in mortality

                          .02
                                     a.Investment decline                      b.Variance increase                   c.Accident increase




                                                                   .02




                                                                                                          .02
                          .01




                                                                   .01




                                                                                                          .01
                          0




                                                                   0




                                                                                                          0
                          -.01




                                                                   -.01




                                                                                                          -.01
                          -.02




                                                                   -.02




                                                                                                          -.02
                                 0       20   40    60      80            0       20     40   60     80          0      20    40   60      80
                                              Age                                       Age                                  Age


                                 d.Depreciation increase                      e.Threshold increase
                         .02




                                                                   .02
                         .01




                                                                   .01
                         0




                                                                   0
                         -.01




                                                                   -.01
                         -.02




                                                                   -.02




                                 0       20   40    60      80            0       20     40   60     80
                                              Age                                       Age




                                                                 (b) Log gaps in mortality

                                     a.Investment decline                     b.Variance increase                    c.Accident increase
                         1




                                                                  1




                                                                                                          1
                         .5




                                                                  .5




                                                                                                          .5
                         0




                                                                  0




                                                                                                          0
                         -.5




                                                                  -.5




                                                                                                          -.5
                         -1




                                                                  -1




                                                                                                          -1




                                 0      20    40    60      80            0      20      40   60     80          0      20    40   60      80
                                              Age                                       Age                                  Age


                                 d.Depreciation increase                      e.Threshold increase
                         1




                                                                  1
                         .5




                                                                  .5
                         0




                                                                  0
                         -.5




                                                                  -.5
                         -1




                                                                  -1




                                 0      20    40    60      80            0      20      40   60     80
                                              Age                                       Age




Note: The figure shows the effects of a temporary change in a single parameter occuring at age 20. The shock lasts for 10
years, ending at age 30. Each figure shows the different in mortality that results from a temporary shock, relative to the
counterfactual of no shock. In essence these figures plot the pattern that would be predicted in an event study, where the
coefficient of a dummy for the affected population is intereacted with time fixed effects. Panel a shows the gaps in levels
and panel b shows the gaps in logs. The baseline parameters are the same as in Figure 3b.




                                                                                       42
                                         Table 1: Modeling prime-age mortality. French Cohort born in 1816

                                                                 (1)                  (2)                     (3)                 (4)
             Gender                                                         Females                                       Males
             Model                                            Baseline    With adolescent hump            Baseline     With adolescent hump
             Initial mean health                       µH      0.9115               0.8634                  0.7091              0.7104
                                                                                                                                                                  Appendix A2: Tables




             Investment                                 I      0.1336               0.4075                  0.1209              0.4432
             Standard Deviation of Shock               e       0.5556               1.0241                  0.4700              1.0785
             Depreciation                                      0.0010               0.0006                  0.0014              0.0004
             Aging                                             1.4350               1.7849                  1.3182              1.8883
             Adolescent Hump*                                                       0.0086                                      0.0097




43
             Fit (survival curve)^                             155.06               12.36                   143.07               16.38
             Fit (log of qx )                                   3.01                0.74                     4.02                0.91
             Fit (death distribution)**                         6.21                3.35                    18.10                96.16
             Actual Life Expectancy                             38.25               38.25                   35.93                35.93
             Predicted Life Expectancy                          38.43               38.28                   36.13                35.94
             Counterfactual Life expectancy^^                                       45.86                                        43.54
In this table we fit the model to the 1816 population with and without an exogenous increase in the accident rate occurring in adolescence.
*The estimate in this row corresponds to the value of the parameter  after the onset of adolescence. Adolescence starts at age = (- 0.0175 x calendar year) +
47.4 for all women, based on the estimates provided in de La Rochebrochard (2000). Adolescence starts one year later for men.
^Our main fit criteria is the sum of squared errors of the survival rate at each age. We also report the fit as the sum of squared errors of the log of qx (the
probability of dying between ages x and x + 1) and the distribution of deaths. We don't target these moments directly­we target the survival curve.
**To make the fit of the age distribution comparable across columns we use the (normalized) number of deaths as weights.
^^Counterfactual Life Expectancy is computed by holding all estimated parameters fixed and setting the adolescent hump to 0.
                                              Table 2: Estimated parameters for chimpanzees living in the wild

                                                    (1)               (2)                  (3)                   (4)              (5)                   (6)
      Gender                                                          Female                                                        Male
      Model                                    Basic model     With hump at 8      With hump at 14          Basic model     With hump at 8      With hump at 14
      Initial mean health                µH      0.9995            1.0337               1.0266                1.8421            3.6402               4.5330
      Investment (annual)                 I      0.3488            0.3613               0.3603                0.7646            1.1364               0.7353
      Standard Deviation of Shock        e       1.1299            1.1806               1.1787                2.7145            4.9725               5.0730
      Depreciation                               0.0598            0.0600               0.0593                0.0620            0.0510               0.0073
      Aging                                      0.7627            0.7736               0.7763                1.0319            1.2501               1.8028
      Adolescent Hump*                                            0.000040            0.000002                                 0.000378            0.000003
      # of individuals at birth                     144              144                  144                    122              122                  122




44
      # of moments reported                          55               55                   55                     43               43                   43
      Fit (survival curve)b                       111.12           110.20               110.25                 128.43            99.26               65.63
      Fit (log of qx )                             2.08              2.07                 2.09                  1.21             1.14                 1.06
      Actual Life Expectancy                   15.38(13.4)a     15.38(13.4)a        15.38(13.4)a               14.47             14.47               14.47
      Predicted Life Expectancy                    15.35            15.35                15.35                  14.52            14.50                14.50
     Columns (1) and (4) estimate the model without an adolescent hump. Columns (2) and (4) estimate the model with an exogenous increase in accidents in
     adolescence at age 8. Columns (3) and (6) estimate the model with an exogenous increase in accidents in adolescence at age 14. Because the data are noisy
     the second/third model is not a substantially better fit than the first. All are however excellent fits for this population.
     Data sources: Life tables for primates in the wild come from Bronikowski et al. (2011). In the wild population data come from Brazil, Costa Rica, Kenya,
     Tanzania, Madagascar and Rwanda.
     a. Life expectancy in parenthesis corresponds to the one reported in Bronikowski et al. (2011).
     b. We target the survival curve and compute the sum of squared errors ­ the data provided are in the form of survival rates.
     *Adolescence starts at age 8.
                                                                  Table 3: Robustness checks for 1816

                                                          (1)        (2)           (3)                 (4)               (5)            (6)                 (7)
                                                         Basic       b       b at T ~N ()      T ~N () estimated      Weight      Target death      Truncation at 90
      Initial mean health                        µH     0.8634     0.8917        0.8635              0.7503            0.8020         0.7327              0.8784
      Investment                                  I     0.4075     0.4322        0.4149              0.3712            0.4180         0.4743              0.4200
      Standard Deviation of Shock                e      1.0241     1.0713        1.0367              0.8369            0.9971         0.9930              1.0552
      Depreciation                                      0.0006     0.0005        0.0005              0.0005            0.0006         0.0006              0.0006
      Aging                                             1.7849     1.8321        1.8153              1.8011            1.7807         1.7950              1.7973
      Adolescent Hump*                           a      0.0086     0.0089        0.0089              0.0112            0.0093         0.0108              0.0087
      Accident rate before adolescence           b                 0.0005
      Mean*                                                                       15.6                14.29
      Standard deviation*                                                         1.32                15.71
      Fit (survival curve)^                              12.36      13.03         11.49                3.75            15.86          173.74              12.36
      Fit (log of qx )                                   0.74       0.65          0.57                 0.40            0.92            1.93               0.56
      Fit (death distribution)**                         3.35       39.55         21.82                2.25            6.89            4.48               28.17




45
      Actual Life Expectancy                                                                     38.25
      Predicted Life Expectancy                          38.28      38.29         38.28              38.26             38.33          39.27               38.27
      Counterfactual Life expectancy^^                   45.86      46.45         46.08              48.82             46.66          49.49               45.86
     *Adolescence starts at age = (- 0.0175 x calendar year) + 47.4 in columns 1, 2, 5, 6 and 7.
     In column 3 the timing of adolescence is assumed to follow a normal distribution with mean value (- 0.0175 x calendar year) + 47.4, and standard deviation
     1.3285, calculated from the table of 1975 girls in de La Rochebrochard (2000). In column 4 we estimate the mean and the standard deviation of the onset of
     adolescence.
     In column 5 we investigate what happens if we use the (normalized) number of deaths as weights in the estimation. In column 6 we use weights and target
     the distribution of the ages at death instead of the survival curve. In the column 7 we use only data up to age 90 to see what the effect of censoring is and
     because the data after 90 are estimated. The estimates are somewhat sensitive to these choices. The predicted life expectancy is very close in all cases (the
     error in the predicted life expectancy is less then 0.1 years of life), except when we target the age at death distribution (the prediction is off by about a year).
     But the counterfactual predictions are sensitive: eliminating the hump results in a loss of life of 7.58 years on the baseline model and 9.81 in the worse
     model.
     ^Our main fit criteria is the sum of squared errors of the survival rate at each age. We also report the fit as the sum of squared errors of the log of qx (the
     probability of dying between ages x and x + 1) and the distribution of deaths. We don't target these moments directly­we target the survival curve.
     ^^Counterfactual Life Expectancy is computed by holding all estimated parameters fixed and setting the adolescent hump to 0.
     **To make the fit of the age distribution comparable across columns we use the (normalized) number of deaths as weights.
     In column 4 we target the survival curve but use the (normalized) number of deaths as weights
     In column 5 we target the distribution of the age at death and we use the number of deaths as weights.
                                      Table 4: Estimated parameters for French Women and Men for Selected Cohorts

         Gender                                                        Females                                                   Males
         Year                                       1816      1860       1880      1900       1921          1816       1860      1880       1900       1921
         Initial mean health                µH     0.9327    0.9034     0.8633     0.9643    1.2051         0.7038    0.7848     0.5812     0.6747    1.0929
         Investment                          I     0.3724    0.2559     0.2947     0.3296    0.2602         0.4083    0.2455     0.3386     0.4711    0.2483
         Standard Deviation of Shock        e      0.8296    0.5400     0.5527     0.5215    0.4062         1.0120    0.6200     0.6705     0.8235    0.5067
         Depreciation                              0.0005    0.0006     0.0006     0.0006    0.0008         0.0005    0.0006     0.0006     0.0004    0.0009




46
         Aging                                     1.7916    1.6411     1.6248     1.6337    1.4870         1.8048    1.6587     1.6603     1.8540    1.4844
         Adolescent Hump*                          0.0094    0.0077     0.0069     0.0050    0.0022         0.0092    0.0075     0.0079     0.0059    0.0030
         WWI Shock**                               0.3722    0.0000    -1.0284    -1.0266                  -2.3337    0.1926    -0.6931    -0.0313
         WWII Shock**                                        0.2555    0.1035     0.0002     -0.0660                  0.0698     0.3101    -0.2086    0.0021
     The estimates in this table do not exactly match those in Table 1 because they include a shock for WWI.
     *The estimate in this row corresponds to the value of the parameter  after the onset of adolescence. Adolescence starts at age = (- 0.0175 x calendar year) +
     47.4 for all women, based on the estimates provided in de La Rochebrochard (2000). Adolescence starts one year later for men.
     **The estimates in this row corresponds to the value of the parameter during the world wars. For example the column for the 1900 female cohort shows
     that I was about 0.96 throughout life but decreased to -1.02 during WWI and to 0.005 during WWII.
             Table 5: Estimated parameters for World Wars for French Men born in 1896

                                                                                   (1)         (2)
              Initial condition                                           µH     1.1417      0.8448
              Investment                                                   I     0.4548      0.3009
              Standard Deviation of Shock                                 e      1.0259      0.5983
              Depreciation                                                       0.0002      0.0005
              Aging                                                              2.0052      1.6913
              Adolescence Hump*                                                  0.0025      0.0037
              WWI Shock**                                                        -1.3104
              Shock in 1914                                                                 -2.9302
              Shock in 1915                                                                 -0.7485
              Shock in 1916                                                                 -0.5333
              Shock in 1917                                                                 0.2570
              Shock in 1918                                                                 -0.1191
              WWII Shock**                                                       0.0577     0.1560
              Fit (survival curve)^                                              218.64      11.57
              Fit (log of qx )                                                     2.65       1.27
              Fit during WWI (log of qx )~                                        1.09        0.09
              % Difference in # deaths during WWI~~                               -0.14      -0.05
              Fit during WWII (log of qx )~                                        0.10       0.09
              % Difference in # deaths during WWII~~                              0.02       -0.11
              Actual Life Expectancy                                                    37.94
              Predicted Life Expectancy                                           37.98      37.96
              Counterfactual Life expectancy without WWI^^                        54.13      54.74
              Counterfactual Life expectancy without WWII^^                       39.90      39.10
              Counterfactual Life expectancy^^                                    56.22      55.97
*Hump is modeled as a accident rate that starts in adolescence, set to happen at (- 0.0175 * calendar year) +
47.4 + 1based on the estimates provided in de La Rochebrochard (2000) and the assumption that adolescence
starts one year later for men.
**The estimates in this row corresponds to the value of the parameter during the world wars. For example
the first column shows that I was about 1.1417 throughout life but decreased to -1.3104 during WWI and
decreased to 0.0577 during WWII. The same applies to column (2). In column 2, we allow the shocks in
investment to vary across years during WWI.
^Our main fit criteria is the sum of squared errors of the survival rate at each age. We also report the fit as the
sum of squared errors of the log of qx (the probability of dying between ages x and x + 1). We don't target
these moments directly­we target the survival curve.
^^Counterfactual Life Expectancy is computed by holding all estimated parameters fixed and setting the war
parameters to the parameter I .
~This is computed as sum of squared errors during the war years. A lower number is better.
~~This is computed as (predicted - actual)/actual
To make the fit of the age distribution comparable across columns we use the (normalized) number of deaths
as weights.




                                                        47
   Appendix B: Everyone dies
The model is defined as follows:
                            
                            H = Ha-1 - d(a) + I + t
                                                                if Da-1 = 0
                             a
                            
                            Da = I(Ha  H, Da-1 = 0),                                              (1)
                            D = 0
                             0

with d(a) =  · a   (0, ),   (0, ), and I  R. H and H              2
                                                                     are normalized to be 0 and 1,
                  ^ a  E [Ha | Ha > 0] denote the average health in the living population with age
respectively. Let H
a and H ^ t  V ar [Ha | Ha > 0] the variance of health among the living.


Proposition 1. Everyone dies eventually.

    The cumulative distribution function of our process can be bounded above by a process easier
                                                                          2
to study. Consider the process {Ha }a=1 , defined by H0  = H0  N µH , H      and the recurrence
relation:
                                                                    2
                          Ha  = Ha -1 + I -  · a + a , a  N 0,                               (2)

The process is similar to the one in our model except that there is no truncation. It is easy to tell
                                                                          
that 0  P (Ha > z )  P (Ha     > z ) for any z > 0. Now for any a  0, Ht   is normally distributed
with mean
                                                            a
                                         = µH + I · a - 
                                      µHa                        k                                (3)
                                                           k=1

and standard deviation
                                         Ha
                                           =
                                                 2 + a · 2
                                                 H                                                (4)
                                                         

                             z -µHa
                                  
Hence, P (Ha > z ) = 1 - (      ), where  is the CDF of the standard normal distribution. As
                               Ha
                                   +1                                    µH 
a   , we have µHa
                       I ·a-· a
                              +1 and Ha 
                                               a ·  . Therefore if  > 0, Ha 
                                                                              - as a  .
                                                                                a



Remark: Extended model with Accident shocks Proposition 1, 2 and 3 hold for the extended
model with accident shocks drawn indepently from the health status. Because accident shocks are
drawn independently from the health status, they leave the cdf of health unchanged and therefore
the proofs are unaffected.




                                                 48
   Appendix C: Notes on the empirical method
1. Data
Territory changes. The table below describes the details of the changes in territory that took place
in France since 1816.
     Year Territorial Changes
      1861 Annexion of departements of Savoie and Haute-Savoie, and of Comte de Nice
      1869 Franco-Prussian war: loss of Alsace-Lorraine
      1914- WWI: East of France, from Nord Pas-de-Calais to Vosges, is occupied by German military.
      1919 At the end of WWI, Alsace-Lorraine is re-integrated to French territory
      1939 WW2: Loss of Alsace-Lorraine
      1943 WW2: Loss of Corsica
      1945 Current territory: Alsace-Lorraine and Corsica are re-integrated to French territory
    These changes in territory results in large changes in the population and death counts. This is
illustrated below for population. It is unclear how to compute mortality in the year of the change.
We compute it by using a weighted average of the population at the beginning and end of the year.
    Migration. In the HMD cohort population counts are available. However, because of migra-
tions, these counts cannot be used to derive a survival curve for a cohort. Because of net positive
immigration occurring in France, the number of individuals in a given cohort can even increase
from one year to the next. This is especially true at the end of the Algerian War. (e.g. the size of
the female cohort born in 1910 increases from 300, 369 to 303, 273 between 1962 and 1963, despite a
reported mortality rate of 0.5162. The unit of analysis in our model of mortality is a country cohort,
hence abstracts from migration. In our model the mortality rates coincide exactly with the slope
of the survival curve. This is not true in the HMD. The population of the cohort melts natives and
immigrants of the same age.


2. Computing the death rates, survival rates and life expectancy
Death rates. When taking our model to the data we target the most direct counterpart of our
modeled cohort "mortality rate", which is computed as the number of individuals who died during
a year, divided by the number of individuals alive at the beginning of the day. In typical life
tables this number corresponds to what demographer call qt , the probability of dying in a given
year, and is conceptually distinct to the mortality rate, denoted by mt . The main difference lies in
adjusting the denominator -- the size of the population. As more individuals die during the year
the population needs to be adjusted to estimate the size of the remaining population exposed to the
risk of death. Because our baseline model does not take this adjustment into account, we compute
a direct counterpart of our theoretical object. Therefore, we compute the raw death rate in year t
for a given cohort , qt , as follows:
                                                    Dt
                                               qt =
                                                    Nt




                                                 49
where Dt is the death count for year t from the HMD cohort table and Nt is the population on
January 1st of year t. The HMD makes adjustments to compute a probability that is corrected for
the fact that the data do not tract the same individuals over time, so the probability of dying is not
correctly computed for a given cohort. The q we estimate with the raw counts is very similar to
what is reported by the HMD except for the first year of life and the last years of life as shown in
Figure 13. This results in our under-estimating life expectancy somewhat.
   Survival curves. We compute the survival curve recursively as follows. After initializing S0 =
100 , we iteratively compute:
                                         St = St-1 × (1 - qt-1 )

   Life expectancy. Life Expectancy (LE) is an important statistics for the health profile of a given
cohort. We compute LE as a way of comparing our model to the data in a parsimonious way.
While we try to provide informative estimates of cohort life expectancy, we do not claim that their
accuracy is comparable to demographic studies. Nevertheless, as we treat the series generated by
our model in exactly the same manner as the data series, we obtain pairs of LE that are readily
comparable.


4. Estimation routine
We compute our estimates using Matlab's canned fminsearch routine, a downhill simplex method,
and Powell (1964)'s conjugate direction method. We first estimate the model using fminsearch until
the objective function changes by less than 10-3 . The objective function is the sum of squared errors
between the model's survival's curve and the one from the data. We then use these estimates as
starting values for Powell's routine. Once Powell's routine converges, we use the estimated values
from this procedure and implement fminsearch again until it converges. The total estimations on
the UCLA computing cluster takes several hours. We experimented with different initial values for
the parameters. The reported estimates correspond to the lowest final function value.


5. Bootstrapping standard errors
Estimates from sample data come with standard errors. However, the mortality rates in the HMD
are computed from birth certificates of the total population, not a sample of it. A typical cohort
in our study counts 400, 000 individuals. As a result, the standard errors are negligible and all
of the parameter uncertainty comes from model mispecification and data inaccuracy rather than
sampling variation. We therefore do not report standard errors for the French cohorts.
    In contrast, we do compute the standard errors for the chimpanzee estimates as the data in
that case consist of samples of one or two hundreds of individuals. One way of bootstrapping the
standard errors, given a series of mortality rates for a cohort, is to view each sample of size N as
a sequence of Bernoulli trials with varying success rates. Alternatively, one can view the survival
curve of a population of size N as an N × 1 vector of age at death. One can produce bootstrap esti-
mates by drawing with replacement M subsamples of size N and compute the empirical survival
curve.


                                                 50
