                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         THE REMARKABLE GROWTH IN FINANCIAL ECONOMICS, 1974-2020

                                      G. William Schwert

                                      Working Paper 28198
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28198


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020




This is a personal assessment of the evolution of academic finance during my career. It does not
reflect the opinions of the Journal of Financial Economics, the University of Rochester, or the
National Bureau of Economic Research. Many people have provided helpful comments and
suggestions, especially Jonathan Brogaard, Harry DeAngelo, Ken French, Campbell Harvey,
David Hirshleifer, Laura Liu, Lubos Pastor, Jim Poterba, René Stulz, Avanidhar Subrahmanyam,
and Ivo Welch. Michelle Lowry, Laura Liu, and Kathleen Madsen provided special help with
several aspects of the data collection for this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by G. William Schwert. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Remarkable Growth in Financial Economics, 1974-2020
G. William Schwert
NBER Working Paper No. 28198
December 2020
JEL No. G10,G20,G30

                                         ABSTRACT

Academic finance has grown and evolved in the 46 years since the Journal of Financial
Economics (JFE) began publishing papers. This paper uses detailed data on the 2,858 papers
written by 3,152 different authors published in the JFE from 1974-2019. Cumulatively, these
papers have received 278,018 citations from other published papers as reflected in the Social
Science Citation Index. Increasing computing power and electronic communication have likely
resulted in trends toward more empirical work, more co-authorship, and more complex papers.
Growth in the demand for finance faculty has driven up faculty salaries, and therefore the demand
for journal services.


G. William Schwert
William E. Simon Graduate School of Business Administration
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
Schwert@schwert.ssb.rochester.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28198
2                                  G. W. Schwert, Growth in financial economics


1.   Introduction


       Michael C. Jensen founded the Journal of Financial Economics (JFE) in 1974. I began my

academic career teaching at the University of Chicago in 1975. Since then much has changed in

financial economics. This paper documents some facts related to the phenomenal growth in this

field and relates them to broader trends in financial markets and academia. My perspective is

somewhat idiosyncratic, because it reflects my editorial experience at the JFE, which began in 1979.

From the history of the JFE, I believe that the lessons I learned give an accurate picture of how the

field of financial economics has evolved.

       The focus of this paper is on data that reflect changes in the demand for and supply of

academic research in finance over the last 45 years. Much of the discussion is unabashedly

descriptive, but I also relate the facts to several theories about academic production functions from

the broader economics and social sciences literature.

       Section 2 describes the major editorial policies and goals that have guided the JFE. The JFE

has been innovative in its use of incentive mechanisms, such as submission fees and payments to

referees, to manage the review and editorial process. It has also been entrepreneurial in developing

new areas of research through special issues, conferences, and clinical papers. It has stressed

expositional quality and the importance of empirical implications in theoretical work. Data on the

number of submissions, submission fees, rejection rates for submitted papers, turnaround time, and

the topics of published papers (according to Journal of Economic Literature (JEL) classifications)

show how the JFE has evolved since 1974.

       In section 3, data on JFE editorial decisions from 1994-2019 shed light on a number of issues

related to the evolution of finance research. Characteristics of authors, referees, and editors reflect

the roles that experience and gender play in producing the set of papers ultimately published.

       Section 4 analyzes data from the Social Science Citation Index (SSCI) on citations to papers
                                                                                                  3

published in the JFE over the past 45 years. These data show which papers, authors, and institutions

have had the most influence on the finance and economics literature. Time-series and cross-sectional

analyses provide insight into the success of JFE policies. The evidence shows that research produced

by members of the Editorial Board have played a key role in the success of the Journal.

       Section 5 explores the secular growth in submissions, citations, and papers published across

the JFE, the Journal of Finance (JF), the Review of Financial Studies (RFS), and the Journal of

Financial and Quantitative Analysis (JFQA). While there are some differences across journals,

similar factors have affected all of them.

       Compared with other areas of economics or accounting, the number of finance journals has

grown remarkably from one in 1922 to 62 in 2019. Although it is beyond the scope of this paper to

explain fully why this has happened, section 6 presents data on the trends in starting salaries of

Assistant Professors of Finance since 1975, along with data on starting salaries of MBA students.

The demand for space in academic finance journals has been associated with the large salary rewards

associated with successful publication in finance journals.

       Section 7 provides a few concluding remarks.


2.   JFE editorial policies


       When Michael C. Jensen, Eugene F. Fama, and Robert C. Merton collaborated to start the

JFE in 1974, their sense was that the finance profession could benefit from a new, high quality

academic journal. Their objectives were to provide timely service to authors and to apply high

standards so that published papers would influence the finance and economics literature. From the

beginning, the JFE published editorial data describing turnaround times and the rejection rate for

papers under review during the preceding 12 months at the front of each issue. These data reflect

not only the importance placed by the JFE editors on a prompt, high-quality review process, but also
4                                  G. W. Schwert, Growth in financial economics


our desire to communicate our productivity to authors and referees, allowing them to monitor our

performance.


2.1 Using prices to improve efficiency


       The JFE has always charged authors submission fees and paid referees for submitting reports

within predetermined time limits. We subsequently began paying editors for prompt service after

they had become a bottleneck. We refund the last submission fee to authors of accepted papers, so

the expected fee for a high-quality paper is low. On the other hand, papers that require several

revisions before meeting publication standards must pay several submission fees. JFE editors have

tried to keep submission fees high enough to induce authors to improve their papers as much as

possible before asking a referee and an editor to read and review their work. It also provides revenue

to encourage high quality referees to evaluate papers. The editorial (in Volume 17) by Jensen et al.

(1986), provides a more detailed history and analysis of the role that submission fees have played in

the management of the JFE.

       Fig. 1 plots submission fees (deflated by the Consumer Price Index to August 1973 dollars)

along with the number of submissions for the past 12 months to the JFE from January 1974 through

December 2020. This plot shows that there has been a secular rise in the demand for JFE editorial

services, despite the growth in real submission fees. Casual inspection shows that both fees and

submissions trend upward strongly. Sections 5 and 6 provide suggestive evidence that the value of

a JFE publication drove the number of submissions upward, and we raised submission fees in a

somewhat futile attempt to slow the growth of submissions.

       Fig. 2 shows the rejection rate and the median turnaround time for JFE submissions from

1974-2020. After the first few years of operation, rejection rates have been stable with only a small

upward trend. Because the number of submissions has grown substantially, this implies that the
                                                                                                   5

number of papers published in the JFE has grown. Section 4 shows and discusses this growth in

relation to competing finance journals. The median turnaround time drifted upwards from 1976

through 1996. This partly reflected the growth in the number of submissions and the resultant

increase in the number of JFE editors, which reached its maximum of seven between 1993 and 1996.

In 1996, the organizational structure of the Editorial Board changed substantially and since then the

median turnaround time has remained stable at about 28 days.1 There have been brief periods when

these measures of editorial activity have varied from normal levels, often associated with special

issues of the JFE (see section 2.4).

          Table 1 lists editors and their periods of service from 1974-2020. It includes one hundred

five people who have served as Associate Editors, Advisory Editors, Co-Editors, and Editors. The

primary criteria for selecting members of the Board is the proven ability to help with the review

process. In addition to their roles in editing and refereeing papers, these members of the Editorial

Board have contributed a large number of published papers that have received an above average

number of citations. As shown in the last two columns of Table 1, members of the Editorial Board

have contributed about 12 percent of the papers and 21 percent of the citations to the JFE. Thus,

they are responsible for much of the success of the JFE in achieving its goal of publishing high

quality research.


2.2 Peer review and feedback


          All academic journals depend on the peer review system for their success. Journal editors

often identify successful authors and others who exhibit expertise in a particular area as potential

referees. Moreover, the set of potential referees is common across different journals, so some people




1
    Jensen and Schwert (1996).
6                                         G. W. Schwert, Growth in financial economics


bear a large cost from the peer review process.2 Given the scarce time available to referees, how can

one journal elicit quicker high-quality reviews?3

           From the beginning, Michael Jensen advocated both price and feedback incentives to affect

referees' behavior. The JFE was only the second economics journal to pay referees who returned

their reports promptly, although many major finance and economics journals now pay referees for

reports.4 Since we raised the submission fee to $275 in 1986, we have offered a discount equal to

1/3 of the submission fee for timely referees' reports, in addition to a dollar payment. Thus, referees

face a lower effective submission fee than others who do not contribute to the peer review system.

While these payments do not fully compensate for the time of the referee, they do give referees an

incentive to move JFE papers up in their queue of work. For many years, the JFE has published on

its web page a list of people who produced referee's reports and their average turnaround times

during the past year. This provides reputational rewards for people who are frequent and timely

referees.5

           Some authors are particularly sensitive to speed in the review process. For example, junior

faculty who face a tenure review within a short period gain the most from quick feedback on their

work. By publishing the distribution of turnaround times on the first page of each issue of the



2
 It frequently happens that referees for the JFE, JF, and RFS respond to an invitation to review a submission that they
have already reviewed an earlier version of the paper for a different journal. Green, O'Hara, and Schwert (2002) and
Hirshleifer, Schwert, and Singleton (2013) are editorials published simultaneously in the JF, RFS, and JFE that
encourage authors to use feedback from referees to improve their papers.

3
    Ellison (2002) stresses the apparent increase in turnaround times at many economics journals since 1970.

4
  The Bell Journal of Economics and Management Science began paying referees for prompt reports when it began
operation in 1970. Its founding editor, Paul MacAvoy, reported that The Bell Journal was unusual in that it paid authors
substantial royalties for accepted papers and it mailed subscriptions free to all members of the American Economics
Association. American Telephone and Telegraph Company, which at that time was a regulated monopoly, provided the
budget for The Bell Journal. The Bell Journal did not use submission fees.

5
  Interestingly, Hamermesh (1994, pp. 160-161) describes the success of the policy of rewarding referees to elicit faster
service as a "bribe for prompt service," although the example journal he refers to pays only a modest fee for service.
                                                                                                                     7

Journal, and by striving to have a limited backlog of accepted papers waiting for publication, the

JFE has stressed speed as an important aspect of its service.

           In 2006, the JFE began a formal "desk rejection" process for papers that seemed unlikely to

become publishable in the JFE. In many cases, the reason for the desk rejection decision is a lack

of fit, since many referees' reports say, "there is nothing wrong with the paper, except that it does not

belong in this journal." That kind of feedback is useful to the editor in making rejection decisions,

but it does not help the author improve the paper. Of course, the submission fee for papers that

receive desk rejection decisions is lower. About 14 percent of submissions since mid-2004 have

received desk rejections.6 The most obvious benefit of this practice is to reduce the demands on the

time of referees.

           Table 2 shows estimates of logit regression models relating desk rejection decisions to author

characteristics for 16,081 submissions from 2006-2019. It seems that papers are more likely to be

desk rejected if the authors are female (a marginal effect of 4.5% with a t-statistic of 4.42). I estimate

marginal effects from the equivalent linear probability model. The paper is less likely to be desk

rejected if the authors have served as referees for the JFE (a marginal effect of -20.2% with a t-

statistic of -21.51), or if the authors are from the US (a marginal effect of -7.9% with a t-statistic of

-6.94). The author characteristics are measured as the average of the characteristics of each coauthor.

These last results are not surprising, since familiarity with the standards for publication, which would

be greatest for authors who are also referees, for example, makes it less likely that the authors would

submit a paper that is highly unlikely to become acceptable for publication.7

           Table 3 shows estimates of logit regression models relating acceptance decisions to author



6
  It is my understanding from Andrei Shleifer and Larry Katz that the Quarterly Journal of Economics desk rejects more
than half of its submissions. From the editor's web page, through August 2020, the Journal of Finance had desk rejected
almost 33% of submissions for the prior 12 months.
7
    Probit and linear probability model estimates are essentially equivalent.
8                                   G. W. Schwert, Growth in financial economics


characteristics for 21,669 submissions from 1994-2019. Consistent with the results from Table 2,

papers are more likely to be accepted if the authors also serve as referees for the JFE (a marginal

effect of 13.7% with a t-statistic of 20.16), or are members of the Editorial Board (a marginal effect

of 14.0% with a t-statistic of 6.03). The paper is also more likely to be accepted if the authors are

located in the US, Europe, or Asia, versus the remaining 15 percent of the submissions (marginal

effects of 8.0%, 7.6%, and 6.1%, with t-statistics of 9.91, 8.90, and 6.83). I interpret all of these

results as showing that authors who are most familiar with the standards of the JFE are able to submit

papers that are likely to get accepted.

        Fig. 3a shows several characteristics of the referees for JFE papers from 1994-2019. Over

91% of the referees have also submitted papers to the JFE as an author, and 67% of referees have a

paper published in the JFE (although not necessarily before they serve as a referee). Over 15% of

the referees are female, over 73% of the referees work in the United States. Finally, over 10% of the

referees work in Europe and over 2% of the referees work in Asia. Fig. 3a also shows the

characteristics of authors. About 13% of authors have also served as a referee for the JFE, about

21% of authors have published papers in the JFE, and about 21% of authors are female. In terms of

geographic dispersion, 47% of authors work in the US, 15% work in Europe, and 8% work in Asia.

        Fig. 3b shows the histogram of turnaround times since 1994 for referees who met a requested

deadline and were paid along with the turnaround times for referees who did not meet their deadline

and were not paid. There are some referees who requested and were granted deadlines more than 28

days into the future, but it is clear that by far the largest bin in the graph is for the last week before

the deadline (over 38% of the completed reports). The mean and median turnaround time for

compensated referees are 21.7 and 25 days. Almost two-thirds of the reports earned payment. For

the remaining reports that were submitted too late to receive payment, the mean and median

turnaround time are 70.3 and 52 days, which is not bad by the standards of many competing finance
                                                                                                      9

and economics journals. Thus, the incentive compensation system seems to have been effective in

eliciting timely reports, on average.

        Interestingly, most other finance journals, and some economics journals, have now adopted

compensation schemes for referees that mimic aspects of the JFE policy. In fact, the Review of

Finance offers a fast track submission system with a submission fee of 900 and payments to

referees of 700 if the report is returned within a week.

        Of course, speed is not the only dimension of journal service. Authors also want comments

and criticisms that will improve the quality of their work, whether or not their papers are published

in the Journal. The JFE has departed from many of its competitors in several ways that are intended

to improve the quality of feedback to authors. First, most submissions are reviewed by only one

referee, making the referee more responsible for the outcome (i.e., the free rider problem is smaller).

The cost of this policy is that idiosyncratic judgement by a single referee could expose the author to

more risk. On the other hand, to the extent that editors are likely to focus on negative reports, papers

receiving multiple reports face a higher risk of rejection. Welch (2014) shows that referees often

disagree, and argues that the trend of using more referees, associate editors, and editors has raised

costs to authors in terms of a higher likelihood of rejection.

        Fig. 4a shows the average turnaround time for papers with one referee and for papers with

more than one referee by year from 1994-2019. Not surprisingly, the use of multiple referees

increases the time that authors wait. Of course, several factors can explain the use of multiple

referees. Some papers are more complex and require several types of expertise to evaluate properly.

In other cases, editors may have doubts about some aspect of the first referee's report and decide to

solicit a second opinion. Finally, editors know that some authors are unusually combative, which

could cause editors to seek multiple reports to reduce the likelihood of a subsequent dispute.

        Fig. 4b shows the decisions for papers that involve single and multiple referees from 1994-
10                                          G. W. Schwert, Growth in financial economics


2019. The probability of a straight rejection is 62% versus 42% when there are more than one

reviewer.8 The probability of a rejection with the possibility of resubmission is 25% when there is

one reviewer and 44% when there is more than one reviewer. Therefore, the probability of

acceptance is similar for both situations, about 13%. These facts are consistent with a variety of

scenarios, but my judgment is that it reflects the desire by the editor to seek more advice on papers

that are complex, but potentially publishable.

           Fig. 5a shows the average number of referees per paper yearly from 1994-2019. The average

number of referees is never above 1.1 and there is no substantial trend. The JFE uses "dispute

referees," who are asked to intermediate disagreements between authors and referees. It is apparent

that the rate of disputes has increased over time, despite the high cost to authors of pursuing a dispute

(the dispute fee is currently $1,500). Foreshadowing the discussion of submission fees in section 6,

Fig. 5a shows that we increased the dispute fee in 2004, 2011, and 2015 following an unusual

increase in the number of disputes. Despite these price increases, the rate of disputes has increased

over the last 25 years.

           The referee always receives a copy of the letter written by the editor to the author. This

enables the editors to convey JFE policies to both authors and referees in a consistent way, which is

important since many of our best referees are also authors.

           Another editorial policy that affects the speed of the publication process is the number of

iterations required to produce a publishable paper. In the early days of the JFE, the number of authors

and papers was smaller, and it made sense for the referees and editors to make larger investments in

helping to improve poorly executed papers that had a good idea. Accordingly, there were occasions

where there might be five or more resubmissions before the paper was finally accepted or rejected.

As the profession matured and competition among authors and papers for scarce journal space


8
    Note that this is inconsistent with Welch's (2014) conjecture that more referees are likely to lead to more rejections.
                                                                                                  11

increased, the JFE decided to informally limit the number of resubmissions, so that if a paper was

not acceptable after a third submission it should be rejected. Fig. 5b shows that the frequency of

multiple resubmissions has fallen over time, consistent with JFE policy.

       The value of repeated iterations between authors and referees has been hotly debated and

blamed at least in part for the increasing delay in the speed of publication in the finance and

economics literature (e.g., Ellison (2002), McAfee (2010), Spiegel (2012), Berk, Harvey, and

Hirshleifer (2017), and Hadavand, Hamermesh, and Wilson (2020)).               While we have not

experimented with the "no revisions" process used by Economic Inquiry, we do try to avoid

prolonged battles between authors and referees about the evolution of the paper.

       The Editorial Board includes people who provide the highest level of peer review. As shown

in Table 1, editors have been important contributors to the JFE as authors, contributing almost 12%

of the papers published and more than 21% of the citations to JFE papers. Occasionally, they help

the Journal identify important papers for solicitation (for which we waive the submission fee). While

the Editorial Board includes well-known senior people, we added many members early in their

careers because they were identified as productive scholars and reviewers. Indeed, many of these

people were on the JFE Board before they were given similar recognition by other finance and

economics journals, including editors of the Journal of Finance (Blume, Brennan, Stulz, Stambaugh,

and Harvey), the Review of Financial Studies (Brennan and Karolyi), and the Journal of Financial

and Quantitative Analysis (Bessembinder and Harford). In addition, other members of the Editorial

Board later became editors of significant journals in other fields, including John Campbell (American

Economic Review and Review of Economics and Statistics), Charles Plosser (Journal of Monetary

Economics), Andrei Shleifer (Quarterly Journal of Economics), and Ross Watts (one of the founding

editors of the Journal of Accounting & Economics). Some of the most senior people on the Editorial

Board when the JFE began in 1974 are among the few who did not contribute as authors, and most
12                                  G. W. Schwert, Growth in financial economics


of these people were replaced on the Board by 1980. We added most people to the Board based on

their delivered performance as referees and authors.


2.3 Expositional policies


       The JFE has always stressed expositional clarity as an important goal for the papers it

publishes. Beyond the usual help that editors and referees provide authors, the JFE hires a

professional copy editor to review every accepted paper.

       The JFE also has always had high standards for tables and figures. Since René Stulz became

its editor in 1987, the Journal of Finance has adopted table and figure policies similar to those of the

JFE. The goal is for each table and figure to be virtually self-contained; that is, readers should be

able to understand the information in the table or figure without frequent reference to the text of the

article. We believe this objective is important since many readers skim a paper's abstract, tables,

figures, and conclusions in deciding whether to devote the time to read the paper carefully. In

addition, many readers use results from JFE papers as separate classroom handouts to highlight a

particular fact or result. To help authors achieve this goal, we send a packet of materials containing

good examples of tables and figures when authors are being encouraged to revise and resubmit a

paper for further review (and these guidelines are on the web page of the JFE editors' office).

Frequently, JFE editors also send authors instructions on footnotes (we strive to minimize footnotes)

and other matters of exposition (e.g., Hamermesh (1992), McCloskey (1985), and Wydick (1978)).

The editors believe that expositional quality is important, along with analytical quality, in

determining the success of JFE papers.

       The JFE stresses clarity, but it also has a policy of ignoring absolute length in judging the

publishability of a paper. We would rather see one longer comprehensive paper than several shorter

papers (whose cumulative length is greater). This policy also distinguishes the JFE from many
                                                                                                                  13

competing economics and finance journals. For example, the Journal of Finance has a policy that

submitted manuscripts should be shorter than 60 manuscript pages. Fig. 6a shows the distribution

of paper lengths for the 2,844 papers published in Volumes 1-134, ignoring short editorials and

introductory papers in special issues. The average length is about 30.7 pages, but 12% of the papers

have been more than 40 pages long.9 Fig. 6b shows that the length of papers has grown over time,

probably due to increased complexity. Section 5 analyses this in more detail.


2.4 Entrepreneurial activities: Conferences, special issues, and clinical papers


        Another policy that has differentiated the JFE from other finance and economics journals is

the frequent effort to highlight and cultivate new areas of research. Table 4 lists the special

symposium issues of the JFE, many of which resulted from conferences that were cosponsored by

the Journal. It shows the topic of the symposium, the number of papers and pages in the special

issue, the editors responsible, and the total number of citations to these papers from publication

through 2019 (from the SSCI). It also shows the average citations per year per paper for each

symposium. While these special issues vary in size and subject matter, it is clear from the citation

data that they have been highly influential on the literature. The average number of citations per

year per paper in special issues is 8.6, over 50% higher than the 5.5 average citations per paper per

year for normal issues of the JFE. Sections 4 and 5 provide further analysis of citation patterns for

JFE papers.

        Besides the special issues, in 1989 the JFE began a section on clinical papers under the

guidance of Richard Ruback (Jensen et al. (1989)). The JFE has published 67 clinical papers through

2019. The average number of citations per year is 2.0, compared with 5.8 average citations per year


9
 In 2008, Volume 89, Elsevier changed the format of the printed JFE to use two columns of text, which made the
printed issues about 33% shorter than the original single column format. Therefore, the length of papers after volume
88 are adjusted to reflect the original format.
14                                        G. W. Schwert, Growth in financial economics


for the non-clinical papers. Of course, the goal of the clinical papers section is somewhat different,

so it is not appropriate to judge the success of this policy solely on citations from the academic

journal literature.


3.      Factors of production for the JFE


           The papers it publishes determine the success of any academic journal. Thus, it is the

decisions of authors to submit their papers for review and then the efforts of referees and editors in

helping to improve papers and selecting among the many submissions that results in the set of papers

that is published. This section will present data on the types of authors, referees, topics, and methods

that have contributed to the success of the JFE.


3.1 Research topics and methods

           JEL classification codes10 provide one method of identifying the questions that are addressed

in JFE papers. Fig. 7a shows the evolution of topics addressed in the JFE by decade since 1974. It

is apparent that Asset Markets and Pricing (G1) was the most important category through the 1980s,

and it remains the subject of about a third of the papers today. Corporate Finance and Governance

(G3) grew from a sixth of the papers in the 1970s to over a third of the papers, in large part because

of papers published in the JFE and its special issues in the 1980s and 1990s. It remains the topic of

about a quarter of the papers today. Financial Institutions and Services (G2) has grown substantially

as a focus of research since the 1990s, probably because of the various financial crises that have

caused academicians to study the role that institutions play in financial markets.

           Financial economists benefit from access to a large and growing collection of data to learn

about finance research topics. Thus, it is not surprising that since 1974 the role of empirical papers



10
     https://www.aeaweb.org/jel/guide/jel.php
                                                                                                                        15

in the finance literature has grown. From 1974-79, almost sixty percent of the papers were

theoretical, with essentially no empirical analysis. Michael Jensen was well known for asking

theorists to include empirical predictions from their models in their JFE papers. Over time, the

proportion of theory papers has declined as the number of empirical papers increased.11 In fairness,

the categorization between theory and empirical content is subjective and I categorized papers that

contain both theory and empirical work as "empirical." Since many papers now have significant

content of both types, the simplistic evidence in Fig. 7b does not mean that there are fewer theoretical

contributions since 1979.


3.2 Who are the authors and referees?

         The JFE has detailed information about the identities of authors and referees since 1994.

There are several trends that are apparent over this 26-year period. First, almost all (91%) referees

are also authors who have submitted papers themselves, and about 67% of the referees have

published a paper in the JFE during this period, as seen earlier in Fig. 3a.

         Fig 8a. shows that the proportion of authors and referees from the U.S. has fallen steadily

since 1994 as academic finance has become more of a global enterprise. Similarly, Fig. 8b shows

that the proportion of authors and referees who are female has risen steadily as the profession has

become more gender diverse, similar to what Hamermesh (2013) notes for economics journal

publications.

         As with many things in economics, the distribution of the refereeing workload is positively

skewed. As shown in Fig. 9a, of the 1,941 people who have written referee's reports for the JFE



11
   Angrist, Azoulay, Ellison, Hill, and Lu (2020) find that both the proportion of and citations to empirical papers in top
economics journals has grown steadily from 1980-2015. Hamermesh (2013) in Table 4 shows that the proportion of
theory papers has declined since the mid-1980s. Kim, Morse, and Zingales (2006) in appendix Table 1B show that the
proportion of highly cited theory papers in economics journals, including finance, declined substantially from 1970 to
1999.
16                                 G. W. Schwert, Growth in financial economics


between 1994-2020, about 40% of these people have prepared one or two reports. On the other hand

seven percent of the referees have written more than 40 reports (the maximum is 215). The

distribution of acceptance rates in Fig. 9b is even more unusual. Most referees (59%) have never

accepted a paper, and a handful have relatively high acceptance rates. It is clear though that the

acceptance rates are higher for people who have written more reports, since the equal-weighted

average acceptance rate is 6.7% while the average weighted by the number of reports is 11.1%. In

fact, the acceptance rate distribution for the 349 referees who have written 20 or more reports looks

fairly normal. This is consistent with a sorting process where editors choose inexperienced, or at

least infrequent, referees to review papers that they forecast are unlikely to become publishable in

the JFE. Table 13A in the internet appendix lists all of the people who have served as referees from

1994-2020, along with the number of reports, acceptances, rejections, and average turnaround times.

       Editors often select experienced referees for papers that the editor thinks have a higher

likelihood of eventually becoming publishable. This sorting model makes sense in the context of

the dynamic quid pro quo system that helps academic publishing work. Even when authors pay

"large" submission fees, and referees receive "large" honoraria for their on-time work, the

compensation for referees is far below their opportunity cost of time, especially for the most

experienced referees, who are also among the most prolific authors. Nonetheless, experienced

referees often devote a lot of time to reading others' papers and writing reports on them. Since

authors do not know the identity of the referee, only the editor can observe the valuable work

contributed by the referee. The implicit compensation experienced referees receive is that they

expect the editor to devote scarce high quality refereeing resources to their papers when they submit

as authors.

       It is not true that all experienced, prolific authors also serve as frequent referees. As

mentioned in section 2.2, another way the JFE rewards referees is to list on the editor's web page all
                                                                                                      17

of the people who have refereed papers in a recent 12 month period, along with the number of reports

they have written and the average turnaround time. This provides quantifiable evidence of

professional service to colleagues and Deans. In addition, for accepted papers, if the authors thank

"an anonymous referee," the editor asks the referee if they are willing to reveal their identity in the

published paper.

       Another aspect of the sorting process in selecting referees is that it is expensive for the editor

if the referee errs in being too generous in assessing the paper. This often results in asking a second

person to review the paper, or it could result in publishing a paper that lowers the quality of the

journal. Given this asymmetric loss function, it is normal for editors to learn about the referee's

quality by asking them to review lower quality papers. I remember that my first six or seven referee

reports for the JFE in 1976 were all for papers that were easy rejection decisions. One day I

commented to Mike Jensen that I would love to see a paper that might actually have a chance to be

accepted. As a result, the next two papers I reviewed were Roll (1977) and Scholes and Williams

(1977), which have 858 and 937 citations in the SSCI through 2019, so Mike obviously had decided

that he could trust my judgment.

       Another important source of information about referees is the knowledge of the members of

the Editorial Board. Editors frequently ask members of the Board for recommendations of possible

referees as a way to broaden the set of people who contribute to the Journal. Young scholars have

incentives to produce high quality reports to establish a good reputation with the editor.

       One form of compensation for on-time referee reports is a "coupon" that can be used to pay

1/3 of the submission fee if the referee subsequently submits a paper to the JFE. This coupon is in

addition to the cash payment, which is currently $500. Since referees are also people who are likely

to write papers that might fit in the JFE, the coupons, which are non-transferable, are a price

discrimination device in favor of authors who have a higher likelihood of acceptance. Some referees
18                                  G. W. Schwert, Growth in financial economics


effectively have an unlimited number of free submissions. Together with the policy of refunding

submission fees for the version of the paper that is accepted, and soliciting papers that the editor has

identified as being likely to be publishable, these policies lower the cost of submitting for authors

who have papers that are likely to be publishable.

        Table 5 shows the list of the 59 authors who have published the most papers in the JFE, along

with various measures of the citations to those papers (a full tabulation of the 3,360 authors who

have published papers in the JFE from 1974-2020 is in Table 5A in the internet appendix). The

institutional affiliations in Table 5 reflect the author's location at the time of the last published JFE

paper. René Stulz of Ohio State has the most papers with 38 (16.92 adjusting for coauthorship). His

papers have received 192.2 citations per author per year since they were published, which ranks

third. Eugene Fama and Kenneth French rank second and third in terms of papers per coauthor and

first and second in terms of citations per author per year. Over half of the authors in this table were

on the Editorial Board at some time, and about 90% served as referees. These 59 authors, 1.8% of

all authors, represent 12% of the papers per coauthor and 18% of the citations per coauthor per year.


3.3 Where do the authors work?


        Table 6 shows the list of the 35 institutions whose authors who have published the most

papers in the JFE, along with various measures of the citations to those papers (a full tabulation of

the 605 institutions whose 3,360 authors who have published papers in the JFE from 1974-2020 is

in Table 6A in the internet appendix). These 35 institutions, 5.8% of all institutions, represent 51%

of the papers per coauthor and 60% of the citations per coauthor per year. The institutional

affiliations in Table 6 are measured at the time that the paper is published.

        The role that these leading institutions have played in the JFE has declined over time as the

breadth and depth of the set of potential JFE authors has grown around the world. Fig. 10a shows
                                                                                                                 19

the share of JFE papers weighted by coauthorship for ten universities at the top of Table 6.

Rochester, Chicago, MIT, and UCLA represented almost 40% of the JFE papers in the 1970s, and

slightly more than 8% from 2010-2019. All ten of these universities only represent about 23% of

the JFE papers from 2010-2019. Fig. 10b shows the average citations to JFE papers from the ten

universities weighted by coauthorship relative to the average for all papers. The effect of the highly

cited Jensen and Meckling (1976) and Fama and French (1993) papers explain the unusual values

for Rochester and Chicago in those decades. In general, the papers published by authors at these

institutions were cited more frequently than for an average paper.


4.   Citations to JFE papers


        When Michael C. Jensen, Eugene F. Fama, and Robert C. Merton originally planned the JFE,

they agreed that citations to papers published in the JFE should be an objective measure of the

success of the journal.12 Three separate editorials (Jensen et al. (1987), Jensen et al. (1990), and

Schwert (1993)) summarized the citation success of JFE papers, and the web page for the editor's

office has maintained numerous statistics reflecting citation performance since 1996.

        There are many metrics used to rank journals based on citations, but probably the most

frequently used is the "impact factor" created by Journal Citation Reports (JCR). It measures the

average number of citations in year T to papers published in years T-1 and T-2. Fig. 11a shows the

time series of impact factors for the JFE, along with the JF, the RFS, and the JFQA from 1977-2019.

Several things are apparent from this graph. First, impact factors have increased over time for all

four journals. This probably reflects the increase in the number of journals, and therefore the number

of papers to give citations, along with the positive skewness in citations that means "better" papers



12
   This is not surprising, since Robert K. Merton (1973), a prominent sociologist of science and Robert C. Merton's
father, advocated the value of citation analysis for understanding how science works.
20                                      G. W. Schwert, Growth in financial economics


receive more than a proportional share of the newly available citations. Second, the JFE had

amazingly high impact factors in the 1980s, in large part because of special issues focused on

corporate control. Third, the impact factors for JF have grown substantially since 1988, when René

Stulz began his editorial term. Fourth, the impact factors of RFS have increased since 2008.13

        Fig. 11b shows the number of papers for the same four journals from 1974-2019. Since 1995,

the size of the JFE has more than tripled. The size of the RFS has also almost tripled since 2006.

The size of the JFQA has also more than doubled since 2008. In contrast, the number of papers

published in the JF since 2009 is below the 1974-2019 average. As shown in Fig. 2, the rejection

rate for the JFE has been stable over time, so the number of published papers has grown as the

number of submissions has grown (Fig. 1). The fact that the impact factors in Fig. 11a have also

trended upwards suggests that the growth in the size of the JFE has not had adverse effects on the

quality of the papers published. The shrinkage in the size of the JF probably contributes to the

increasing impact factor for the papers it publishes.


4.1 Which papers are cited?

        There are many ways to break down the kinds of papers that are most cited. Fig. 12a shows

the percentage of citations to papers written by authors who are also referees for the JFE, female

authors, and authors from the US, Europe, and Asia for five decades between 1974-2019. In all

periods, papers written by people who are also referees are cited more than the average. For the

other categories, there is no particular pattern in citations relative to an average paper.

        Fig. 12b shows the relative citations to theory and empirical papers, as well as to papers that

cover topics in financial markets (G1), financial institutions (G2), or corporate finance (G3) for the



13
   The impact factors for RFS jumped substantially in 2010 and 2011. It turns out that much of this increase was due
to one very highly cited paper. The impact factors, 4.60 and 4.75 in 2010 and 2011, would be 4.02 and 4.04 excluding
Petersen (2009). Now that paper gets one more citation.
                                                                                                              21

decades from 1974-2019. Jensen and Meckling (1976) has a strong influence to make the corporate

finance and theory groups have higher than average citations in the first period. After that, the most

striking tendency is that citations to theory papers have declined, and citations to empirical papers

have increased.

        Table 7 shows the papers that have received the most citations per year since publication, led

by Jensen and Meckling (1976) with almost 270 citations per year on average. It is clear that the

mix of papers is quite diversified, spanning time, topics, and methods. The complete list of all papers

and the citations they have received is in the internet appendix, Table 7A.

        Table 8 shows the list of papers that were selected as the "best" papers published in the JFE

in each year from 1997-2019. There are two prizes in two categories: the Fama/DFA capital markets

prize and the Jensen corporate finance prize. In the early years, all personal subscribers were allowed

to vote. As it became more difficult to monitor the list of subscribers, the eligible voters were limited

to people who had either published a paper in the JFE in the past year, or who had refereed three or

more papers in the past year. Table 8 also includes information about the order that each winning

paper appeared in its issue of the JFE, which reflects the editor's forecast of the "importance" of the

paper, and the average number of citations per year that the paper has received since its publication,

which reflects subsequent authors' perceptions of the importance of the paper.14


4.2 Relations between "paper quality" and citations

        Table 9 contains estimates of regression models that analyze the relation between citations

and various factors that arguably reflect the "quality" of JFE papers from 1997-2019. The dependent

variable is the log of the average number of citations received per year from the SSCI since the paper



14
  Coupe (2013) shows that prize winning papers accrue a larger than average number of citations for 26 economics
and finance journals.
22                                         G. W. Schwert, Growth in financial economics


was published, plus 1. This transformation reduces the substantial positive skewness that occurs in

citation data. The first column of Table 9 shows that papers selected by readers, referees, and authors

as winners of the Fama/DFA and Jensen best papers prizes receive higher than average citations,

with t-statistics between 3.7 and 6.9. Expressed as percent changes, the average citations for prize-

winning papers are between 21% and 61% larger.

           Schwert (1993) notes that JFE editors typically order papers in each issue based on the

predicted impact of the papers in the issue.15 Consistent with that, the second column of Table 9

shows that papers that are first, second, or third in each issue receive higher than average citations,

with t-statistics between 3.1 and 5.3. The marginal effect of prize winning, given the ordering of the

papers, remains positive and reliably different from zero.

           The role that paper ordering plays in explaining differences in citations has been studied

many times in the economics and finance literature, including Schwert (1993), Smart and Waldfogel

(1996), Coupe, Ginsburgh, and Noury (2010), and Brogaard, Engelberg, and Parsons (2014). There

are two obvious competing hypotheses that can explain higher citation rates. In addition to the editor

identification of quality, it is also possible that the placement in the journal causes readers and

subsequent authors to pay more attention to articles at the front of an issue.16 Coupe, Ginsburgh, and

Noury (2010) study citations to papers in the European Economic Review between 1975 and 1977

because this journal used two different methods to order papers in each issue. First was the usual

editor's choice model, and the second was to order papers by the first author's surname. They

describe their analysis as a "natural experiment" on the premise that the surname of the first author

should not be correlated with the quality of the paper. Based on their estimates for the 303 papers



15
     Conversations with former editors of the JF and the RFS confirm that they followed a similar policy.
16
  It will be interesting to see whether the ordering effect changes as readers depend less on the structure of "issues"
due to electronic publishing.
                                                                                                             23

that were ordered alphabetically versus the 760 papers that were ordered by editors, they conclude

that 2/3 of the "first paper effect" is unrelated to a forecast of quality. Of course, alert readers

presumably could have detected which model was being used by inspection of the alphabetical

ordering of papers in the issue. A better experiment would have selected the order of the papers

randomly and not inform readers of which method was used for ordering.17

        The JFE had one small "natural experiment" in 1999. The publisher accidentally used a

random order for volume 54 issue 3, December 1999. The editor had requested that Robert

Stambaugh's (1999) predictive regressions paper be the lead article, since that paper had been

solicited by the editor. In fact, it appeared as the fourth paper out of five in the issue. The Stambaugh

paper won the Fama/DFA second place prize (and its fourth order in Table 8 is highlighted with an

asterisk) and through 2019 it has received more than twice as many citations as any other paper in

that issue. This is essentially a clinical study of the role of ordering in citations because of the small

sample size, but it truly was a natural experiment.

        Finally, the institutional affiliation of the authors of the paper can be a signal of the quality

of the paper. Many papers have found evidence that authors at high ranked institutions tend to

receive more citations for their papers, and there is evidence of this in Tables 1, 5, and 6. To control

for this phenomenon, column 3 in Table 9 shows that papers whose authors are affiliated with the

JFE Editorial Board, Chicago, Harvard, Pennsylvania, MIT, NYU, or UCLA receive higher than

average citations, with t-statistics between 2.3 and 4.8. Expressed as percent changes, the average

citations for affiliated papers are between 6% and 12% larger. The marginal effect of prize winning

and article ordering remain positive and are generally reliably different from zero.



17
   Feenberg, Ganguli, Gaule, and Gruber (2017) show that National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) working
papers listed early in the ordering of its weekly email list were downloaded more frequently, so NBER adopted a
policy of random ordering in 2015. I am not aware of subsequent analysis of NBER downloads following this change
in policy.
24                                  G. W. Schwert, Growth in financial economics


5.      Secular changes at the JFE and other finance journals


          Fig. 13a shows the number of economics, finance, and accounting journals in operation each

year from 1886-2020. This is based on the following data selection process. First, I identified the

227 economics journals with impact factors greater than 1.0 in the 2019 JCR and found their initial

year of publication. I selected all of the finance journals from the business finance list in JCR,

omitting journals that are primarily in accounting, or tax, or real estate, or monetary economics. The

accounting journals are also selected from the business finance list. It is clear from this graph that

the size of the academic literatures in all three areas have grown substantially, especially since 1970.

          Fig. 13b shows the growth in finance and accounting journals relative to economics journals

from 1886-2020. This graph makes clear that starting in 1974 the number of finance journals grew

much faster than economics journals until the late 1990s, after which they have grown at the same

rate. The growth in accounting journals relative to economics journals occurred between 1963 and

1982, after which they have grown at the same rate.

          Together with the evidence from Fig. 1 and Fig. 11b, it is clear that the demand for more

publications (by readers of journals) or publication outlets (by authors) in finance has grown a lot in

the past five decades. This has put a lot of pressure on the pool of people who serve as referees. Fig.

14a shows that number of papers that were reviewed by the JFE between 1994-2020, along with the

number of people serving as referees (on the right axis). Both of these measures grew by a factor of

more than five over this period. This problem would have been more severe if the JFE had not desk

rejected about 14% of submissions from 2006-2020. The extraordinary growth in the demand for

refereeing services has been the largest strain on the operations of the JFE (and presumably other

finance journals, since we all draw on the same pool of potential referees). In response, the JFE has

increased the payments to referees for on-time reports at a faster rate than the growth in submission

fees.
                                                                                                                 25

        Not only has the quantity of papers to be reviewed risen, but the size and complexity of a

typical paper has also increased. Fig. 14b shows the average length of published papers from 1974-

2019 by decade (on the right axis), along with the average number of JEL categories identified by

authors and the average number of coauthors per paper on the left axis. All three of these measures

have increased substantially, length by 44%, number of coauthors by 66%, and JEL categories by

85%. Thus, there is strong evidence that the complexity of published papers has also increased over

time, which is likely to increase the difficulty of performing refereeing tasks.

        An interesting question, which is beyond the scope of this paper, is why it is so hard to create

new "top-tier" journals. The impact factors shown in Fig. 11a show that the JFE starting in 1974

and the RFS starting in 1988 have become established, along with the JF, as top journals in finance.

Fig. 13a shows that there have been 49 new finance journals started since 1974, yet only the RFS

seems to be comparable to the JF and the JFE.

        Another interesting question that is beyond the scope of this paper to answer is what the

increased competition for scarce spots in "top-tier" journals means for hiring and promotion

decisions by Universities. My casual impression is that the quantitative standards for achieving

tenure have gradually lowered over time as the rejection rates of top journals have risen.18


5.1 Trends in the quantity and complexity of papers


        Panel A of Table 10 shows summary statistics for the three measures of complexity from Fig.

14b, along with the log of average citations per year plus 1 for 2,858 papers published between 1974

and 2019. The complexity measures, length, number of authors, and JEL codes are all positively

correlated and positively correlated with citations. Panel B of Table 10 shows the estimates of



18
  Although it is also possible that the increased complexity of papers means that Universities "count" modern papers
more than older, simpler papers in evaluating research portfolios of faculty candidates.
26                                    G. W. Schwert, Growth in financial economics


regression models of citations as a function of the complexity measures. There is a reliable relation

between citations and both article length and the number of authors, with a small negative partial

relation with JEL codes, although the last effect is not reliably different from zero when year dummy

variables are included. A direct interpretation of these estimates is that longer papers with more

content contain more information that is worth citing in subsequent research. A possible concern for

reverse causality is that the presence of more coauthors provides more opportunities for self-

citations, or at least social citations (citations to friends' papers).

        Laband and Tollison (2000) find that coauthorship in economics journals increased

significantly between 1886-1995, that coauthorship was positively related to article length, and

that it is positively related to the quantitative content of the paper. They also find that coauthorship

among authors working in different geographic locations has grown over time.

        Card and DellaVigna (2013, p. 151, Fig. 4) show that the average length of papers in five

leading economics journals has risen at a rate similar to what the JFE has experienced, shown in Fig.

6b. Thus, it is reasonable to believe that the trend in this measure of complexity is not particular to

the JFE, or to finance.

        The secular increase in the number of coauthors has been noted and studied many times

before. Hamermesh (2013) argues that coauthorship is likely the result of: (1) increased complexity

of research, (2) lower costs of communication through technological advances, (3) enjoyment from

author interaction, and (4) a built-in critical reader of the paper. Of course, these factors are not

mutually exclusive, so they could all occur together. He says that "one school offers salary bonuses

X for publications, graded by the quality of the journal, with the bonus equaling an amount X/N,

where N is the number of authors. One young economist told me that, in recognition of the

profession's unwillingness to divide by N, a friend and he now put each other's names on each

paper" (p. 166, fn 10).
                                                                                                     27

       Sauer (1988) studies the relation between citations and salaries for 140 economists in seven

top economics departments in 1982. He concludes that coauthored papers are discounted by

approximately 1/n, where n is the number of coauthors, in predicting salary.

       Hilmer, Ransom, and Hilmer (2015) study 1,009 members of economics departments from

53 public universities in the US in 2007. They conclude that there is no discount for coauthorship

in the relation between salaries and publications or citations.

       Ellison (2013) studies the relation between citations and university employment using a

variety of measures of citations. He estimates a discrete choice model to determine how the labor

market measures quality as reflected in various citation measures and how departments should be

ranked. Using a sample of 513 young, tenured economists from 50 departments, he concludes that

the market gives more than 1/n credit, which implies a "strong incentive for coauthoring" (p. 79).

       Liebowitz (2014) argues that proration of credit for publication is important to avoid

"excessive coauthoring." He performed a survey of 47 economics departments to learn about their

attitudes toward coauthoring. More than a third of departments do not pro-rate credit among

coauthors. On average, a two-person authored paper was worth about 89% as much as a single-

authored paper for each of the coauthors.

       Card and DellaVigna (2013, p. 160) argue that "both lower acceptance rates and longer

delays, however, make it increasingly difficult for any one author to achieve a given set of publication

benchmarks. Authors have clearly responded by forming bigger teams, and to the extent that

coauthored papers are treated as equivalent to single authored papers . . . they have been able to

partially mitigate the adverse effects of lower acceptance rates and longer delays."

       Sarsons (2017) and Sarsons, Gërxhani, Reuben, and Schram (2020) find that among Ph.D.

economists from 30 economics departments between 1985-2014, women who coauthor with men
28                                      G. W. Schwert, Growth in financial economics


receive less credit toward tenure decisions than if they write sole-authored papers, or coauthor with

women only. They find no evidence of discounting for men who coauthor.

        Seltzer and Hamermesh (2018) compare coauthorship trends in economic history with

general history, where sole-authored papers are the norm. They find that coauthorship has risen,

particularly among younger authors. They also find that coauthors in economic history are further

apart in age than for economics generally. They conclude that they cannot attribute the rise in

coauthorship to the content of the papers, as measured by the use of econometrics, large datasets,

or citation of economics journals.

        Another factor that has contributed to the rise in coauthorship is the dramatic reduction in

the costs of long distance communication and collaboration.19 Similarly, the costs of computing

have fallen a lot, which has resulted in much more empirical work.20 Kim, Morse, and Zingales

(2009) find that there has been a strong upward trend in the number of papers coauthored by teams

that include people from both "elite" (top-25) and "non-elite" universities from 1971-2004 (Fig.

2, p. 378). They attribute this change to the lowering costs of computing and communication.

They also note that the size of finance faculty for the top 25 schools grew cumulatively 69% from

1973 to 2001 (p. 360, fn 17).


5.2 Secular changes in the relation between citations and author characteristics


        Table 11 shows how the relations between citations and author characteristics have

changed in the five decades that the JFE has been in existence. The positive relation between the


19
   My first recollection of the effects of the internet on long distance research was Ken French, who was at Chicago,
telling me about working with Bob McCormick, who was at Clemson, using FTP in 1983.

20
   My first microcomputer was a Compaq 386 with a 40MB hard disk, which I acquired in late 1986. Prior to that
time, all of my empirical work was performed using FORTRAN on time-sharing mainframe computers. Another
innovation was the decision of Wharton Research Data Services (WRDS) to provide computer support services and
access to large commercial databases to other universities in 1997, mostly over the internet.
                                                                                                  29

number of authors and the average citation rate is largest and reliably different from zero only

since 2000. The relation between papers written by authors who are either referees or members of

the Editorial Board with average citation rates are reliably positive in all decades. There do not

seem to be any reliable relations between the geographic locations of authors and average citations

per year. There is also no stable relation between female authors' papers and average citations per

year. Thus, the factors that seem to explain at least some of the variation in citation impact across

different JFE papers seem to be relatively stable over time.


6.   What factors might explain the growth in the demand for journal services?


       Despite the increase in the submission fees for the JFE, the number of submissions and the

number of papers published have grown substantially from 1974-2019, as shown in Fig. 1 and Fig.

11b. Part of this is undoubtedly due to the expansion of the set of potential authors to include far

more people who work outside the US and more females, as shown in Fig. 15. Despite the growth

in the size of finance faculties in the US (Kim, Morse, and Zingales (2009)), the growth in finance

faculties in Europe and Asia has been even faster, as shown for published papers in Fig. 15 and for

submissions in Fig. 8a.

       The pricing policy followed by the JFE editors is reflected in the cross-correlations between

changes in submission and changes in submission fees, shown in Fig. 16. These correlations indicate

that when submissions have increased in the prior two years, it is likely that submission fees are

increased. In the year following the increase in submission fees, there is a modest decrease in

submissions. Thus, the pricing policy has been reactive to the behavior of submissions, but the

success in using fees to reduce the flow of submissions is only short-lived.

       What kinds of factors might explain the unusual growth in the demand for JFE services?

One obvious answer is that the value of publishing a paper in the JFE grew substantially since 1974.
30                                     G. W. Schwert, Growth in financial economics


There have been numerous attempts to try to measure the value of high quality academic

publications, including Sauer (1988) and Hilmer, Ransom, and Hilmer (2015).21 A common and

sensible finding is that influential journal articles are related to both salaries and to the quality of the

department where authors are employed. However, that cross-sectional relation cannot explain why

demand for JFE services has changed so much over time.

        To measure the salaries of JFE authors over time, I solicited information on starting salaries

from 328 people who entered the finance job market between 1974 and 2011 and received 251

answers. I also received information on "typical" offers made to new assistant professors of finance

from several leading business schools for the post-2011 period. Based on these data, I construct an

index number starting at $15,000 in 1974 and ending at $240,000 in 2020 that represents 9-month

starting salaries for Assistant Professors of finance (Asst_sal), ignoring other features of

compensation such as summer compensation, relocation bonuses, research budgets, and so forth.

Thus, starting salaries have risen at a rate of about 6.2% per year, on average.

        Figure 17 shows some benchmarks to evaluate the growth in academic finance salaries.

MBA_sal represents a measure of starting salaries for MBA graduates from leading business schools.

I asked several business schools to share information on the average starting salaries of their MBA

graduates, again without signing bonuses or moving allowances, from 1974-2020. Five schools

agreed to share data with me on the condition of anonymity. From these responses, I created an

index number starting at $15,000 in 1974 (which is slightly lower than the average MBA salary for

that year) and ending with $128,460 in 2020, which is an annual growth rate of 4.8%. Of course,

these are nominal salaries, which undoubtedly rose in part because of the inflation of the cost of

living. CPI represents an index number that grows from $15,000 in 1974 to $74,885 in 2020



21
  Hamermesh (2018), Table 9, p. 145 summarizes 13 articles that have studied the relation between compensation
and citations for academic economists.
                                                                                                    31

reflecting the 3.5% average annual growth in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers,

not seasonally adjusted. Finally, Fin_comp represents per capita compensation of employees in

finance, insurance , and real estate (from Tables 6.2A-6.2D and 6.5A-6.5D of National Income and

Product Accounts maintained by the Bureau of Economic Analysis), scaled to begin at $15,000 in

1974. The 2020 value for this series is $170,472, representing an annual growth rate of 5.4%.

        Several things are notable from Fig. 17. First, in the mid-1980s starting salaries for finance

faculty started to rise substantially faster than the other benchmarks. This has been noted and

analyzed several times in the popular press. Uchitelle (1989) noted that academic salaries in finance

had jumped relative to their past values, and relative to salaries in economics departments. Lappen

(1998) describes many of the lucrative non-academic activities that compete for the scarce time of

leading finance academics, and Byrne (2018) documents high salaries for some finance professors

from public universities (where faculty compensation is published).               Even ignoring outside

opportunities for finance Ph.D. graduates, Martin (2020) observes that the ratio of the number of

undergraduate and masters students who take business courses to Ph.D. graduates from business

schools who would teach those courses is much higher than for any other major academic field,

which at least partly explains the high and rising salaries of finance faculty.

        Table 12 contains estimates of an error correction model (Engle and Granger (1987)) to

explain the annual changes in the log of JFE submissions, Log(Submitt), as a function of changes

and lagged levels of the log of median JFE turnaround time for the prior 12 months, Log(Turnt),

changes and lagged levels of the real submission fee, Log(Feet), changes and lagged levels of the

rejection rate for the prior 12 months, Log(Rejectt), and changes and lagged levels of the real

Assistant Professor salary for finance professors, Log(Asst_salt). Columns (2) and (3) in Table 12

show simplified variants of this model that are implied by the estimates in column (1).

        The main conclusions from Table 12 are that increases in the real pay for finance professors
32                                 G. W. Schwert, Growth in financial economics


are associated with increases in the growth rate of submissions (with a t-statistic of 3.55 in column

(3)) and increases in the real submission fee slow down the growth rate of submissions (with a t-

statistic of -4.27 in column (3)). There is weak evidence that high rejection rates are associated

with increased growth rates of submissions and that longer turnaround times are associated with

lower growth rates of submissions. Fig. 18 shows a graph of the log of submissions, the fitted

values from column (3) in Table 12, and the residuals from that model. The residuals appear to be

random and seem to have constant variance, suggesting that the model is well-specified.

        Thus, the regression model in Table 12 supports many of the qualitative observations made

about submission fees in section 2, as well as the discussion of academic finance salaries earlier in

this section.


7.   Conclusions


        This paper uses detailed data from the Journal of Financial Economics to reflect the

extraordinary growth in the quantity and quality of academic finance research in the past 45 years.

Cross-sectional analysis of the characteristics of papers and their authors help explain the selection

process that results in published papers from the large flow of papers submitted for consideration. It

also helps characterize the different influence that papers have in terms of subsequent citations from

other published papers.

        Time-series data from the JFE, as well as from other finance, economics, and accounting

journals, shows the growth in the production of academic finance research. The set of people who

serve as authors, referees, and editors has grown as academic finance has evolved to span a much

larger geographic footprint, and as women have come to play a larger role in all aspects of academic

finance. The technological improvements in computing and communications have resulted in more

and more complex empirical analysis, and have allowed collaboration by diverse teams of coauthors.
                                                                                                   33

       My opinion is that the largest challenge for the industry in the future is to manage the growth

of journals so that the demands on referees do not become so onerous that talented academics decide

to withdraw from the peer review process (e.g., Ellison (2010)). I believe the JFE has attempted to

address this problem at least somewhat through its policies. I also believe that the value of peer

review in helping authors write better papers and helping readers focus on a limited subset of the

vast amount of working papers that are produced has never been more important.
34                                         G. W. Schwert, Growth in financial economics


References

Angrist, J., Azoulay, P., Ellison, G., Hill, R., and Lu, S. F. 2020. Inside job or deep impact? Extramural citations and the

     influence of economic scholarship. J. Econ. Lit. 58, 3­52.

Berk, J. B., Harvey, C. R., and Hirshleifer, D. 2017. How to write an effective referee report and improve the scientific

     review process. J. Econ. Perspectives. 31, 231-244.

Brogaard, J., Engelberg, J., and Parsons, C. A. 2014. Network position and productivity: Evidence from journal editor

     rotations, J. Financ. Econ. 111, 251­270.

Byrne, J. A. 2018. What business school professors are paid may surprise you. Poetsandquants.com, August 11.

Card, D., and Della Vigna, S. 2013. Nine facts about top journals in economics. J. Econ. Lit. 51, 144-161.

Coupe, T. 2013. Peer review versus citations ­An analysis of best paper prizes. Research Policy. 42, 295-301.

Coupe, T., Ginsburgh, V., and Noury, A. 2010. Are leading papers of better quality? Evidence from a natural experiment.

     Oxford Econ. Pap. 62, 1­11.

Ellison, G. 2002. The slowdown of the economics publishing process. J. Polit. Econ. 110, 947-993.

Ellison, G. 2010. Is peer review in decline? Econ. Inq. 49, 635­657.

Ellison, G. 2013. How does the market use citation data? The Hirsch index in economics, Amer. Econ. Journal: Applied

     Econ. 5, 63­90.

Engle, R. F. and Granger, C. W. J. 1987. Co-integration and error correction: Representation, estimation, and testing,

     Econometrica 55, 251-276.

Fama, E. F., and French, K. R. 1993. Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds. J. Financ. Econ. 33, 3-56.

Feenberg, D. R., Ganguli, I., Gaule, P., and Gruber, J. 2017. It's good to be first: Order bias in reading and citing NBER

     working papers. Rev. of Econ. And Stat. 99, 32-39.

Green, R., O'Hara, M., and Schwert, G. W. 2002. Joint editorial: Advice for authors. J. Financ. Econ. 65, 163-165.

Hadavand, A., Hamermesh, D. S., and Wilson, W. W. 2020. Is scholarly refereeing productive (at the margin)? NBER

     Working Paper 26614.

Hamermesh, D. S. 1992. The young economist's guide to professional etiquette. Jour. of Econ. Perspectives. 6, 169-179.

Hamermesh, D. S., 2013. Six decades of top economics publishing: Who and how? J. Econ. Lit. 51, 162-172.

Hamermesh, D. S., 2018. Citations in economics: Measurement, uses, and impacts. J. Econ. Lit. 56, 115­156.

Hilmer, M. J., Ransom, M. R., and Hilmer, C. E. 2015. Fame and the fortune of academic economists: How the market

     rewards influential research in economics. South. Econ. J. 82, 430­452.
                                                                                                                       35

Hirshleifer, D., Schwert, G. W., and Singleton, K. J. 2013. Joint editorial. J. Financ. Econ. 110, 279.

Jensen, M. C., Fama, E. F., Long, J. B., Ruback, R. S., Smith, C. W., Schwert, G. W., and Warner, J. 1986. A note on

     submission fees. J. Financ. Econ. 17, 1-2.

Jensen, M. C., Fama, E. F., Long, J. B., Ruback, R. S., Smith, C. W., Schwert, G. W., and Warner, J. 1987. Citation index

     ratings of the Journal of Financial Economics. J. Financ. Econ. 18, 3-6.

Jensen, M. C., Fama, E. F., Long, J. B., Ruback, R. S., Smith, C. W., Schwert, G. W., and Warner, J. 1989. Clinical papers

     and their role in the development of financial economics. J. Financ. Econ. 24, 3-6.

Jensen, M. C., Fama, E. F., Long, J. B., Ruback, R. S., Smith, C. W., Schwert, G. W., and Warner, J. 1990. Citation index

     ratings of the Journal of Financial Economics. J. Financ. Econ. 28, 3-5.

Jensen, M. C., and Schwert, G. W. 1996. Changes in the management structure of the JFE. J. Financ. Econ. 42, 291.

Jensen, M. C., and Meckling, W. H. 1976. Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency costs and ownership

     structure. J. Financ. Econ. 3, 305-360.

Journal Citation Reports. 1977-2019.

Journal of Financial Economics 1974-2020, 1-138.

Kim, E. H., Morse, A., and Zingales, L. 2006. What has mattered to economics since 1970. J. of Econ. Perspectives. 20,

     189-202.

Kim, E. H., Morse, A., and Zingales, L. 2009. Are elite universities losing their competitive edge? J. Financ. Econ. 93,

     353-381.

Laband, D. N., and Tollison, R. D. 2000. Intellectual collaboration. J. Polit. Econ. 108, 632-662.

Lappen, A. A. 1998. Ivory tower investing. Institutional Investor. 43-55.

Liebowitz, S. J. 2014. Willful blindness: The inefficient reward structure in academic research. Econ. Inquiry. 52, 1267-

     1283.

Martin, R. L. 2020. A really good gig: Why b-school faculty are paid so well, Poetsandquants.com, June 29.

McAfee, R. P. 2010. Edifying editing. Amer. Economist. 55, 1-8.

McCloskey, D. 1985. Economical writing. Econ. Inquiry. 24, 187-222.

Merton, R. K. 1973. The sociology of science: Theoretical and empirical investigations. University of Chicago Press,

     Chicago.

Newey, W. K. and West, K. D. 1987. A simple, positive semi-definite, heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent

     covariance matrix. Econometrica. 55, 703­708.
36                                        G. W. Schwert, Growth in financial economics


Petersen, M. A. 2009. Estimating standard errors in finance panel data sets: Comparing approaches. Rev. Financ. Stud.

     22, 435-480.

Roll, R. 1977. A critique of the asset pricing theory's tests: Part I: On past and potential testability of the theory. J.

     Financ. Econ. 4, 129-176.

Sauer, R. D. 1988. Estimates of the returns to quality and coauthorship in economic academia. J. Polit. Econ. 96, 855-

     866.

Sarsons, H. 2017. Recognition for group work: Gender differences in academia. Am. Econ. Rev. 107, 141­145.

Sarsons, H., Gërxhani, K., Reuben, E., and Schram, A. 2020. Gender differences in recognition for group work. J. Polit.

     Econ. forthcoming.

Scholes, M. S., and Williams, J. 1977. Estimating betas from nonsynchronous data. J. Financ. Econ. 5, 309-328.

Schwert, G. W. 1993. The Journal of Financial Economics: A retrospective evaluation (1974-91). J. Financ. Econ. 33,

     369-424.

Seltzer, A., and Hamermesh, D. S. 2018. Co-authorship in economic history and economics: Are we any different?

     Explorations in Econ. History. 69, 102­109.

Social Science Citation Index. 1977-2019.

Smart, S., and Waldfogel, J. 1996. A citation-based test for discrimination at economics and finance journals. National

     Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 5460.

Spiegel, M. 2012. Reviewing less -- progressing more. Rev. Financ. Stud. 25, 1331-1338.

Stambaugh, R. F. 1999. Predictive regressions. J. Financ. Econ. 54, 375-421.

Uchitelle, L. 1989. A bidding war for professors who know Wall Street ways. New York Times, August 1, A1.

Welch, I. 2014. Referee recommendations. Rev. Financ. Stud. 27, 2773­2804.

White, H. 1980. A heteroskedasticity-consistent covariance matrix estimator and a direct test for heteroskedasticity.

     Econometrica. 48, 817-838.

Wydick, R. T. 1978. Plain english for lawyers. Cal. Law Rev. 66, 727-761.
                            1,800                                                                       $180

                            1,600   Submissions                 Real Fees (Aug 73$)                     $160




                                                                                                                              Real Submission Fee (Aug 73 $)
                            1,400                                                                       $140
  Submissions per Month




                            1,200                                                                       $120

                            1,000                                                                       $100

                             800                                                                        $80

                             600                                                                        $60

                             400                                                                        $40

                             200                                                                        $20

                               0                                                                        $0
                                    1974
                                    1976
                                    1978
                                    1980
                                    1982
                                    1984
                                    1986
                                    1988
                                    1990
                                    1992
                                    1994
                                    1996
                                    1998
                                    2000
                                    2002
                                    2004
                                    2006
                                    2008
                                    2010
                                    2012
                                    2014
                                    2016
                                    2018
                                    2020
                                                Date of Submission

Fig. 1. Number of JFE submissions in the past twelve months and real submission fees (in August 1973 dollars) in the
period January 1974 - December 2020.
                            100%                                                                         60




                                                                                                               Median Turnaround Time (days)
                                                                                                         50
                            90%
           Rejection Rate




                                                                                                         40
                            80%

                                                                                                         30

                            70%
                                                                                                         20

                            60%          Rejection Rates                  Turnaround
                                                                                                         10


                            50%                                                                          0
                                    1974
                                    1976
                                    1978
                                    1980
                                    1982
                                    1984
                                    1986
                                    1988
                                    1990
                                    1992
                                    1994
                                    1996
                                    1998
                                    2000
                                    2002
                                    2004
                                    2006
                                    2008
                                    2010
                                    2012
                                    2014
                                    2016
                                    2018
                                    2020




 Fig. 2. JFE rejection rate and median turnaround time for the preceding twelve months for each issue in the period
January 1974 - December 2020.
                                              91%
                                   100%
                                                                     Referee Characteristics                    Author Characteristics
                                   90%




                                                                                                               74%
                                   80%
  Percent of Referees or Authors




                                                                   67%
                                   70%

                                   60%




                                                                                                                      47%
                                   50%

                                   40%




                                                                                                         21%
                                   30%                                           21%



                                                                                              16%




                                                                                                                                         15%
                                                        13%




                                                                                                                              11%
                                   20%




                                                                                                                                                       8%
                                                                                                                                               3%
                                   10%

                                    0%
                                                                     Published




                                                                                                                                                Asia
                                              Referee




                                                                                                Female




                                                                                                                                Europe
                                                                                                                 US
                                              Author




Fig. 3a. Characteristics of referees and authors for papers submitted to the JFE, 1994-2019. 

                                    40%

                                    35%
                                                                                          Referee Paid               Referee Not Paid
                                    30%
                                                                                       Turnaround for Paid Referees:
      Percent of Reports




                                                                                       Mean = 21.7
                                    25%
                                                                                       Median = 25
                                                                                       N = 12,235
                                    20%
                                                                                                                 Turnaround for Not Paid Referees:
                                                                                                                 Mean = 70.3
                                    15%
                                                                                                                 Median = 52
                                                                                                                 N = 6,756
                                    10%

                                     5%

                                     0%
                                          0         7         14 21 28 35 42 49 56 63 70 77 84 91 98 105 112 119 126
                                                                                          Turnaround Time in Days

Fig. 3b. Histograms of referee turnaround time for JFE papers that were not desk rejected, by whether the
referee met the deadline to receive compensation, 1994-2019.
                                    180               Single Referee          Multiple Referees

                                    160
  Average Turnaround Time in Days



                                    140


                                    120


                                    100


                                    80


                                    60


                                    40


                                    20
                                          1994
                                          1995
                                          1996
                                          1997
                                          1998
                                          1999
                                          2000
                                          2001
                                          2002
                                          2003
                                          2004
                                          2005
                                          2006
                                          2007
                                          2008
                                          2009
                                          2010
                                          2011
                                          2012
                                          2013
                                          2014
                                          2015
                                          2016
                                          2017
                                          2018
                                          2019
Fig. 4a. Average turnaround times with one or multiple referees for the JFE, 1994-2019.



                                    70%
                                          62%           One Referee     Multiple Referees
                                    60%


                                    50%
          Probability of Decsion




                                                42%                     44%

                                    40%


                                    30%                           25%

                                    20%
                                                                                            13%   14%

                                    10%


                                    0%
                                            Reject             Reject/Resubmit                Accept

Fig. 4b. Decision probabilities for papers with one or multiple referees for the JFE, 1994-2019.
                              1.10                                                                 180%
                                                             Number of Referees
                              1.09
                                                                                                   160%




                                                                                                           Dispute Fee Relative to Submission Fee
                              1.08
 Average Number of Referees




                              1.07                                                                 140%

                              1.06
                                                                                                   120%
                              1.05
                                                                                                   100%
                              1.04

                              1.03                                                                 80%

                              1.02
                                                                                                   60%
                              1.01

                              1.00                                                                 40%
                                     1994
                                     1995
                                     1996
                                     1997
                                     1998
                                     1999
                                     2000
                                     2001
                                     2002
                                     2003
                                     2004
                                     2005
                                     2006
                                     2007
                                     2008
                                     2009
                                     2010
                                     2011
                                     2012
                                     2013
                                     2014
                                     2015
                                     2016
                                     2017
                                     2018
                                     2019
Fig. 5a. Average number of referees per paper submitted to the JFE, 1994-2019, including and excluding
dispute referees. Also, the fee for a dispute relative to the subscribers' submission fee (right axis).

                              90%
                                                 82%
                              80%          76%
                                                                  1994-1999    2000-2009   2010-2019
                              70%    67%
    Perecent of Submissions




                              60%

                              50%

                              40%

                              30%
                                                       21%
                              20%                            15%
                                                                   12%
                                                                              9%
                              10%                                                  7% 6%
                                                                                              3% 2% 1%
                               0%
                                            1                 2                    3               4
                                                       Number of Revisions Reviewed
Fig. 5b. Percentage of submissions to the JFE that are first, second, third, or fourth rounds of review, 1994-
2019.
                                           30%



                                           25%
                                                                                                                                                  Average=30.7
   Percent of Papers This Length or Less



                                                                                                                                                  Std = 8.8
                                                                                                                                                  Median = 30
                                           20%



                                           15%



                                           10%



                                           5%



                                           0%
                                                 5           10               15   20          25               30    35         40               45      50       55               60     >60
                                                                                               Length of Paper in Pages                                                                               
Fig. 6a. Histogram of paper lengths for JFE papers, 1974-2019. 


                                           34

                                           32
  Average Length of Papers




                                           30

                                           28

                                           26

                                           24

                                           22

                                           20
                                                 1974-1979



                                                                  1980-1984



                                                                                   1985-1989



                                                                                                    1990-1994



                                                                                                                     1995-1999



                                                                                                                                      2000-2004



                                                                                                                                                       2005-2009



                                                                                                                                                                        2010-2014



                                                                                                                                                                                         2015-2019




Fig. 6b. Average length of JFE papers in five-year intervals, 1974-2019.
                                                                          70%
                           Percentage of Papers Using Each JEL Category
                                                                                 66%
                                                                                            G1 - Finl Markets          G2 - Finl Institutions     G3 - Corp Fin & Govrn
                                                                          60%

                                                                                                     50%
                                                                          50%

                                                                                                                                       41%
                                                                          40%
                                                                                                                 35%                            35%                 34%
                                                                                                                                                            32%
                                                                                                                           31%
                                                                          30%
                                                                                                                                                                                24%


                                                                          20%
                                                                                            15%                                                                           15%
                                                                                                                                 13%                  13%

                                                                          10%          7%
                                                                                                           4%


                                                                           0%
                                                                                       1974-




                                                                                                           1980-




                                                                                                                                 1990-




                                                                                                                                                      2000-




                                                                                                                                                                          2010-
                                                                                       1979




                                                                                                           1989




                                                                                                                                 1999




                                                                                                                                                      2009




                                                                                                                                                                          2019
Fig. 7a. Percentage of JEL categories used in JFE papers by decade, 1974-2019 

                                                                          100%
                                                                                            Theory   Empirical                         90%
                                                                          90%                                                                                 87%                 88%

                                                                          80%                                   75%
  Proportion of Theory/Empirical Papers




                                                                          70%
                                                                                   59%
                                                                          60%

                                                                          50%
                                                                                         39%
                                                                          40%

                                                                          30%
                                                                                                           23%
                                                                          20%
                                                                                                                                                       13%                  12%
                                                                                                                                  9%
                                                                          10%

                                                                           0%
                                                                                        1974-




                                                                                                             1980-




                                                                                                                                   1990-




                                                                                                                                                         2000-




                                                                                                                                                                                2010-
                                                                                        1979




                                                                                                             1989




                                                                                                                                   1999




                                                                                                                                                         2009




                                                                                                                                                                                2019




Fig. 7b. Theory and empirical papers in the JFE by decade, 1974-2019
                      100%


                      95%


                      90%


                      85%
   Percent US




                      80%

                                                                                Percent of US Authors                                                            Percent of US Referees
                      75%


                      70%


                      65%


                      60%


                      55%


                      50%
                             1994
                                    1995
                                           1996
                                                  1997
                                                         1998
                                                                1999
                                                                       2000
                                                                               2001
                                                                                       2002
                                                                                               2003
                                                                                                       2004
                                                                                                               2005
                                                                                                                       2006
                                                                                                                               2007
                                                                                                                                       2008
                                                                                                                                               2009
                                                                                                                                                       2010
                                                                                                                                                               2011
                                                                                                                                                                       2012
                                                                                                                                                                               2013
                                                                                                                                                                                       2014
                                                                                                                                                                                               2015
                                                                                                                                                                                                        2016
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2017
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2018
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2019
Fig. 8a. Percentage of authors and referees from the U.S. based on JFE submissions by year, 1974-2019.
 
                      20%

                      18%

                      16%

                      14%
 Percent of Females




                      12%

                      10%

                       8%

                       6%

                       4%
                                                                Percent of Female Authors                                                             Percent of Female Referees
                       2%

                       0%
                             1994
                                    1995
                                           1996
                                                  1997
                                                         1998
                                                                1999
                                                                       2000
                                                                              2001
                                                                                      2002
                                                                                              2003
                                                                                                      2004
                                                                                                              2005
                                                                                                                      2006
                                                                                                                              2007
                                                                                                                                      2008
                                                                                                                                              2009
                                                                                                                                                      2010
                                                                                                                                                              2011
                                                                                                                                                                      2012
                                                                                                                                                                              2013
                                                                                                                                                                                      2014
                                                                                                                                                                                              2015
                                                                                                                                                                                                      2016
                                                                                                                                                                                                               2017
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2018
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2019




Fig. 8b. Percentage of authors and referees who are female based on JFE submissions by year, 1974-2019.
                                                                 45%

                                                                        40%
                                                                 40%


                                                                 35%
      Percent of Referees Who Reivew K Papers




                                                                                                            Average Number of Reviews = 12.2
                                                                                      31%
                                                                                                            1,941 Referees
                                                                 30%


                                                                 25%


                                                                 20%


                                                                 15%
                                                                                                  12%
                                                                                                                  10%
                                                                 10%

                                                                                                                               5%
                                                                 5%
                                                                                                                                            1%           1%
                                                                 0%
                                                                             2         10         20              40            80          120          240
                                                                                             Number of Papers Reviewed, 1994-2020
Fig. 9a. Percentage of referees who referee K papers, 1974-2020.

 
                                                                 70%

                                                                                            All referees      Referees of > 19 papers
    Percent of Referees With Acceptance Rates in Each Category




                                                                 60%   59%
                                                                                                                        For all referees:
                                                                                                                        Average acceptance rate = 6.7%
                                                                                                                        Weighted average acceptance rate = 11.1%
                                                                 50%
                                                                                                                        1,941 Referees

                                                                                                                        For frequent referees:
                                                                 40%                                                    Average acceptance rate = 11.3%
                                                                                                                        Weighted average acceptance rate = 12.0%
                                                                                                                        349 Referees
                                                                 30%                                        26%
                                                                                             26%
                                                                                                                         22%
                                                                 20%
                                                                                  13%
                                                                                                        10%            11%
                                                                 10%                        9%
                                                                         6%                                                      6% 7%
                                                                                 2%                                                                    3%
                                                                                                                                            1% 0%           0%
                                                                 0%
                                                                        0%        5%        10%            15%          20%          25%     30%        35%
                                                                                             Referee's Acceptance Rate, 1994-2020
Fig. 9b. Percentage of referees with acceptance rates in each category, 1974-2020.
                                               14%
                                                         Rochester    Chicago   UCLA       MIT         Penn
                                                         Harvard      NYU       Stanford   Columbia    Ohio St.
 Percentage of Authors from Each Institution
                                               12%


                                               10%


                                               8%


                                               6%


                                               4%


                                               2%


                                               0%
                                                      1974-




                                                                     1980-




                                                                                1990-




                                                                                            2000-




                                                                                                        2010-
                                                      1979




                                                                     1989




                                                                                1999




                                                                                            2009




                                                                                                        2019
Fig. 10a. Percentage of JFE papers authored at ten institutions, 1974-2019.

                                               500%
                                                         Rochester    Chicago   UCLA       MIT        Penn
                                               450%
                                                         Harvard      NYU       Stanford   Columbia   Ohio St.
    Relative Citations per Author per Year




                                               400%

                                               350%

                                               300%

                                               250%

                                               200%

                                               150%

                                               100%

                                                50%

                                                0%
                                                       1974-




                                                                     1980-




                                                                                1990-




                                                                                           2000-




                                                                                                       2010-
                                                       1979




                                                                     1989




                                                                                1999




                                                                                           2009




                                                                                                       2019




Fig. 10b. Total average citations per year for per co-author at ten institutions relative to average
for all papers, 1974-2019.
                                                     7
                                                                                                JFE                                          JF                            RFS                                 JFQA
(average citations per paper in prior two years)

                                                     6


                                                     5
                 Impact Factor




                                                     4


                                                     3


                                                     2


                                                     1


                                                     0
                                                         1977
                                                                 1979
                                                                         1981
                                                                                  1983
                                                                                           1985
                                                                                                     1987
                                                                                                                   1989
                                                                                                                             1991
                                                                                                                                      1993
                                                                                                                                               1995
                                                                                                                                                         1997
                                                                                                                                                                 1999
                                                                                                                                                                        2001
                                                                                                                                                                               2003
                                                                                                                                                                                       2005
                                                                                                                                                                                               2007
                                                                                                                                                                                                        2009
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2011
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2015
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2017
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2019
Fig. 11a. Impact factors for four finance journals, JFE, JF, RFS, and JFQA, from the Journal
Citation Reports, 1977-2019. Data for 1998-1999 corrected for errors in JCR. 

                                                   160
                                                                                                     JFE                                     JF                         RFS                           JFQA

                                                   140


                                                   120


                                                   100
            Articles




                                                   80


                                                   60


                                                   40


                                                   20


                                                    0
                                                         1974
                                                                1976
                                                                        1978
                                                                                1980
                                                                                         1982
                                                                                                  1984
                                                                                                            1986
                                                                                                                      1988
                                                                                                                               1990
                                                                                                                                        1992
                                                                                                                                                  1994
                                                                                                                                                          1996
                                                                                                                                                                 1998
                                                                                                                                                                        2000
                                                                                                                                                                               2002
                                                                                                                                                                                      2004
                                                                                                                                                                                              2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                      2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                               2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2014
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2016
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2018
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2020




Fig. 11b. Articles published in four finance journals, JFE, JF, RFS, and JFQA, 1974-2019.
                                           140%
  Relative Citations per Author per Year                  Referee    Female      US   Europe           Asia
                                           120%


                                           100%


                                           80%


                                           60%


                                           40%


                                           20%


                                            0%
                                                  1974-




                                                             1980-




                                                                              1990-




                                                                                           2000-




                                                                                                                   2010-
                                                  1979




                                                             1989




                                                                              1999




                                                                                           2009




                                                                                                                   2019
Fig. 12a. Relative citations per paper per year for authors who are also referees for the JFE, who are female,
and who work in the US, in Europe, or in Asia. Citations from the Social Science Citation Index, 1974-
2019. 
                                           250%

                                                           Theory      Empirical      G1         G2           G3
  Relative Citations per Author per Year




                                           200%



                                           150%



                                           100%



                                            50%



                                            0%
                                                  1974-




                                                             1980-




                                                                              1990-




                                                                                               2000-




                                                                                                                    2010-
                                                  1979




                                                             1989




                                                                              1999




                                                                                               2009




                                                                                                                    2019




                                                                                                                             
Fig. 12b. Relative citations per paper per year for papers that are primarily theoretical, primarily empirical,
in the financial markets (G1) area, the financial institutions area (G2), and the corporate finance (G3) area.
Citations from the Social Science Citation Index, 1974-2019.
                                                                                                                           Finance and Accounting Journals                                                                                                                                              Number of Economics Journals
                                                                                                                            Relative to Economics Journals




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        150
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 250
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1886




                                                                                                                 0%
                                                                                                                      5%
                                                                                                                             10%
                                                                                                                                    15%
                                                                                                                                            20%
                                                                                                                                                   25%
                                                                                                                                                             30%
                                                                                                                                                                         35%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1891
                                                                                                          1886
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1896
                                                                                                          1891
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1901
                                                                                                          1896
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1906
                                                                                                          1901
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1911
                                                                                                          1906
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1916
                                                                                                          1911
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1921
                                                                                                          1916                                                                                                                                                                     1926
                                                                                                          1921                                                                                                                                                                     1931
                                                                                                          1926
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ECO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1936
                                                                                                          1931                                                                                                                                                                     1941
                                                                                                          1936                                                                                                                                                                     1946
                                                                                                          1941                                                                                                                                                                     1951




                                                                                                                                                                   FIN
                                                                                                          1946                                                                                                                                                                     1956
                                                                                                          1951                                                                                                                                                                     1961
                                                                                                          1956                                                                                                                                                                     1966
                                                                                                          1961                                                                                                                                                                     1971
                                                                                                          1966                                                                                                                                                                     1976
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              FIN (right axis)




                                                                                                                                                                   ACC
                                                                                                          1971                                                                                                                                                                     1981
                                                                                                          1976                                                                                                                                                                     1986
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1991
                                                                                                          1981
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1996
                                                                                                          1986
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2001
                                                                                                          1991
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2006
                                                                                                          1996
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2011
                                                                                                          2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2016
                                                                                                          2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2021
                                                                                                          2011
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 70




                                                                                                                                                                               Fig. 13a. Number of economics, finance, and accounting journals in operation per year, 1886-2020.




                                                                                                          2016
                                                                                                          2021                                                                                                                                                                                Number of Finance and Accounting Journals




Fig. 13b. Number of finance, and accounting journals relative to economics journals in year, 1886-2020.
                                               1,800                                                                                            900
                                                                                   Papers              Referees (right axis)
                                               1,600                                                                                            800




                                                                                                                                                         Number of Reeferees per Year
                                               1,400                                                                                            700
          Papers Reviewed per Year



                                               1,200                                                                                            600

                                               1,000                                                                                            500

                                                800                                                                                             400

                                                600                                                                                             300

                                                400                                                                                             200

                                                200                                                                                             100

                                                     0                                                                                          0
                                                         1994
                                                         1995
                                                         1996
                                                         1997
                                                         1998
                                                         1999
                                                         2000
                                                         2001
                                                         2002
                                                         2003
                                                         2004
                                                         2005
                                                         2006
                                                         2007
                                                         2008
                                                         2009
                                                         2010
                                                         2011
                                                         2012
                                                         2013
                                                         2014
                                                         2015
                                                         2016
                                                         2017
                                                         2018
                                                         2019
                                                         2020
                                                                                                                                                                                         
Fig. 14a. Number of papers reviewed and referees used by the JFE, 1994-2020.



                                                                   # of Authors          # of JEL Categories            Length (right axis)
                                               3.5                                                                                                  35
 Average Number of Authors or JEL Categories




                                               3.0                                                                                2.82              30
                                                                                                                                         2.69
                                                                                                                2.53
                                               2.5                                                                                                  25



                                                                                                                                                          Average Length of Papers
                                                                                            2.29                       2.30
                                                                          2.03                     2.04
                                               2.0                                                                                                  20
                                                         1.70
                                                                1.45              1.42
                                               1.5                                                                                                  15


                                               1.0                                                                                                  10


                                               0.5                                                                                                  5


                                               0.0                                                                                                  0
                                                           1974-




                                                                             1980-




                                                                                               1990-




                                                                                                                   2000-




                                                                                                                                    2010-
                                                           1979




                                                                             1989




                                                                                               1999




                                                                                                                   2009




                                                                                                                                    2019




Fig. 14b. Average number of authors per paper and JEL categories per paper along with the average length
of JFE papers by decade, 1979-2020.
                                                US (left-axis)         Europe         Asia              Female
                              95%                                                                                          18%




                                                                                                                                  Percent of European, Asian, or Female JFE Authros
                              85%                                                                                          15%
  Percent of US JFE Authors




                              75%                                                                                          12%




                              65%                                                                                          9%




                              55%                                                                                          6%




                              45%                                                                                          3%




                              35%                                                                                          0%
                                    1974-1979




                                                           1980-1989




                                                                          1990-1999




                                                                                        2000-2009




                                                                                                             2010-2020
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Fig. 15. Proportion of authors in JFE published papers who work in the US (left-axis), or in Europe, or in Asia, or who are female (all
right-axis), by decade, from 1974-2020. 
                                           0.5
                                                              0.44
    Corr[LogSubmit(t-k)), Log(Fee(t))]     0.4

                                           0.3   0.25

                                           0.2                             0.18


                                           0.1

                                           0.0

                                          -0.1                                                     -0.05


                                          -0.2                      -0.16
                      2                1              0               -1           -2 lag, k
Fig. 16. Cross-correlations between changes in the logs of annual submissions Log(Submit(t-k))
and changes in the logs of submission fees LogFee(t)) for the JFE, 1974-2019. The asymptotic
standard error for these correlations is .15.
 

                                                   Asst_sal      MBA_sal          Fin_comp   CPI
                                         $250                                                              $240



                                         $200
                                                                                                      $170.5
               Annual Salary ($000)




                                         $150                                                          $138



                                         $100
                                                                                                      $74.9


                                          $50



                                           $0
                                                 1974
                                                 1976
                                                 1978
                                                 1980
                                                 1982
                                                 1984
                                                 1986
                                                 1988
                                                 1990
                                                 1992
                                                 1994
                                                 1996
                                                 1998
                                                 2000
                                                 2002
                                                 2004
                                                 2006
                                                 2008
                                                 2010
                                                 2012
                                                 2014
                                                 2016
                                                 2018
                                                 2020




Fig. 17. Salaries for a new Assistant Professor of finance (Asst_sal), 1974-2020, along with
comparable indexes for starting salaries of MBA graduates (MBA_sal), per capita compensation
in the finance industry (Fin_comp), and the Consumer Price Index (CPI).
 

                                             8                                                                                                                                                                     0.6
    Log of JFE submissions and predictions


                                                                             Log(Submit)                    P[Log(Submit)]                         U[Log(Submit)] (right axis)

                                             7                                                                                                                                                                     0.5


                                             6                                                                                                                                                                     0.4


                                             5                                                                                                                                                                     0.3


                                             4                                                                                                                                                                     0.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Residuals, U[Log(Submit)]
                                             3                                                                                                                                                                     0.1


                                             2                                                                                                                                                                     0.0


                                             1                                                                                                                                                                     -0.1


                                             0                                                                                                                                                                     -0.2
                                                 1976

                                                        1978

                                                               1980

                                                                      1982

                                                                             1984

                                                                                    1986

                                                                                           1988

                                                                                                  1990

                                                                                                         1992

                                                                                                                1994

                                                                                                                       1996

                                                                                                                              1998

                                                                                                                                     2000

                                                                                                                                            2002

                                                                                                                                                    2004

                                                                                                                                                           2006

                                                                                                                                                                  2008

                                                                                                                                                                         2010

                                                                                                                                                                                2012

                                                                                                                                                                                       2014

                                                                                                                                                                                              2016

                                                                                                                                                                                                     2018

                                                                                                                                                                                                            2020
Fig. 18. Graph of log submissions, Log(Submit), predictions of log submissions, P[Log(Submit)] from Table 12, col. 3, and residuals,
U[Log(Submit)], 1976-2020.
              Table 1. One hundred five people who have served on the Editorial Board of the Journal of Financial Economics, 1974-2020

                                              Associate Editor         Advisory Editor          Co-Editor               Editor         Papers in the JFE
                         Volumes   Years   Volumes         Years     Volumes     Years     Volumes     Years     Volumes       Years   Papers Citations
P.       Asquith            18       9       12-29      1983-1991                                                                        3.25       28.0
G.       Baker              26      10       26-51      1990-1999                                                                        0.50        1.1
B.       Barber              6       2      133-138     2019-2020                                                                        2.08       29.7
M.       Barclay            67      20       20-51      1988-1999     52-86    1999-2007                                                 4.67       19.3
V.S.     Bawa                4       4        6-9       1978-1981                                                                        3.00       10.5
H.       Bessembinder       79      20       60-138     2001-2020                                                                        7.58       24.5
F.       Black              19      14        1-19      1974-1987                                                                        3.50       25.3
M.       Blume               7       6        3-9       1976-1981                                                                        0.50        3.6
R.A.     Brealey             9       8        1-9       1974-1981
D.T.     Breeden            12       7       10-21      1982-1988                                                                        2.00       21.5
                                             1-6,       1974-1980,
M.       Brennan            25      16      12-19,      1983-1987,                                                                       4.83       26.9
                                            26-34       1990-1993

                                            25-29,      1989-1991,
J.       Campbell           89      25      48-79,      1998-2006,   122-138   2016-2020                                                 2.92     45.42
                                            87-121      2008-2016
D.       Cass               6       5         1-6       1974-1978
L.       Dann              32       12       20-51      1988-1999                                                                        3.17      13.3
H.       DeAngelo          127      38      12-138      1983-2020                                                                        9.00      43.6
A.       Dittmar           30        8      104-133     2012-2019                                                                        1.83      17.7
G.       Donaldson         10        5       25-34      1989-1993                                                                        1.00       1.1
D.       Duffie             76      19      63-103      2002-2012    104-138   2012-2020                                                 1.00      10.7
A.       Edmans            17        5      122-138     2016-2020                                                                        2.67      28.3
B.B      Esty              56       15      48-103      1998-2012                                                                        4.00       5.8
E.F.     Fama              138      47                               5-138     1977-2020     1-4     1974-1977                          15.00     353.6
K.R.     French            127      38       12-51      1983-1999    52-138    1999-2020                                                10.33     311.9
K.       Gaver              3        3         5-7      1977-1979
M.       Geisel             7        6        1-7       1974-1979
M.R.     Gibbons           15        8       10-24      1982-1989                                                                        2.00        7.2
N.       Gonedes             3       3         1-3      1974-1976
J.P.     Gould              8        7        5-11      1977-1983                                                                        0.50        0.3
J.R.     Graham             6        2      133-138     2019-2020                                                                        6.25       92.2
C.W.J.   Granger             7       6         1-7      1974-1979
              Table 1. One hundred five people who have served on the Editorial Board of the Journal of Financial Economics, 1974-2020

                                               Associate Editor         Advisory Editor          Co-Editor               Editor          Papers in the JFE
                         Volumes   Years   Volumes          Years     Volumes     Years     Volumes     Years     Volumes       Years    Papers Citations
R.       Green             28        8      87-134        2008-2015                                                                        2.83        8.7
N.H.     Hakansson          9        8        1-9         1974-1981                                                                        2.00        0.8
J.V.T.   Harford           79       20      60-138        2001-2020                                                                        6.75       69.1
                                             41-81,     1996-2006,
C.       Harvey             71      19                                133-138   2019-2020                                                  7.83       94.9
                                            109-132     2013-2019
P.       Healy             50       13       41-90       1996-2008                                                                         1.33       7.4
L.       Hentschel         39       10       48-86       1998-2007                                                                         1.50      16.6
D.       Hirshleifer        6        2      133-136      2019-2020                          137-138     2020                               3.17       9.6
G.L.     Hite              38       17       10-47       1982-1998                                                                         2.33       5.9
J.       Ingersoll         15        9        8-22       1980-1988                                                                         2.83       9.1
V.       Ivashina           6        2      133-138      2019-2020                                                                         4.00      45.3
C.       James             87       23      35-121       1994-2016                                                                         5.33      25.1
M.C.     Jensen            138      47                                43-138    1997-2020                           1-42     1974-1996     4.00     163.4
S.       Johnson           32        9      72-103       2004-2012                                                                         1.20      20.2
R.       Kaniel            18        5                                121-125   2016-2017   126-138   2017-2020                            2.33       7.8
S.       Kaplan            108      29      31-138       1992-2020                                                                         6.67      25.6
G.A.     Karolyi           19        5      95-113       2010-2014                                                                         3.67      38.9
J.M.     Karpoff           35        9      104-138      2012-2020                                                                         3.92      24.5
B.       Kelly              6        2      133-138      2019-2020                                                                         1.58       9.1
A.       Kleidon           14        7       12-25       1983-1989                                                                         0.58       1.8
A.       Kraus              10       9        5-14       1977-1985                                                                         0.50       0.1
J.       Lerner            45       12      94-138       2009-2020                                                                         6.25      32.9
J.       Lintner            7        6        1-7        1974-1979
R.H.     Litzenberger      16        9        9-24       1981-1989                                                                         3.08       10.1
J.B.     Long              51       26        1-10       1974-1982     43-51    1997-1999    20-42    1988-1996    11-19     1983-1987     4.33        7.6
F.       Longstaff          6        2      133-138      2019-2020                                                                         7.83       33.4
T.       Loughran           54      14       80-133      2006-2019                                                                         2.50       14.9
M.       Lowry             59       15      80-138       2006-2020                                                                         3.17       19.0
B.B      Mandelbrot         7        6         1-7       1974-1979
R.       Masulis            6        2       20-25       1988-1989                                                                         6.83       39.1
D.       Mayers             40      23        1-40       1974-1996                                                                         5.33       12.4
R.C.     Merton             11      10        5-11       1977-1983                            1-4     1974-1977                            4.17       57.6
W.       Mikkelson          89      27       15-33       1986-1993    43-103    1997-2012    34-42    1993-1996                            4.67       21.9
            Table 1. One hundred five people who have served on the Editorial Board of the Journal of Financial Economics, 1974-2020

                                             Associate Editor         Advisory Editor          Co-Editor               Editor           Papers in the JFE
                       Volumes   Years   Volumes          Years     Volumes     Years     Volumes     Years     Volumes       Years     Papers Citations
M.     Miller            11       10       1-11         1974-1983                                                                         0.50        2.8
T.     Moskowitz          6       2      133-138        2019-2020                                                                         2.28       30.6
J.     Mossin             7       6         1-7         1974-1979
K.     Murphy            106      28      33-138        1993-2020                                                                         1.00       3.0
S.     Myers             22       15        1-22        1974-1988                                                                         3.33     133.6
M.     Officer           59       15      80-138        2006-2020                                                                         4.00      28.7
K.     Palepu            24        9       23-46        1989-1997                                                                         2.33       9.0
L.     Pastor             59      15      80-138        2006-2020                                                                         3.17      28.4
N.     Pearson           107      29      32-138        1992-2020                                                                         2.50       8.5
C.     Plosser            4        4       8-11         1980-1983
S.     Richard            8        7        4-11        1977-1983                                                                         3.50        6.4
J.     Ritter            104      27      35-138        1994-2020                                                                         5.00       42.1
R.     Roll              33       20        1-33        1974-1993                                                                         9.70       72.8
S.     Ross               11      10        1-11        1974-1983                                                                         3.17       24.1
M.     Rozeff             7        7        5-11        1977-1983                                                                         2.00        5.3
                                          11-21,       1983-1988,
R.S.   Ruback             54      20                                 43-51    1997-1999    22-42    1988-1996                             5.83     28.55
                                          52-64        1999-2002
M.     Rubinstein         40      23        1-40       1974-1996                                                                          1.33       14.6
P.     Samuelson          7       6         1-7        1974-1979                                                                          0.50        0.9
M.     Scholes            11      10       1-11        1974-1983                                                                          2.00       16.9
E.     Schwartz           28      11       20-47       1988-1998                                                                          3.50        9.3
                                                                                            7-8,    1979-1980    9-17,     1981-1986,
G.W.   Schwert           134      44        5-6        1977-1978     18-24    1987-1989                                                   7.67       41.4
                                                                                           25-42    1989-1996   43-138     1997-2020
P.     Seguin             14      4        41-54       1996-1999                                                                          1.17        2.6
                                           20-51,     1988-1999,
J.     Shanken           119      33                                52-103    1999-2012
                                          104-138     2012-2020                                                                           6.67      26.1
A.     Shleifer          119      33      20-55        1988-2000    56-138    2000-2020                                                   7.25     129.8
R.     Sloan             59       15      80-138       2006-2020                                                                          1.25       4.8
C.W.   Smith             129      43       5-10        1977-1982    43-133    1997-2019    20-42    1988-1996    11-19     1983-1987      6.83      59.3
R.     Stambaugh          22      11       12-33       1983-1993                                                                         10.33      81.9
                                          56-103,      2000-2012
J.     Stein              72      19
                                          114-138      2015-2020                                                                          4.28     33.92
H.     Stoll              65      21       15-79       1986-2006                                                                          2.00       14.2
                  Table 1. One hundred five people who have served on the Editorial Board of the Journal of Financial Economics, 1974-2020

                                                             Associate Editor          Advisory Editor           Co-Editor                   Editor             Papers in the JFE
                                 Volumes       Years      Volumes         Years     Volumes      Years      Volumes     Years         Volumes       Years       Papers Citations
    R.M.     Stulz                 128          34         20-55        1988-2000    56-138    2000-2020                              19-Nov     1983-1987       16.92       192.2
    L.       Taylor                 17           5        122-138       2016-2020                                                                                 2.83        16.1
    J.       van Binsbergen          6           2        133-138       2019-2020                                                                                 1.75        12.8
    R.       Vishny                 36          13         20-55        1988-2000                                                                                 3.67        84.5
                                                           8-17,       1980-1986,
    J.B.     Warner                131          41                                   43-51     1997-1999      20-42     1988-1996       18-19        1987          5.67      75.66
                                                          52-134       1999-2020
    R.       Watts                  22          15         1-22        1974-1988                                                                                   1.83       24.9
    M.       Weisbach               31           8         60-90       2001-2008                                                                                   6.42       66.7
    R.       Whaley                 28          10         25-50       1989-1998                                                                                   3.83       11.8
    T.       Whited                 52          13        87-103       2008-2012    104-113    2012-2014     114-138    2014-2020                                  3.00        9.9
    M.       Wolfson                 9           5         23-33       1989-1993                                                                                   1.00        2.2
    K.       Wruck                  99          28        23-121       1989-2016                                                                                   4.67       21.5
    J.       Wurgler                35           9        104-138      2012-2020                                                                                   3.83       40.1
    D.       Yermack                48          12        91-138       2009-2020                                                                                   6.08       79.2
    A.       Zellner                 3           3          1-3        1974-1976
    L.       Zhang                  35           9        104-138      2012-2020                                                                                   2.03        9.6

    Total Papers and Citations per year for all editors                                                                                                          370.7      3461.3
    Total Papers and Citations per year by all authors                                                                                                           3,010      16,439
    Percent of totals represented by editors                                                                                                                     12.3%      21.1%


    Papers is the number of papers, weighted by the number of co-authors, published in the JFE by members of the editorial board any time from 1974-2020. Citations are the average
    number of citations per year since publication, weighted by the number of co-authors. Members of the editorial board have contributed a disproportionate share of the papers
    published in the JFE, and their papers have been cited even more disproportionately.
 
                                            Table 2
               Logit model for "desk rejection" decisions by the JFE, 2006-2019
Author_female is the proportion of the co-authors for a paper who are female. Author_referee is the
proportion of the co-authors who also serve as JFE referees. Author_JFE is the proportion of the co-
authors who have been on the JFE editorial board at any time from 1974-2019. Number_authors is the
number of co-authors of the submitted paper. Author_US is the proportion of the co-authors who work in
the US. Author_Europe is the proportion of co-authors who work in Europe. Author_Asia is the
proportion of co-authors who work in Asia. Asymptotic Z-statistics based on White (1980)
heteroskedastic-consistent standard errors are in parentheses. Estimates of marginal effects from the
equivalent linear probability model are in brackets. Authors who serve as referees and who work in the
US are less likely to receive desk reject decisions. Female authors are more likely to receive a desk
rejection.
                                               (1)                   (2)                    (3)
                                           Coefficient           Coefficient            Coefficient
                                           (Z-statistic)         (Z-statistic)          (Z-statistic)
        Variable                          [marg. effect]        [marg. effect]         [marg. effect]

       Constant                             -1.196                 -1.101                 -0.640
                                           (-19.05)               (-11.45)               (-4.89)
                                           [0.252]                [0.264]                [0.321]
       Author_female                        0.343                  0.377                  0.389
                                            (4.61)                 (4.29)                 (4.42)
                                           [0.048]                [0.044]                [0.045]
       Author_referee                       -2.871                 -2.400                 -2.467
                                           (-26.01)               (-21.20)               (-21.51)
                                           [-0.260]               [-0.196]               [-0.202]
       Author_JFE                           -0.916                 -0.699                 -0.811
                                            (-1.96)                (-1.52)                (-1.74)
                                           [-0.029]               [-0.014]               [-0.023]
       Number_authors                        0.045                  0.055                 0.103
                                            (1.86)                 (2.00)                 (3.66)
                                           [-0.005]               [-0.003]               [0.002]
       Author_US                                                   -0.643                 -0.574
                                                                   (-7.97)                (-6.94)
                                                                  [-0.088]               [-0.079]
       Author_Europe                                               -0.160                 -0.076
                                                                   (-1.75)                (-0.81)
                                                                  [-0.032]               [-0.022]
       Author_Asia                                                 0.181                  0.301
                                                                   (1.83)                 (2.99)
                                                                  [0.025]                [0.038]
       Year dummy variables?                  N                      N                      Y
       McFadden R-squared                   0.104                  0.106                  0.116
       Observations                        16,081                  14,615                14,615
                                                Table 3
                       Logit model for acceptance decisions by the JFE, 1994-2019
    Author_female is the proportion of the co-authors for a paper who are female. Author_referee is the
    proportion of the co-authors who also serve as JFE referees. Author_JFE is the proportion of the co-
    authors who have been on the JFE editorial board at any time from 1974-2019. Number_authors is the
    number of co-authors of the submitted paper. Author_US is the proportion of the co-authors who work
    in the US. Author_Europe is the proportion of co-authors who work in Europe. Author_Asia is the
    proportion of co-authors who work in Asia. Asymptotic Z-statistics based on White (1980)
    heteroskedastic-consistent standard errors are in parentheses. Estimates of marginal effects from the
    equivalent linear probability model are in brackets. Authors who serve as referees and are on the JFE
    editorial board are more likely to have their papers accepted. Papers with more authors are more likely to
    be accepted. Authors who work in the US, Europe, and Asia are more likely to have their papers accepted.
                                                  (1)                     (2)                     (3)
                                              Coefficient             Coefficient             Coefficient
                                              (Z-statistic)           (Z-statistic)           (Z-statistic)
           Variable                          [marg. effect]          [marg. effect]          [marg. effect]

           Constant                               -3.209                 -4.072                 -3.904
                                                (-40.53)                (-29.62)               (-17.74)
                                                 [0.030]                [-0.022]               [-0.002]
           Author_female                         -0.183                  -0.154                 -0.144
                                                 (-2.12)                 (-1.77)                (-1.65)
                                                [-0.016]                [-0.015]               [-0.014]
           Author_referee                        1.646                   1.297                   1.308
                                                (28.31)                 (20.37)                 (20.16)
                                                [0.161]                 [0.136]                 [0.137]
           Author_JFE                            0.835                   0.788                   0.743
                                                 (6.90)                  (6.50)                  (6.03)
                                                [0.151]                 [0.146]                 [0.140]
           Number_authors                        0.147                   0.132                   0.143
                                                 (5.90)                  (5.20)                  (5.34)
                                                [0.008]                 [0.009]                 [0.010]
           Author_US                                                     1.278                   1.283
                                                                        (10.15)                  (9.91)
                                                                        [0.080]                 [0.080]
           Author_Europe                                                 1.226                   1.252
                                                                         (8.98)                  (8.90)
                                                                        [0.075]                 [0.076]
           Author_Asia                                                   1.056                   1.084
                                                                         (6.87)                  (6.83)
                                                                        [0.059]                 [0.061]
           Year dummy variables?                   N                       N                       Y
           McFadden R-squared                    0.069                   0.067                   0.070
           Observations                         21,669                  20,218                  20,218
 
                                                                        Table 4
                                           Special issues of the Journal of Financial Economics, 1974-2019
                                                                                                    Citations
                      Topic                           Year     Volume    Papers    Pages      Total     Paper/Year       Editors

Option Pricing Models                                   1976        3         6      176      3,685          14.0         Michael C. Jensen
Anomalous Evidence Regarding Market
                                                        1978        6         9      235      1,024           2.7         Michael C. Jensen
Efficiency
Futures Pricing                                         1981        9         3       62        585           5.0       G. William Schwert
The Market for Corporate Control: The Scientific
                                                        1983       11        17      466      3,927           6.2         Michael C. Jensen
Evidence
Size and Stock Returns, and Other Empirical
                                                        1983       12         8      154      1,601           5.4       G. William Schwert
Regularities

Investment Banking and the Capital Acquisition                                                                        Michael C. Jensen and
                                                        1986       15        10      279      3,475          10.2        Clifford W. Smith
Process
The Distribution of Power Among Corporate                                                                             Michael C. Jensen and
                                                        1988       20        18      504      6,244          10.8
Managers, Shareholders, and Directors                                                                                     Jerold B. Warner
                                                                                                                      Michael C. Jensen and
The Structure and Governance of Enterprise              1990       27        23      604      4,489           6.5
                                                                                                                         Richard S. Ruback
                                                                                                                      Michael C. Jensen and
Symposium on Corporate Focus                            1995       37         5      124      1,503          12.0
                                                                                                                       Wayne H. Mikkelson
Symposium on Market Microstructure: Focus on
                                                        1997       45         7      164        176           1.1       G. William Schwert
Nasdaq
Special Issue on International Corporate
                                                        2000       58         9      332      4,892          27.2            Andrei Shleifer
Governance
Complementary Research Methodologies: The
Interplay of Theoretical, Empirical and Field-          2001       60        11      433      1,502           7.2              Peter Tufano
Based Research in Finance
                                                                                                                         Andrei Shleifer and
Limits on Arbitrage                                     2002       66         9      336      1,574           9.7
                                                                                                                            Jeremy C. Stein
                                                                                                                     G. William Schwert and
Tuck Symposium on Corporate Governance                  2003       69         8      276      1,184           8.7
                                                                                                                             B. Espen Eckbo
                                                                               Table 4
                                           Special issues of the Journal of Financial Economics, 1974-2019
                                                                                                                  Citations
                        Topic                             Year      Volume      Papers        Pages         Total     Paper/Year                 Editors

 NBER Conference on Corporate Alliances                     2006          80          2           75           154           5.5                     Josh Lerner and
                                                                                                                                                    Raghuram Rajan
 NBER Conference on the economics of conflicts                                                                                                   Hamid Mehran and
                                                            2007          85        10          332            951           7.3
 of interest financial institutions                                                                                                                  René M. Stulz
 Special Issue on Investor Sentiment                        2012         104        11          193          1,059         12.0                      Jeffrey Wurgler
                                                                                                                                                       Mark Carey,
 NBER Conference on Market Institutions,                                                                                                           Anil K Kashyap,
                                                            2012         104          7         139            996         17.8
 Financial Market Risks and Financial Crisis                                                                                                   Raghuram Rajan, and
                                                                                                                                                     René M. Stulz
 NBER Conference on the Causes and                                                                                                                Luigi Zingales and
                                                            2015         117        11          223            423           7.7
 Consequences of Corporate Culture                                                                                                               G. William Schwert
                                                                                                                                                  Viral V. Acharya,
 NBER Symposium on New perspectives on
                                                            2015         118          8         162            168           4.2                Heitor Almeida, and
 corporate capital structures
                                                                                                                                                    Malcolm Baker
 JFE Special Issue on Labor and Finance                     2019         133        10          225              3           0.3                     Toni M. Whited


 Average for JFE Special Issues                                                     9.6         262          1,886           8.6
 Average for Normal Issues of the JFE                                                                                        5.5

Citations Total is the sum of all citations for all papers in the issue from publication through 2019. Citations per Paper/Year is the average number of citations per
year since publication through 2019 for all papers in the issue. Across all special issues, average citations per year are about 50% higher for papers in special
issues.
                                                                                  Table 5
                                          Authors of JFE papers with the most papers and citations, 1974-2020
Papers/Coauth: each of n authors receives 1/n credit for a JFE paper. Papers/Author: each coauthor receives full credit for each paper. Total Cites: the sum of citations
across all papers from the Social Science Citation Index for each year since a paper was published. Cites/Year: average citations per year since publication. Cites/Author:
average citations per author for all years since publication. Cites/Auth/Year: average citations per year per author. Affiliation reflects the author's location at the time
of the last JFE paper was published. JFE editor indicates the author was on the editorial board at some time from 1974-2019. There are 3,360 authors who published
3,010 papers in the JFE from 1974-2020.

Papers     Citations                                        Papers/     Papers/     Total    Cites/     Cites/       Cites/                                         JFE
Rank        Rank                    Author                  Coauth      Author      Cites    Year       Author      Auth/Yr                Affiliation             Editor
      1        3   Stulz                      R.M.           16.92         38       7988     420.9      4087.6         192.2    Ohio St. U.                             1
      2        1   Fama                        E.F.          15.00         24      13439     644.8      7546.0         353.6    U. Chicago                              1
      3        2   French                     K.R.           10.33         19      12989     622.5      6552.7         311.9    Dartmouth C.                            1
      4       11   Stambaugh                   R.F.          10.33         18       3409     157.8      1891.7          81.9    U. Pennsylvania                         1
      5       14   Roll                          R.           9.70         18       3137     147.1      1958.8          72.8    Cal Tech                                1
      6       31   DeAngelo                      H.           9.00         21       2285     104.8      1014.2          43.6    U. Southern Cal.                        1
      7        8   Harvey                      C.R.           7.83         17       3618     231.4      1677.5          94.9    Duke U.                                 1
      8       59   Longstaff                   F.A.           7.83         13        652      53.9       441.3          33.4    U. Cal. (Los Angeles)                   1
      9       37   Schwert                    G.W.            7.67         11       2560      79.7      1296.2          41.4    U. Rochester                            1
     10      122   Bessembinder                  H.           7.58         13        706      48.5       375.2          24.5    Arizona State U.                        1
     11        7   Shleifer                      A.           7.25         20       7113     365.7      2531.6         129.8    Harvard U.                              1
     12      257   Schultz                     P.H.           7.00         11        442      22.8       291.5          14.5    Notre Dame U.                           0
     13       41   McConnell                    J.J.          6.92         16       2236      84.2      1058.8          39.2    Purdue U.                               0
     14       42   Masulis                    R.W.            6.83         13       2132      76.7      1145.7          39.1    U. New South Wales                      1
     15       21   Smith                      C.W.            6.83         12       3529     105.6      2046.3          59.3    U. Rochester                            1
     16       16   Harford                        J.          6.75         15       1661     151.4       838.0          69.1    U. Washington (Seattle)                 1
     17      109   Kaplan                      S.N.           6.67         11        925      37.2       704.6          25.6    U. Chicago                              1
     17      106   Shanken                        J.          6.67         11        973      53.1       564.3          26.1    Emory U.                                1
     19       96   DeAngelo                      L.           6.50         16       1270      72.5       506.7          27.5    U. Southern Cal.                        0
     20       19   Weisbach                   M.S.            6.42         13       2110     104.9      1589.1          66.7    Ohio St. U.                             1
     21       23   Subrahmanyam                  A.           6.33         18       2426     149.0       923.4          54.6    U. Cal. (Los Angeles)                   0
     22       78   Denis                       D.J.           6.33         13       1057      65.5       498.7          30.5    U. Pittsburgh                           0
     23        9   Graham                      J.R.           6.25         13       2918     213.0      1427.3          92.2    Duke U.                                 1
     23       62   Lerner                         J.          6.25         13       1012      66.6       586.6          32.9    Harvard U.                              1
     25       18   Acharya                    V.V.            6.08         16       1657     159.9       719.4          68.1    New York U.                             0
     26       36   Keim                        D.B.           6.08          9       1748      71.2      1175.3          41.7    U. Pennsylvania                         0
     27       12   Yermack                       D.           6.08          8       1813      89.3      1705.1          79.2    New York U.                             1
     28       32   Hong                          H.           6.00         15       1300     103.4       515.3          43.1    Columbia U.                             0
     29       40   Kang                    Jun-Koo            6.00         14       1440      97.5       649.9          39.3    Nanyang Tech U.                         0
     30       87   Ruback                      R.S.           5.83          8       2054      57.8      1029.2          28.5    Harvard U.                              1
                                                                                      Table 5
                                              Authors of JFE papers with the most papers and citations, 1974-2020
    Papers/Coauth: each of n authors receives 1/n credit for a JFE paper. Papers/Author: each coauthor receives full credit for each paper. Total Cites: the sum of citations
    across all papers from the Social Science Citation Index for each year since a paper was published. Cites/Year: average citations per year since publication. Cites/Author:
    average citations per author for all years since publication. Cites/Auth/Year: average citations per year per author. Affiliation reflects the author's location at the time
    of the last JFE paper was published. JFE editor indicates the author was on the editorial board at some time from 1974-2019. There are 3,360 authors who published
    3,010 papers in the JFE from 1974-2020.

    Papers     Citations                                        Papers/     Papers/     Total    Cites/     Cites/       Cites/                                         JFE
    Rank        Rank                    Author                  Coauth      Author      Cites    Year       Author      Auth/Yr                Affiliation             Editor
         31      121   Eckbo                       B.E.            5.67        11        907      44.6       630.7           24.6   Dartmouth C.                                0
         31       13   Warner                      J.B.            5.67        11       5261     156.2      2585.5           75.7   U. Rochester                                1
         33       26   Chordia                       T.            5.58        14       1991     127.9       757.3           46.9   Emory U.                                    0
         34      173   Massa                        M.             5.42        13        547      46.4       242.3           19.2   INSEAD                                      0
         35      116   James                      C.M.             5.33        11        959      39.9       672.7           25.1   U. Florida                                  1
         36      308   Mayers                        D.            5.33        10        763      24.7       364.0           12.4   U. Cal. (Riverside)                         1
         37      153   Zhou                      Guofu             5.25        12        383      53.1       184.5           20.8   Washington U.(St Louis)                     0
         38       47   O'Hara                       M.             5.17        11       1045      70.0       522.2           37.4   Cornell U.                                  0
         39       34   Ritter                      J.R.            5.00        10       1829      86.2       939.3           42.1   U. Florida                                  1
         40      349   Constantinides             G.M.             5.00         6        524      15.8       379.5           11.1   U. Chicago                                  0
         41       99   Brennan                     M.J.            4.83        10       1487      59.4       709.9           26.9   U. Cal. (Los Angeles)                       1
         42      144   Walkling                   R.A.             4.67        11       1421      55.1       561.8           21.5   Drexel U.                                   0
         43      139   Mikkelson                  W.H.             4.67         9       1431      45.0       713.2           21.9   U. Oregon                                   1
         44      172   Barclay                     M.J.            4.67         8       1039      36.3       552.2           19.3   U. Rochester                                1
         44      281   Grenadier                   S.R.            4.67         8        390      21.8       253.3           13.1   Stanford U.                                 0
         46      146   Wruck                      K.H.             4.67         7       1077      36.4       640.8           21.5   Ohio St. U.                                 1
         47      102   Malatesta                   P.H.            4.58        11       1274      71.5       579.8           26.6   U. Washington (Seattle)                     0
         48       55   Puri                         M.             4.58         9        883      77.6       456.7           33.9   Duke U.                                     0
         49      307   Johnson                     T.C.            4.50         6        271      22.2       152.0           12.5   U. Illinois (Urbana-Champaign)              0
         50      664   Garman                     M.B.             4.50         5        271       6.3       259.5            6.0   U. Cal. (Berkeley)                          0
         51      248   Bakshi                      G.S.            4.33        10        459      34.8       200.8           14.8   U. Maryland                                 0
         51      145   Brickley                    J.A.            4.33        10       1547      53.7       642.2           21.5   U. Rochester                                0
         51      140   Shivdasani                    A.            4.33        10        819      50.2       365.7           21.8   U. North Carolina                           0
         54      526   Long                        J.B.            4.33         5        311       8.1       291.7            7.6   U. Rochester                                1
         55       56   Stein                       J.C.            4.28        10       1453      93.2       566.1           33.9   Harvard U.                                  1
         56      289   Morellec                      E.            4.25         9        329      27.2       169.3           13.0   Ecole Poly. Fed. Lausanne                   0
         57      117   Lin                        Chen             4.17        14        711      88.2       196.1           25.0   Hong Kong U.                                0
         58      182   Kim                        E.H.             4.17        11       1152      47.2       417.8           18.6   U. Michigan                                 0
         59      114   Lo                         A.W.             4.17         9       1018      83.7       358.5           25.1   Massachusetts Inst. Tech.                   0
 
                                                               Table 6
                        Papers and citations to papers written by authors at a given institution
                                           published in the JFE, 1974-2020
    Papers/Coauth: each of n authors receives 1/n credit for a JFE paper. Papers/Author: each coauthor receives full credit for
    each paper. Total Cites: the sum of citations across all papers from the Social Science Citation Index for each year since a
    paper was published. Cites/Year: average citations per year since publication. Cites/Author: average citations per author
    for all years since publication. Cites/Auth/Year: average citations per year per author. The institutions are identified at the
    time the paper is published. There are 605 institutions and 3,360 authors who published 3,010 papers in the JFE from
    1974-2020.

     Papers    Citations                                      Papers/ Papers/ Total           Cites/       Cites/        Cites/
     Rank       Rank                  Affiliation             Coauth   Author Cites            Year       Author        Auth/Yr
       1          2      Harvard U.                             118.02   252  30673           1988.85     14610.30      883.16
       2          1      U. Chicago                             116.95   227  53023           2477.86     26439.22     1193.76
       3          4      U. Pennsylvania                         92.50   181  22455           1422.38     10946.50      659.29
       4          3      U. Rochester                            85.50   141  52504           1551.57     28424.83      853.31
       5          5      New York U.                             85.30   183  17513           1194.75      8615.82      543.45
       6          7      U. Cal. (Los Angeles)                   64.67   136  15432            834.64      7874.58      384.99
       7          6      Massachusetts Inst. Tech.               63.65   132  24267           1058.93     14388.98      540.22
       8          8      Ohio St. U.                             53.55   124  15188            871.69      6604.10      354.66
       9         10      Stanford U.                             49.42   108  10242            612.33      5369.08      284.80
       10        14      Columbia U.                             45.60   112   8480            587.68      3486.15      229.55
       11        12      U. Michigan                             45.50    98   9224            528.41      4490.08      248.61
       12        19      U. Cal. (Berkeley)                      44.32    86   6883            428.36      4052.58      201.22
       13         9      Duke U.                                 40.32    98  12319            895.35      5192.87      348.84
       14        15      U. Southern Cal.                        39.67    85   7296            493.97      3725.42      222.62
       15        13      U. Washington (Seattle)                 39.17    88   7315            541.19      3348.08      231.02
       16        18      Boston C.                               37.45    85   6669            499.66      2904.08      201.84
       17        37      Federal Reserve Board                   36.15    73   2997            254.31      1301.22      104.20
       18        25      U. North Carolina                       34.42    79   4173            325.63      1903.67      141.28
       19        17      Northwestern U.                         33.95    70   7458            413.35      4235.72      203.09
       20        29      U. Illinois (Urbana-Champaign)          31.67    72   4261            293.03      1788.83      122.73
       21        21      London Business School                  31.12    66   5313            360.49      2889.03      173.93
       22        22      Cornell U.                              29.83    69   5796            372.91      2580.83      155.69
       23        34      U. Utah                                 28.08    65   3719            260.62      1782.08      109.29
       24        26      U. Texas (Austin)                       27.37    64   5184            317.52      2500.35      135.47
       25        27      Arizona State U.                        27.33    60   4558            314.22      1963.33      128.01
       26        24      Purdue U.                               27.17    57   5757            319.09      2848.33      153.80
       27        33      U. British Columbia                     25.92    51   4290            230.34      2521.92      110.62
       28        31      U. Maryland                             24.82    57   3114            250.36      1519.92      116.35
       29        36      U. Florida                              24.50    57   4146            256.30      1794.00      107.47
       30        38      Notre Dame U.                           24.37    51   3021            213.40      1514.25      102.89
       31        42      Washington U.(St Louis)                 23.83    53   1886            225.36       920.25       97.84
       32        11      Yale U.                                 22.70    50  10705            534.47      5259.98      255.47
       33        30      Indiana U.                              21.67    49   2954            298.60      1163.67      120.05
       34        41      U. Oregon                               20.67    39   4442            174.60      2631.33       98.62
       35        64      Carnegie-Mellon U.                      20.25    35   2280             91.57      1547.25       56.22
 
                                                                           Table 7
                                                        Most cited papers published in the JFE
Authors, title, volume, publication year, total citations since the paper was published through 2019, and the average number of citations per year in the Social
Science Citation Index.
                                                                                                                                                        Total
Rank                                   Title                                  Vol    Year                     Authors                      Cites/Yr     Cites
        Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency costs and
  1     ownership structure                                                      3   1976    M.C. Jensen, W.H. Meckling                      269.5       11,859
  2     Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds                  33   1993    E.F. Fama, K.R. French                          195.8        5,287
        Corporate financing and investment decisions when firms have
  3     information that investors do not have                                 13    1984    S.C. Myers, S. Majluf                             97.6       3,513
  4     A five-factor asset pricing model                                     116    2015    E.F. Fama, K.R. French                            88.7         532
  5     Industry costs of equity                                               43    1997    E.F. Fama, K.R. French                            69.1       1,589
        How do family ownership, control, and management affect firm
  6     value?                                                                  80   2006    B. Villalonga, R. Amit                            64.6         905
  7     Determinants of corporate borrowing                                      5   1977    S.C. Myers                                        60.8       2,613
        The separation of ownership and control in East Asian
  8     Corporations.                                                           58   2000    S. Claessens, S. Djankov, L.H.P. Lang             60.1       1,201
        Earnings management and investor protection: An international
  9     comparison                                                              69   2003    C. Leuz, D. Nanda, P.D. Wysocki                   59.1       1,004
                                                                                             R. LaPorta, F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A.
 10     Investor protection and corporate governance                            58   2000    Shleifer, R.W. Vishny                             58.9       1,178
        Women in the boardroom and their impact on governance and
 11     performance                                                             94   2009    R.B. Adams, D. Ferreira                           53.1         584
 12     Bank governance, regulation and risk taking                             93   2009    L. Laeven, R. Levine                              52.6         579
        The theory and practice of corporate finance: Evidence from the
 13     field                                                                   60   2001    J.R. Graham, C.R. Harvey                          52.5         998
 14     Law, finance and economic growth in China                               77   2005    F.H. Allen, J. Qian, M. Qian                      51.3         769
        Management ownership and market valuation: An empirical
 15     analysis                                                                20   1988    R. Morck, A. Shleifer, R.W. Vishny                51.1       1,635
        Higher market valuation of companies with a small board of
 16     directors                                                               40   1996    D. Yermack                                        49.6       1,191
 17     Private credit in 129 countries                                         84   2007    S. Djankov, C. McLiesh, A. Shleifer               49.0         637
 18     The ultimate ownership of Western European corporations                 65   2002    M. Faccio, L.H.P. Lang                            48.7         877
                                                                            Table 7
                                                        Most cited papers published in the JFE
Authors, title, volume, publication year, total citations since the paper was published through 2019, and the average number of citations per year in the Social
Science Citation Index.
                                                                                                                                                        Total
Rank                                   Title                                  Vol     Year                    Authors                      Cites/Yr     Cites

 19     Endogeneity and the dynamics of internal corporate governance         105     2012   M.B. Wintoki, J.S. Linck, J.M. Netter             47.8         382
        Politically connected CEOs, corporate governance, and Post-IPO
 20     performance of China's newly partially privatized firms                 84    2007   J.P.H. Fan, T.J. Wong, Tianyu Zhang               47.2         614
 21     Using daily stock returns: The case of event studies                    14    1985   S.J. Brown, J.B. Warner                           47.2       1,651
 22     Market efficiency, long-term returns, and behavioral finance            49    1998   E.F. Fama                                         45.2         995
 23     Bank lending during the financial crisis of 2008                        97    2010   V.P. Ivashina, D. Scharfstein                     44.7         447
        Econometric measures of connectedness and systemic risk in the                       M. Billio, M. Getmansky, A.W. Lo L.
 24     finance and insurance sectors                                         104     2012   Pelizzon                                          44.6         357
 25     A model of investor sentiment                                          49     1998   N.C. Barberis, A. Shleifer, R.W. Vishny           44.6         981
        Corporate governance, chief executive officer compensation, and
 26     firm performance                                                        51    1999   J.E. Core, R.W. Holthausen, D.F. Larcker          43.0         904
        The great reversals: The politics of financial development in the
 27     20th Century                                                            69    2003   R.G. Rajan, L. Zingales                           42.8         728
        Bid, ask and transaction prices in a specialist market with
 28     heterogeneously informed traders                                        14    1985   L.R. Glosten, P.R. Milgrom                        42.3       1,481
        Who makes acquisitions? CEO overconfidence and the market's
 29     reaction                                                               89     2008   U.M. Malmendier, G. Tate                          42.0         504
 30     Boards: Does one size fit all?                                         87     2008   J.L. Coles, N.D. Daniel, L. Naveen                40.3         524
 31     Size, value, and momentum in international stock returns              105     2012   E.F. Fama, K.R. French                            39.8         318
        Simple formulas for standard errors that cluster by both firm and
 32     time                                                                   99     2011   S.B. Thompson                                     39.6         356
 33     Securitized banking and the run on repo                               104     2012   G. Gorton, A. Metrick                             39.4         355
 34     Asset pricing with liquidity risk                                      77     2005   V.V. Acharya, L.H. Pedersen                       38.7         581
 35     Managerial incentives and risk-taking                                  79     2006   J.L. Coles, N.D. Daniel, L. Naveen                38.2         535
 36     Financial literacy and stock market participation                     101     2011   M. van Rooij, A. Lusardi, R. Alessie              38.0         342

        The real effects of financial constraints: Evidence from a
 37     financial crisis                                                        97    2010   M. Campello, J.R. Graham, C.R. Harvey             37.8         378
                                                                           Table 7
                                                        Most cited papers published in the JFE
Authors, title, volume, publication year, total citations since the paper was published through 2019, and the average number of citations per year in the Social
Science Citation Index.
                                                                                                                                                        Total
Rank                                    Title                                 Vol    Year                     Authors                      Cites/Yr     Cites
 38     The short of it: Investor sentiment and anomalies                     104    2012    R.F. Stambaugh, Jianfeng Yu, Y. Yuan              35.9         287
 39     The determinants of board structure                                    87    2008    J.S. Linck, J.M. Netter, T. Yang                  35.3         424
 40     Betting against beta                                                  111    2014    A. Frazzini, L.H. Pedersen                        35.0         245
        The investment opportunity set and corporate financing, dividend,
 41     and compensation policies                                               32   1992    C.W. Smith, R.L. Watts                            34.5         966
 42     The market for corporate control: The scientific evidence               11   1983    M.C. Jensen, R.S. Ruback                          34.3       1,268
 43     Outside directors and CEO turnover                                      20   1988    M.S. Weisbach                                     34.2       1,093
                                                                                             S.B. Moeller, F.P. Schlingemann, R.M.
 44     Firm size and the gains from acquisitions                               73   2004    Stulz                                             33.7         539
 45     Business conditions and expected returns on stocks and bonds            25   1989    E.F. Fama, K.R. French                            33.0       1,023
        The information content of stock markets: Why do emerging
 46     markets have synchronous stock price movements?                         58   2000    R. Morck, B. Yeung, Wayne Yu                      32.9         657
 47     An equilibrium characterization of the term structure                    5   1977    O.A. Vasicek                                      32.7       1,404
 48     Asset pricing and the bid-ask spread                                    17   1986    Y. Amihud, H. Mendelson                           32.2       1,094
                                                                                             K.R. French, G.W. Schwert, R.F.
 49     Expected stock returns and volatility                                   19   1987    Stambaugh                                         31.8       1,049
 50     Option pricing: A simplified approach                                    7   1979    J.C. Cox, S.A. Ross, M. Rubinstein                31.6       1,296
 51     Finance and the sources of growth                                       58   2000    T. Beck, R. Levine, N. Loayza                     31.4         628
                                                                                             T.G. Andersen, T. Bollerslev, F.X.
 52     The distribution of stock return volatility                             61   2001    Diebold, H. Ebens                                 31.4         596

 53     Option pricing when underlying stock returns are discontinuous          3    1976    R.C. Merton                                       31.3       1,379
 54     CEO incentives and earnings management                                 80    2006    D. Bergstresser, T. Philippon                     31.0         434
 55     Diversification's effect on firm value                                 37    1995    P.G. Berger, E. Ofek                              31.0         774
 56     Additional evidence on equity ownership and corporate value            27    1990    J.J. McConnell, H. Servaes                        30.2         905
 57     The other side of value: The gross profitability premium              108    2013    R. Novy-Marx                                      30.1         211
        Disappearing dividends: Changing firm characteristics or lower
 58     propensity to pay?                                                      60   2001    E.F. Fama, K.R. French                            29.7         564
 59     Corporate governance and the value of cash holdings                     83   2007    A. Dittmar, J. Mahrt-Smith                        29.6         385
                                                                                Table 7
                                                            Most cited papers published in the JFE
    Authors, title, volume, publication year, total citations since the paper was published through 2019, and the average number of citations per year in the Social
    Science Citation Index.
                                                                                                                                                            Total
    Rank                                   Title                                  Vol     Year                    Authors                      Cites/Yr     Cites
                                                                                                 T. Opler, L. Pinkowitz, R.M. Stulz, R.
     60     The determinants and implications of corporate cash holdings            52    1999   Williamson                                        29.5         620
            Detecting long-run abnormal stock returns: The empirical power
     60     and specification of test statistics                                   43     1997   B.M. Barber, J.D. Lyon                            29.5         679
     62     Political uncertainty and risk premia                                 110     2013   L. Pastor, P. Veronesi                            28.7         201
            The jump-risk premia implicit in options: Evidence from an
     63     integrated time-series study                                            63    2002   J. Pan                                            28.2         508
                                                                                                 A. Brav, J.R. Graham, R. Michaely, C.R.
     64     Payout policy in the 21st century                                       77    2005   Harvey                                            28.1         421
            The relationship between return and market value of common
     65     stocks                                                                   9    1981   R.W. Banz                                         28.0       1,091
     66     Does financial liberalization spur growth?                              77    2005   G. Bekaert, C.R. Harvey, C.T. Lundblad            27.9         419
            The determinants of corporate board size and composition: An                         A.L. Boone, L.C. Field, J.M. Karpoff,
     67     empirical analysis                                                      85    2007   C.G. Raheja                                       27.9         363
     68     R2 around the world: New theory and new tests                           79    2006   L. Jin, S.C. Myers                                27.8         389
     69     Monitoring: Which institutions matter?                                  86    2007   X. Chen, J. Harford, K. Li                        27.8         361
            Understanding the determinants of managerial ownership and the
     70     link between ownership and performance                                  53    1999   C.P. Himmelberg, R.G. Hubbard, D. Palia           27.7         582
     71     Why are foreign firms listed in the U.S. worth more?                    71    2004   C. Doidge, G.A. Karolyi, R.M. Stulz               27.2         435
            Does function follow organizational form? Evidence from the                          A.N. Berger, N.H. Miller, M.A. Petersen,
     72     lending practices of large and small banks                              76    2005   R.G. Rajan, J.C. Stein                            26.9         404
            High idiosyncratic volatility and low returns: International and
     73     further U.S. evidence                                                   91    2009   A. Ang, R.J. Hodrick, Y. Xing, X. Zhang           26.9         296
            The colors of investors' money: Which firms attract institutional
     74     investors from around the world?                                        88    2008   M.A. Ferreira, P. Matos                           26.8         321
     75     Stock market driven acquisitions                                        70    2003   A. Shleifer, R.W. Vishny                          26.7         454
     76     The price of sin: The effects of social norms on markets                93    2009   H. Hong, M. Kacperczyk                            26.6         293

 
                                                                              Table 8
                                                                 JFE best paper winners, 1997-2019
    Papers that won the Fama/DFA prize for the best paper in capital markets or the Jensen prize for the best paper in corporate finance, 1997-2019.
    Winning papers selected based on votes from subscribers or authors and referees (voting rules have changed over time). Authors, title, volume, publication year,
    the order of the paper in the issue, total citations since the paper was published through 2019, and the average number of citations per year in the Social Science
    Citation Index.

                                                                                                  Order in                                                       Total
            Prize                                        Title                              Vol    Issue     Year              Authors               Cites/Yr    Cites
 
                             Detecting long-run abnormal stock returns: The empirical
    1997 Fama/DFA 1st        power and specification of test statistics                     43       2       1997   B.M. Barber, J.D. Lyon                29.5     679
    1997 Fama/DFA 2nd        Analyzing investments whose histories differ in length         45       1       1997   R.F. Stambaugh                         2.6      59
                             Market efficiency, long-term returns, and behavioral
    1998 Fama/DFA 1st        finance                                                        49       1       1998   E.F. Fama                             45.2     995
    1998 Fama/DFA 2nd        An empirical analysis of NYSE specialist trading               48       3       1998   A. Madhavan, G. Sofianos               3.9      85
                             Alternative factor specifications, security characteristics,                           M.J. Brennan, T. Chordia, A.
    1998 Fama/DFA 2nd        and the cross-section of expected stock returns                 49      3       1998   Subrahmanyam                          15.0     329
                             Bank entry, competition, and the market for corporate                                  A. Gande, M. Puri, A.
    1999 Fama/DFA 1st        securities underwriting                                        54      2        1999   Saunders                               4.3      91
    1999 Fama/DFA 2nd        Predictive regressions                                         54      4*       1999   R.F. Stambaugh                        22.5     472
                                                                                                                    T. Chordia, R. Roll, A.
    2000 Fama/DFA 1st        Commonality in liquidity                                       56       1       2000   Subrahmanyam                          18.5     369
    2000 Fama/DFA 2nd        Herding among security analysts                                58       2       2000   I. Welch                               8.6     172
                             Following the leader: A study of individual analysts                                   R.A. Cooper, T.E. Day, C.M.
    2001 Fama/DFA 1st        earnings forecasts                                             61       3       2001   Lewis                                  4.8      92
                             Forecasting crashes: Trading volume, past returns and
    2001 Fama/DFA 2nd        conditional skewness in stock prices                           61       2       2001   J. Chen, H. Hong, J.C. Stein          13.2     250
    2002 Fama/DFA 1st        Breadth of ownership and stock returns                         66       1       2002   J. Chen, H. Hong, J.C. Stein          15.3     276
    2002 Fama/DFA 2nd        Mutual fund performance and seemingly unrelated assets         63       1       2002   L. Pastor, R.F. Stambaugh              5.6     101
                             The great reversals: The politics of financial development
    2003 Fama/DFA 1st        in the 20th Century                                             69      1       2003   R.G. Rajan, L. Zingales               42.8     728
                             Voting with their feet: Institutional ownership changes                                R.F. Parrino, R.W. Sias, L.T.
    2003 Fama/DFA 2nd        around forced CEO turnover                                     68       1       2003   Starks                                13.7     233
                                                                                                                    J.Y. Campbell, Y.L. Chan,
    2003 Fama/DFA 2nd        A multivariate model of strategic asset allocation             67       2       2003   L.M. Viceira                           8.1     138
                                                                                                                    C. Doidge, G.A. Karolyi,
    2004 Fama/DFA 1st        Why are foreign firms listed in the U.S. worth more?           71       1       2004   R.M. Stulz                            27.2     435
    2004 Fama/DFA 2nd        New lists: Fundamentals and survival rates                     73       2       2004   E.F. Fama, K.R. French                10.3     164
                                                                              Table 8
                                                                 JFE best paper winners, 1997-2019
    Papers that won the Fama/DFA prize for the best paper in capital markets or the Jensen prize for the best paper in corporate finance, 1997-2019.
    Winning papers selected based on votes from subscribers or authors and referees (voting rules have changed over time). Authors, title, volume, publication year,
    the order of the paper in the issue, total citations since the paper was published through 2019, and the average number of citations per year in the Social Science
    Citation Index.

                                                                                                 Order in                                                        Total
            Prize                                        Title                             Vol    Issue      Year              Authors               Cites/Yr    Cites
 
    2005 Fama/DFA 1st        Asset pricing with liquidity risk                              77       5       2005   V.V. Acharya, L.H. Pedersen           38.7     581
    2005 Fama/DFA 2nd        The risk and return of venture capital                         75       1       2005   J.H. Cochrane                         12.3     184
                             The conditional CAPM does not explain asset-pricing
    2006 Fama/DFA 1st        anomalies                                                      82       2       2006   J. Lewellen, S. Nagel                 13.4     187
    2006 Fama/DFA 2nd        Was there a Nasdaq bubble in the last 1990s?                   81       3       2006   L. Pastor, P. Veronesi                 6.6      92
                                                                                                                    M.J. Cooper, J.J. McConnell,
    2006 Fama/DFA 2nd        The other January effect                                       82       3       2006   A.V. Ovtcinnikov                       1.1      16
    2007 Fama/DFA 1st        Laddering in initial public offerings                          85       4       2007   Q. Hao                                 1.5      20
                             Does industry-wide distress affect defaulted firms?                                    V.V. Acharya, S.T. Bharath,
    2007 Fama/DFA 2nd        Evidence from creditor recoveries                              85       7       2007   A. Srinivasan                         13.9     181
    2007 Fama/DFA 2nd        Optimism and economic choice                                   86       3       2007   M. Puri, D.T. Robinson                13.6     177
                             Inter-firm linkages and the wealth effects of financial                                M.G. Hertzel, Z. Li, M.S.
    2008 Fama/DFA 1st        distress along the supply chain                                87       7       2008   Officer, K.J. Rodgers                  9.8     117
                             Dumb money: mutual fund flows and the cross-section of
    2008 Fama/DFA 2nd        stock returns                                                  88       5       2008   A. Frazzini, O.A. Lamont              16.4     197
                             Venture capital investment cycles: The impact of public                                P.A. Gompers, A. Kovner, J.
    2008 Fama/DFA 2nd        markets                                                        87       1       2008   Lerner, D.S. Scharfstein               8.0      96
    2009 Fama/DFA 1st        Why is PIN priced?                                             91       1       2009   J. Duarte, L. Young                   12.3     135
                                                                                                                    R.Y. Goyenko, C.W. Holden,
    2009 Fama/DFA 2nd        Do liquidity measures measure liquidity?                       92       1       2009   C.A. Trzcinka                         26.1     287
                                                                                                                    E. Boehmer, Z.R. Huszar, B.
    2010 Fama/DFA 1st        The good news in short interest                                96       5       2010   Jordan                                 6.4      64
                                                                                                                    J. Lewellen, S. Nagel, J.
    2010 Fama/DFA 2nd        A skeptical appraisal of asset-pricing tests                   96       1       2010   Shanken                               22.9     252
                                                                                                                    K. Giesecke, F.A. Longstaff,
    2011 Fama/DFA 1st       Corporate bond default risk: A 150-year perspective            102       1       2011   S. Schaefer, I.A. Strebulaev           5.1      46
                             Do hedge funds trade on private information? Evidence                                  N. Massoud, D. Nandy, A.
    2011 Fama/DFA 2nd        from syndicated lending and short-selling                      99       1       2011   Saunders, K.R. Song                    4.7      42
    2012 Fama/DFA 1st        Is momentum really momentum?                                  103       1       2012   R. Novy-Marx                          10.6      85
                                                                             Table 8
                                                                JFE best paper winners, 1997-2019
    Papers that won the Fama/DFA prize for the best paper in capital markets or the Jensen prize for the best paper in corporate finance, 1997-2019.
    Winning papers selected based on votes from subscribers or authors and referees (voting rules have changed over time). Authors, title, volume, publication year,
    the order of the paper in the issue, total citations since the paper was published through 2019, and the average number of citations per year in the Social Science
    Citation Index.

                                                                                                 Order in                                                        Total
            Prize                                       Title                              Vol    Issue      Year              Authors               Cites/Yr    Cites
 
                                                                                                                    J.E. Engelberg, P. Gao, C.A.
    2012 Fama/DFA 2nd        Friends with money                                            103       9       2012   Parsons                               10.9      87
    2013 Fama/DFA 1st        The other side of value: The gross profitability premium      108       1       2013   R. Novy-Marx                          30.1     211
                                                                                                                    D. Avramov, T. Chordia, G.
    2013 Fama/DFA 2nd        Anomalies and financial distress                              108       8       2013   Jostova, A. Philipov                   7.9      55
                                                                                                                    L. Cohen, K. Diether C.J.
    2013 Fama/DFA 2nd        Legislating stock prices                                      110       4       2013   Malloy                                 0.9       6
    2014 Fama/DFA 1st        Betting against beta                                          111       1       2014   A. Frazzini, L.H. Pedersen            35.0     245
                             Limited partner performance and the maturing of the                                    B.A. Sensoy, Yingdi Wang,
    2014 Fama/DFA 2nd        private equity industry                                       112       2       2014   M.S. Weisbach                          4.3      26
                                                                                                                    L. Pastor, R.F. Stambaugh,
    2015 Fama/DFA 1st        Scale and skill in active management                          116       2       2015   L.A. Taylor                            9.6      48
                             Juicing the dividend yield: Mutual funds and the demand                                L.E. Harris, S. Hartzmark, D.
    2015 Fama/DFA 2nd        for dividends                                                 116       1       2015   Solomon                                3.2      16
                             Systemic risk and the macroeconomy: An empirical                                       S. Giglio, B.T. Kelly, S.
    2016 Fama/DFA 1st        evaluation                                                    119       1       2016   Pruitt                                11.8      47
    2016 Fama/DFA 2nd        Momentum crashes                                              122       1       2016   K.D. Daniel, T.J. Moskowitz           25.3     101
                             Information networks: Evidence from illegal insider
    2017 Fama/DFA 1st        trading tips                                                  125       2       2017   K.R. Ahern                             5.7      17
    2017 Fama/DFA 2nd        Skill and luck in private equity performance                  124       5       2017   A.G. Korteweg, M. Sorensen             4.0      12
                                                                                                                    J.Y. Campbell, S. Giglio, C.
    2018 Fama/DFA 1st        An intertemporal CAPM with stochastic volatility              128       1       2018   Polk, R. Turley                        8.5      17
                                                                                                                    R.S.J. Koijen, T.J.
                                                                                                                    Moskowitz, L.H. Pedersen,
    2018 Fama/DFA 2nd        Carry                                                         127       1       2018   E. Vrugt                              11.0      22
                             Characteristics are covariances: A united model of risk
    2019 Fama/DFA 1st        and return                                                    134       1       2019   B.T. Kelly, S. Pruitt, Y. Su           2.0        2
                                                                                                                    R. Greenwood, A. Shleifer,
    2019 Fama/DFA 2nd        Bubbles for Fama                                              131       2       2019   Y. You                                 3.0        3
                                                                              Table 8
                                                                 JFE best paper winners, 1997-2019
    Papers that won the Fama/DFA prize for the best paper in capital markets or the Jensen prize for the best paper in corporate finance, 1997-2019.
    Winning papers selected based on votes from subscribers or authors and referees (voting rules have changed over time). Authors, title, volume, publication year,
    the order of the paper in the issue, total citations since the paper was published, and the average number of citations per year in the Social Science Citation Index.

                                                                                                   Order in                                                         Total
            Prize                                        Title                              Vol     Issue      Year               Authors               Cites/Yr    Cites
 
       1997 Jensen 1st       The complexity of compensation contracts                         43       3      1997    S.R. Kole                              5.4      124
                             The decline of takeovers and disciplinary managerial                                     W.H. Mikkelson, M.M.
      1997 Jensen 2nd        turnover                                                         44       2      1997    Partch                                 4.1       94
                             Risk management, capital budgeting, and capital structure
       1998 Jensen 1st       policy for financial institutions: An integrated approach        47       2      1998    K.A. Froot, J.C. Stein                 7.8      172
                             Why firms issued convertible bonds: The matching of
      1998 Jensen 2nd        financial and real investment options                            47       3      1998    D. Mayers                              4.5       99
                             The determinants and implications of corporate cash                                      T. Opler, L. Pinkowitz, R.M.
       1999 Jensen 1st       holdings                                                         52       1      1999    Stulz, R. Williamson                  29.5      620
                             Deregulation and the adaptation of governance structure:
      1999 Jensen 2nd        The case of the U.S. airline industry                            52       3      1999    S.R. Kole, K.M. Lehn                   3.4       71
                             Measuring investment distortions arising from
      1999 Jensen 2nd        stockholder-bondholder conflicts                                 53       1      1999    R.F. Parrino, M.S. Weisbach            4.4       93
                                                                                                                      V.V. Acharya, K. John, R.K.
       2000 Jensen 1st       On the optimality of resetting executive stock options           57       3      2000    Sundaram                               3.0       60
                                                                                                                      R. LaPorta, F. Lopez-de-
                                                                                                                      Silanes, A. Shleifer, R.W.
      2000 Jensen 2nd        Investor protection and corporate governance                     58       1      2000    Vishny                                58.9    1,178
                             The theory and practice of corporate finance: Evidence
       2001 Jensen 1st       from the field                                                   60       2      2001    J.R. Graham, C.R. Harvey              52.5      998
                             Disappearing dividends: Changing firm characteristics or
      2001 Jensen 2nd        lower propensity to pay?                                         60       1      2001    E.F. Fama, K.R. French                29.7      564
                             Does diversification destroy value? Evidence from
      2002 Jensen 1st        industry shocks                                                  63       2      2002    O.A. Lamont, C. Polk                   4.7       84
      2002 Jensen 2nd        Investor protection and equity markets                           66       1      2002    A. Shleifer, D. Wolfenzon             14.4      260
      2003 Jensen 1st        Stock market driven acquisitions                                 70       1      2003    A. Shleifer, R.W. Vishny              26.7      454
      2003 Jensen 2nd        Testing the pecking order theory of capital structure            67       2      2003    M.Z. Frank, V.K. Goyal                20.4      346
                             Are dividends disappearing? Dividend concentration and                                   H. DeAngelo, L. DeAngelo,
      2004 Jensen 1st        the consolidation of earnings                                    72       1      2004    D.J. Skinner                           8.7      139
      2004 Jensen 2nd        Is the IPO pricing process efficient?                            71       1      2004    M. Lowry, G.W. Schwert                 5.3       85
                                                                                                                      A. Brav, J.R. Graham, R.
       2005 Jensen 1st       Payout policy in the 21st century                                77       1      2005    Michaely, C.R. Harvey                 28.1      421
                                                                              Table 8
                                                                 JFE best paper winners, 1997-2019
    Papers that won the Fama/DFA prize for the best paper in capital markets or the Jensen prize for the best paper in corporate finance, 1997-2019.
    Winning papers selected based on votes from subscribers or authors and referees (voting rules have changed over time). Authors, title, volume, publication year,
    the order of the paper in the issue, total citations since the paper was published, and the average number of citations per year in the Social Science Citation Index.

                                                                                                   Order in                                                         Total
            Prize                                        Title                              Vol     Issue      Year               Authors               Cites/Yr    Cites
 
                             The effect of external finance on the equilibrium
      2005 Jensen 2nd        allocation of capital                                            75       5      2005    H. Almeida, D. Wolfenzon               1.5       22
      2006 Jensen 1st        Tax shelters and corporate debt policy                           81       4      2006    J.R. Graham, A.L. Tucker               9.2      129
      2006 Jensen 2nd        Profitability, investment and average returns                    82       1      2006    E.F. Fama, K.R. French                12.3      172
      2006 Jensen 2nd        Are perks purely managerial excess?                              79       1      2006    R.G. Rajan, J. Wulf                    5.3       74
                             Does backdating explain the stock price pattern around
       2007 Jensen 1st       executive stock option grants?                                   83       1      2007    R.A. Heron, E. Lie                     9.2      120
                             Financial fraud, director reputation, and shareholder
      2007 Jensen 2nd        wealth                                                           86       2      2007    E.M. Fich, A. Shivdasani              14.2      185
                                                                                                                      M.A. Desai, A. Dyck, L.
      2007 Jensen 2nd        Theft and taxes                                                  84       1      2007    Zingales                              10.5      137
                                                                                                                      L.L. Bargeron, F.P.
                             Why do private acquirers pay so little compared to public                                Schlingemann, R.M. Stulz,
       2008 Jensen 1st       acquirers?                                                       89       1      2008    C.J. Zutter                            7.0       84
                             Managerial incentives, capital reallocation, and the
      2008 Jensen 2nd        business cycle                                                   87       8      2008    A.L. Eisfeldt, A.A. Rampini            3.4       41
                             Share issuance and cross-sectional returns: International                                R.D. McLean, J. Pontiff, A.
       2009 Jensen 1st       evidence                                                         94       1      2009    Watanabe                               5.9       65
                                                                                                                      E.H. Kim, A. Morse, L.
      2009 Jensen 2nd        Are elite universities losing their competitive edge?            93       1      2009    Zingales                               3.8       42
      2010 Jensen 1st        The marketing of seasoned equity offerings.                      97       3      2010    X. Gao, J.R. Ritter                    8.7       87
                             Seasoned equity offerings, market timing, and the                                        H. DeAngelo, L. DeAngelo,
      2010 Jensen 2nd        corporate lifecycle                                              95       1      2010    R.M. Stulz                             9.6      105
                                                                                                                      Chen Lin, Yue Ma, P.H.
       2011 Jensen 1st       Ownership structure and the cost of corporate borrowing        100        1      2011    Malatesta, Y. Xuan                    13.8      124
                             The causes and consequences of venture capital stage
      2011 Jensen 2nd        financing                                                      101        7      2011    X. Tian                                7.0       63
      2012 Jensen 1st        Securitized banking and the run on repo                        104        2      2012    G. Gorton, A. Metrick                 39.4      355
                                                                                                                      M.W. Faulkender, M.J.
                                                                                                                      Flannery, K.W. Hankins,
      2012 Jensen 2nd        Cash flows and leverage adjustments                            103       11      2012    J.M. Smith                             9.9       89
                             The effect of reference point prices on mergers and
      2012 Jensen 2nd        acquisitions                                                   106        3      2012    M. Baker, X. Pan, J. Wurgler           9.5       76
                                                                              Table 8
                                                                 JFE best paper winners, 1997-2019
    Papers that won the Fama/DFA prize for the best paper in capital markets or the Jensen prize for the best paper in corporate finance, 1997-2019.
    Winning papers selected based on votes from subscribers or authors and referees (voting rules have changed over time). Authors, title, volume, publication year,
    the order of the paper in the issue, total citations since the paper was published, and the average number of citations per year in the Social Science Citation Index.

                                                                                                   Order in                                                         Total
            Prize                                        Title                              Vol     Issue      Year               Authors               Cites/Yr    Cites
 
                                                                                                                      J.R. Graham, C.R. Harvey,
       2013 Jensen 1st       Managerial attitudes and corporate actions                     109        6      2013    M. Puri                               22.6      158
                             Do personal taxes affect capital structure: Evidence from
       2013 Jensen 1st       the 2003 tax cut                                               109       13      2013    L. Lin, M.J. Flannery                  1.0        7
                             Firm boundaries matter: Evidence from conglomerates
       2014 Jensen 1st       and R&D activity                                               111        6      2014    A. Seru                               11.8       94
                                                                                                                      A. Danis, D.A. Rettl, T.M.
      2014 Jensen 2nd        Refinancing, profitability and capital structure               114        2      2014    Whited                                 2.2       13
                             A century of capital structure: The leveraging of                                        J.R. Graham, M.T. Leary,
       2015 Jensen 1st       corporate America                                              118        7      2015    M.R. Roberts                          11.0       55
                             Lost in translation? The effect of cultural values on                                    K.R. Ahern, D. Daminelli, C.
      2015 Jensen 2nd        mergers around the world                                       117       10      2015    Fracassi                              17.6      123
                             Target revaluation after failed takeover attempts - Cash                                 U.M. Malmendier, M. Opp,
       2016 Jensen 1st       versus stock                                                   119        5      2016    F. Saidi                               4.5       18
                             The ownership and trading of debt claims in Chapter 11                                   V.P. Ivashina, B. Iverson,
      2016 Jensen 2nd        restructurings                                                 119        4      2016    D.C. Smith                             3.8       15
                                                                                                                      C. Doidge, G.A. Karolyi,
       2017 Jensen 1st       The U.S. listing gap                                           123        2      2017    R.M. Stulz                             4.3       13
                             Growth through rigidity: An explanation for the rise in
      2017 Jensen 2nd        CEO pay                                                        123        1      2017    K. Shue, R.R. Townsend                 3.0        9
                                                                                                                      A. Babkin, B. Glover, O.
      2017 Jensen 2nd        Are corporate inversions good for shareholders?                126        1      2017    Levine                                 2.0        6
                             How does hedge fund activism reshape corporate                                           A. Brav, W. Jiang, S. Ma, X.
       2018 Jensen 1st       innovation?                                                    130        2      2018    Tian                                   6.0       12
                                                                                                                      G. Buchak, G. Matvos, T.
      2018 Jensen 2nd        Fintech, regulatory arbitrage, and the rise of shadow banks    130        1      2018    Piskorski, A. Seru                     2.0        4
                             What's in a (school) name? Racial discrimination in                                      C. Dougal, P. Gao, W.J.
       2019 Jensen 1st       higher education bond markets                                  134        4      2019    Mayew, C.A. Parsons                    0.0        0
                             Are lemons sold first? Dynamic signaling in the mortgage                                 M. Adelino, K. Gerardi, B.
      2019 Jensen 2nd        market                                                         132        1      2019    Hartman-Glaser                         1.0        1
 
                                                  Table 9
                            Predictors of average citations per year, 1997-2019
    The dependent variable is the log of the average number of citations per year since publication plus 1.
    Fama/DFA 1st and 2nd are the papers that won the first and second place prizes among capital markets
    papers. Jensen 1st and 2nd are the papers that won the first and second place prizes among corporate
    finance papers. First, Second, and Third are indicator variables if the paper was first, second or third in
    the issue. JFE, Chicago, Harvard, Penn, MIT, NYU and UCLA are variables that measure the proportion
    of co-authors of the papers who are on the JFE editorial board, or are faculty member at the respective
    schools. T-statistics based on White (1980) heteroskedastic-consistent standard errors are in parentheses.
                                                           (1)               (2)                  (3)
                                                      Coefficient       Coefficient          Coefficient
           Variable                                   (t-statistic)     (t-statistic)        (t-statistic)

           Constant                                      1.504             1.417                1.363
                                                        (83.38)           (64.91)              (60.56)
           Fama/DFA 1st                                  1.139             0.917                0.858
                                                         (6.85)            (5.38)               (5.08)
           Fama/DFA 2nd                                  0.734             0.589                0.472
                                                         (5.52)            (4.39)               (3.15)
           Jensen 1st                                    0.889             0.684                0.612
                                                         (5.42)            (3.85)               (3.53)
           Jensen 2nd                                    0.557             0.375                0.230
                                                         (3.65)            (2.41)               (1.61)
           First                                                           0.307                0.157
                                                                           (5.28)               (2.66)
           Second                                                          0.281                0.203
                                                                           (5.14)               (3.80)
           Third                                                           0.164                0.131
                                                                           (3.07)               (2.47)
           JFE                                                                                  0.301
                                                                                                (4.83)
           Chicago                                                                              0.226
                                                                                                (3.27)
           Harvard                                                                              0.163
                                                                                                (3.30)
           Penn                                                                                 0.251
                                                                                                (3.73)
           MIT                                                                                  0.163
                                                                                                (2.27)
           NYU                                                                                  0.168
                                                                                                (2.94)
           UCLA                                                                                 0.165
                                                                                                (2.66)
           R-squared                                     0.044             0.062                0.098
           S.E. of regression                            0.817             0.810                0.796
           Observations                                  2,166             2,166                2,166
 
                                                  Table 10
                   Citations to JFE papers related to measures of complexity, 1974-2019
    The dependent variable is the log of the average number of citations per year since publication plus 1 for 2,858
    papers published in the JFE, 1974-2019. Length is the number of pages for each paper (adjusted after 2008 to be
    on a consistent basis as the papers before 2008). Number_authors is the number of coauthors for the paper. JEL
    codes is the number of JEL categories chosen by authors for the paper. T-statistics based on White (1980)
    heteroskedastic-consistent standard errors are in parentheses.

                                      Panel A. Summary statistics, N=2,858
                                      Log(cites+1)              Length       Number_authors         JEL codes

    Mean                                   1.500               30.616              2.220                2.294
    Standard Deviation                     0.849                9.058              0.887                1.153
    Maximum                                5.600              103.000              6.000                9.000
    Median                                 1.486               31.000              2.000                2.000
    Minimum                                0.000                1.000              1.000                0.000
    Corr with Length                       0.183
    Corr with Number_authors               0.101                 0.178
    Corr with JEL codes                    0.008                 0.238             0.111

                             Panel B. Regressions explaining citations, Log(cites+1)
                                                                 (1)                                      (2)
                                                             Coefficient                             Coefficient
    Variable                                                 (T-statistic)                           (T-statistic)

    Constant                                                    0.898                                   0.367
                                                               (13.82)                                  (2.18)
    Length                                                      0.017                                   0.019
                                                                (8.97)                                  (9.59)
    Number_authors                                              0.071                                   0.105
                                                                (3.94)                                  (6.20)
    JEL codes                                                  -0.032                                   -0.006
                                                               (-2.34)                                  (-0.44)
    Year dummy variables?                                         N                                        Y
    R-squared                                                   0.040                                   0.217
    S.E. of regression                                          0.833                                   0.758
    Observations                                                2,858                                   2,858
 
                                                                      Table 11
                           Average citations per year to JFE papers related to paper and author characteristics, 1974-2019
The dependent variable is the log of the average number of citations per year since publication plus 1. Length is the number of pages for each paper (adjusted
after 2008 to be on a consistent basis as the papers before 2008). Number_authors is the number of co-authors of the paper. JEL codes is the number of
JEL categories chosen by authors for the paper. Author_female is the proportion of the co-authors for a paper who are female. Author_referee is the
proportion of the co-authors who also serve as JFE referees. Author_JFE is the proportion of the co-authors who have been on the JFE editorial board at
any time from 1974-2019. Author_US is the proportion of the co-authors who work in the US. Author_Europe is the proportion of co-authors who work
in Europe. Author_Asia is the proportion of co-authors who work in Asia. T-statistics based on White (1980) heteroskedastic-consistent standard errors are
in parentheses.

                                      Number       JEL     Author      Author     Author     Author     Author    Author                    S.E. of
 Variable       Constant    Length                                                                                           R-squared                   Obs
                                      _authors    codes    _female     _referee    _JFE       _US      _Europe    _Asia                   regression
                                                                         1974-2019
Coefficient      0.473       0.015     0.102     -0.013     0.042       0.486    0.335       0.039      0.221      -0.130      0.121         0.798      2,858
(t-statistic)    (5.90)      (8.02)    (5.74)    (-0.94)    (0.70)     (11.92)   (6.97)      (0.60)     (1.24)     (-0.85)
                                                                         1974-1979
Coefficient      0.268       0.033     0.070     -0.134     -1.839      0.109    0.507       0.043      -0.218     1.159       0.252         0.909       120
(t-statistic)    (0.55)      (3.35)    (0.58)    (-0.96)    (-6.05)     (0.51)   (3.11)      (0.16)     (-0.46)    (0.61)
                                                                         1980-1989
Coefficient      0.346       0.027     0.057     0.048      -0.283      0.430    0.365       -0.260     1.245      -0.757      0.260         0.750       324
(t-statistic)    (1.60)      (5.47)    (0.93)    (0.60)     (-1.56)     (3.58)   (3.70)      (-1.86)    (2.13)     (-3.23)
                                                                         1990-1999
Coefficient      0.618       0.014     0.084     -0.037     -0.373      0.444      0.386     0.099      0.179      0.389       0.146         0.789       408
(t-statistic)    (2.59)      (2.42)    (1.58)    (-0.89)    (-2.57)     (4.15)     (3.01)    (0.61)     (0.38)     (0.70)
                                                                         2000-2009
Coefficient      0.794       0.011     0.120     -0.007     0.261       0.542      0.190     -0.073     -0.087     -0.173      0.115         0.767       771
(t-statistic)    (5.26)      (3.28)    (3.55)    (-0.27)    (2.53)      (7.09)     (2.09)    (-0.61)    (-0.29)    (-0.49)
                                                                         2010-2019
Coefficient      0.313       0.008     0.136     0.018      0.058       0.450      0.379     0.267      0.529      0.133       0.096         0.771      1,235
(t-statistic)    (2.34)      (2.79)    (5.39)    (0.92)     (0.66)      (7.33)     (4.08)    (2.37)     (2.35)     (0.67)
                                                    Table 12
                         Error correction models for JFE submissions, 1976-2020
    The dependent variable is the change in the log of the number of submissions to the JFE per
    year, Log(Submitt). Log(Turnt) is the log of the median turnaround time for the prior 12
    months. Log(Feet) is the log of the real submission fee for JFE submissions. Log(Rejectt) is
    the log of the rejection rate for the prior 12 months. Log(Asst_Salt) is the log of the real Assistant
    Professor salary for finance professors.            T-statistics based on Newey-West (1987)
    autocorrelation-heteroskedastic-consistent standard errors are in parentheses.
                                                              (1)               (2)              (3)
                                                         Coefficient       Coefficient      Coefficient
            Variable                                     (t-statistic)     (t-statistic)    (t-statistic)

            Constant                                        0.951            0.102             0.721
                                                            (1.19)           (0.11)            (1.12)
            Log(Submitt-1)                                  -0.219           -0.121           -0.207
                                                            (-2.21)          (-1.24)          (-2.02)
            Log(Turnt)                                      -0.052
                                                            (-0.24)
            Log(Turnt-1)                                    -0.130           -0.039           -0.089
                                                            (-0.69)          (-0.18)          (-0.53)
            Log(Feet)                                       -0.024
                                                            (-0.20)
            Log(Feet-1)                                     -0.222           -0.173           -0.235
                                                            (-2.47)          (-2.31)          (-4.27)
            Log(Rejectt)                                    1.109
                                                            (1.60)
            Log(Rejectt-1)                                  1.218            -0.098
                                                            (1.55)           (-0.15)
            Log(Rejectt)                                                                       1.074
                                                                                               (1.74)
            Log(Asst_Salt)                                  0.665
                                                            (2.12)
            Log(Asst_Salt-1)                                0.592            0.459
                                                            (3.59)           (3.99)
            Log(Asst_Salt)                                                                     0.606
                                                                                               (3.55)
            R-squared                                       0.317             0.239            0.314
            S.E. of regression                              0.094             0.094            0.089
            Observations                                      45                45               45
 
