                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 DO ENLARGED FISCAL DEFICITS CAUSE INFLATION:
                           THE HISTORICAL RECORD

                                      Michael D. Bordo
                                      Mickey D. Levy

                                     Working Paper 28195
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28195


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2020




Paper prepared for the IIMR Annual Monetary Conference "The Return of Inflation? Lessons
from History and Analysis of Covid -19 Crisis Policy Response" organized by University of
Buckingham, England, October 28 2020. For helpful comments on an earlier draft we thank:
Michael Boskin, Andy Filardo, Harold James, Owen Humpage, Eric Leeper and Hugh Rockoff.
For valuable research assistance we thank Roiana Reid and Humberto Martinez Beltran. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Michael D. Bordo and Mickey D. Levy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Enlarged Fiscal Deficits Cause Inflation: The Historical Record
Michael D. Bordo and Mickey D. Levy
NBER Working Paper No. 28195
December 2020
JEL No. E3,E62,N4

                                          ABSTRACT

In this paper we survey the historical record for over two centuries on the connection between
expansionary fiscal policy and inflation. As a backdrop, we briefly lay out several theoretical
approaches to the effects of fiscal deficits on inflation: the earlier Keynesian and monetarist
approaches; and modern approaches incorporating expectations and forward looking behavior:
unpleasant monetarist arithmetic and the fiscal theory of the price level.

We find that the relationship between fiscal deficits and inflation generally holds in wartime
when fiscally stressed governments resorted to the inflation tax. There were two peacetime
episodes in the early twentieth century when bond financed fiscal deficits that were unbacked by
future taxes seem to have greatly contributed to inflation: France in the 1920s and the recovery
from the Great Recession in the 1930s in the U.S. In the post-World War II era a detailed
examination of the Great Inflation in the 1960s and 1970s in the U.S. and the U.K. suggests that
fiscal influences on monetary policy was a key factor. Finally we contrast the experience of the
Great Financial Crisis of 2007-2008, when both expansionary fiscal and monetary policy did not
lead to rising inflation, with the recent pandemic, which may involve the risks of fiscal
dominance and future inflation.


Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Jersey Hall
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu

Mickey D. Levy
Berenberg Capital Markets LLC
1251 Avenue of the Americas, 53rd Floor
New York, NY 10020
mickey.levy@berenberg-us.com
Do Enlarged Deficits Cause Inflation? The Historical Record




      1. Introduction
The current global Covid -19 pandemic has led to massive government responses across the
world, including lockdowns of normal activities and expansive fiscal and monetary policies to
stabilize their economies and head off financial stresses. In the U.S. and UK and other advanced
nations, expansive fiscal programs raised budget deficits and pushed debt-to-GDP ratios to the
highest levels since World War II or in the preceding two centuries . See figures 1 and 2. Central
banks lowered interest rates to zero, introduced extensive lender of last resort and credit
facilities and engaged in large-scale asset purchases of government bonds. The low interest
rates and central bank purchases of government bonds lowered debt service costs and
facilitated the dramatic fiscal expansions.
In many respects, the initial response combined aspects of the policy response in several
overlapping crisis scenarios in the past: World Wars I and II, the Great Depression, and the
Global Financial Crisis (Bordo, Levin and Levy 2020). These earlier episodes of induced fiscal and
monetary expansion in the 1930s and the World Wars led to rising price levels and inflation. In
this paper we survey the historical record for over two centuries on the connection between
expansionary fiscal policy and inflation and find that fiscal deficits that are financed by
monetary expansion tend to be inflationary. However, some research finds that money finance
is not required for an inflationary outcome. 2
In section 2 we briefly lay out several theoretical approaches to the effects of fiscal deficits on
inflation: the earlier Keynesian and Quantity theoretic approaches; and modern approaches
incorporating expectations and forward looking behavior:unpleasant monetarist arithmetic and
fiscal theory of the price level. In section 3 we survey the historical wartime records,
distinguishing between earlier wars of the eighteenth century including the Napoleonic wars,
and modern wars including the World Wars, Korea and Vietnam. In section 4 we examine the
peacetime episodes in the interwar period of the twentieth century linking fiscal expansion to


2
    Earlier surveys by Schwartz (1973) and Capie (1979) cover some of the same ground.


                                                                                                      2
inflation. In section 5 we focus on the Great Inflation of the 1960s-1970s in the U.S. and the
U.K. Section 6 covers the recent experience since the 2008-2009 Great Financial Crisis in which
high deficits did not result in inflation and the experience of the pandemic, which may involve
future inflation risks. We conclude in section 7 with some policy lessons, particularly in light of
historically high deficits.


    2. Theoretical Perspectives
In the post-World War II era two theories have dominated economists approaches to the link
between fiscal deficits and inflation.
Simple Keynesian models. The prevalent view on the relationship between fiscal deficits and
inflation is based on the post-WWII Keynesian models that posited that any increase in
aggregate demand (consumption expenditures, investment expenditures, government
expenditures less tax receipts and exports less imports) will lead to an increase in nominal
income. The extent to which it leads to a rise in the price level depends on the shape of the
aggregate supply curve. The early Keynesians also argued that monetary policy would be
impotent because the economy was in a liquidity trap so that money does not matter.
Accordingly, fiscal policy is the only tool to influence the economy 3. The early Keynesians
posited an L-shaped supply curve in which shifts in aggregate demand would result in increase
in real activity until full employment is reached, when expansionary demand would be reflected
in rises in the price level. In the early Phillips curve framework, the supply curve is positively
shaped so that expansionary aggregate demand would lead to both rising prices and output
(Lipsey 1960). Thus, fiscal policy can be inflationary in Keynesian models.
Simple quantity theory of money. Changes in nominal income are generated by changes in the
money supply assuming a stable money demand function that determines the income velocity
of money. Inflation (sustained increases in the price level) requires sustained money growth
(Friedman 1956). Once increases in inflation become expected, higher nominal interest rates
reduce the demand for money such that faster money velocity amplifies the effect of money


3
 The early Keynesian models did not explicitly discuss how fiscal deficits would be financed
other than by taxes.


                                                                                                      3
supply on prices. Early monetarists also posited that fiscal policy, unless it was money financed,
as during wars when central banks were subservient to the fiscal authorities, would have no
influence on nominal income or price movements (Anderson and Jordan 1965).
Modern approaches. Forward looking behavior and inflationary expectations play a central
role in recent approaches built upon the earlier Keynesian and monetarist approaches. The
heightened importance of inflationary expectations was initiated and reinforced by the Great
Inflation of 1965-1980. Expectations of inflation are reflected in financial markets and affect
real economic activity, and are integral to the inflation process. Adjustments of inflation
expectations operate as constraints on the efficacy of countercyclical fiscal policies and
excessively easy monetary policy.
Fiscal dominance of monetary policy. Fiscal dominance posits that persistent deficits and
mounting debt exert pressures on the central bank to follow inflationary monetary policy.
Sargent and Wallace (1980) "Some Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic" extended the
monetarist approach in a dynamic setting with rational expectations and perfect foresight. In
that environment fiscal deficits, even if they are financed by the issuance of government bonds,
ultimately will be accommodated by inflationary increases in high powered money to satisfy the
governments' long-run consolidated balance sheet.
The Fiscal Theory of the Price Level (FTPL). Sims (2011), Leeper (1991), Cochrane (2019) argue
that if fiscal deficits are persistent and taxes are not raised or expenditures cut in the future
sufficiently to prevent an explosion of national debt, this will lead to a state of fiscal dominance.
Economic agents will perceive the increase in nominal government debt to be an increase in
real wealth. The wealth effect will lead to increased consumption expenditure and to rising
prices that will reduce the real value of the national debt and restore fiscal equilibrium.
According to Jacobson Leeper and Preston (2019) when fiscal policy is active (dominant),
increased government spending induces both the traditional Keynesian multiplier and a more
powerful debt multiplier.
In both modern approaches, fiscal deficits are expansionary. In the Sargent and Wallace
framework, fiscal deficits are inflationary because they lead to monetary expansion in the




                                                                                                    4
quantity theory tradition. In the FTPL, fiscal deficits are inflationary by themselves in the
tradition of the Keynesian approach.


     3. Evidence from History: Wars
In this section, we review some salient episodes in modern economic history of fiscal deficits
associated with inflation in wartime in the eighteenth, nineteenth and twentieth centuries. 4
Three salient episodes stand out in the eighteenth century: the Swedish experience with fiat
money in the Seven Years war, the Continentals in the American Revolution and the Assignats
in the French Revolution.


    3.1. Sweden: The Seven Years War
The Riksbank, the earliest central bank, was founded in 1668. It was chartered by and owned by
the Swedish parliament, the Riksdag (Fregert 2018). Its mandate was to be a depository for the
government's revenues, to provide a safe means of payment and to maintain convertibility of
its notes into specie. It was originally supposed to be independent of the government. After
1720, the Riksbank shifted from being independent of the government to being controlled by it
and becoming a tool for fiscal policy.
In 1745, the expansionist, soft money Hat Party, which was mercantilist and hawkish, took
control of the government from the more conservative Cap Party that favored hard money)
(Eagly 1969). The Riksbank began expanding its notes to finance the war against Russia leading
to a suspension of convertibility. Money financed fiscal deficits burgeoned later in the Seven
Years War with a tripling of the note issue (Fregert and Jonung 1996). This led to significant
inflation and depreciation of the currency by a half of its 1745 value. A return to power of the
Caps in 1765 set in play deflationary policies to restore price stability and resume convertibility
in 1777. This episode is considered the earliest use of fiat money fiscal finance.


     3.2. The American Revolutionary War 1775-1781


4
 There is a considerable body of research on debasement and seigniorage in the middle ages
and the early modern period not covered here.


                                                                                                   5
The War of the American Revolution was an early prominent example of the use of inflationary
finance to pay for the war. In wartime, governments need to finance unusual expenditure by
reallocating resources from peacetime to wartime uses. This requires the use of taxation,
borrowing or the issue of fiat money, sometimes called seigniorage, which is the tax on real
cash balances. Relying on taxes as a source of financing wars in the eighteenth century was
difficult and limited because tax revenues were inelastic. Taxes were derived mainly from
indirect taxes, which were often evaded, while direct taxes were not popular and the
governments were not organized to administer them. Moreover, sufficiently large increases in
taxation to finance the war efforts could reduce labor effort during a time when it is needed
most.
In its many wars of the eighteenth century, the British government, in addition to raising taxes,
began using a policy of tax smoothing, which involved financing wars by the issue of
government debt that would be repaid after the war by continuing war time taxation rates
(Barro 1979,1987). This tax smoothing scheme for financing war may have been an important
reason for Great Britain's martial success. A key determinant of Great Britain's ability to issue so
much debt was the efficiency and credibility of its fiscal system (Dickson 1967, Brewer 1989). In
the more costly wars of the subsequent two centuries, debt finance was also supplemented by
the issue of paper money, following the suspension of the specie standard. 5
The American revolutionary government was unable to adopt the British model. The Congress
did not have the power to levy taxes directly and could not raise adequate tax revenue. The
states had the power to tax, but they were unwilling to raise adequate tax revenue in part
because the revolution was fought over the issue of taxation. Moreover, the Congress and the
states found it very difficult to borrow because those colonists who had wealth were unwilling
to lend because of the risk that the British would repudiate the debt were they to win. Foreign
loans were not forthcoming for the same reason until 1780, when France and Spain joined the
war on the Americans side. Thus, the revolutionary government had to resort to the issue of



5
 The theory of optimal taxation (Mankiw 1987) posited that an optimal taxation strategy using
a combination of taxes, debt and seigniorage would minimize the marginal excess burden of the
three instruments. This makes the case for some inflationary finance in major wars.


                                                                                                  6
paper money--bills of credit. Citizens accepted this practice because it had been widely used by
many of the colonies in the preceding century.
The evidence suggests that over three quarters of government expenditure was financed by fiat
money. The Congress issued bills of credit called continentals. Initially the Congress pledged
that the bills would be retired by state taxes on the assumption that the war would be brief.
This assumption did not hold up, and the bills were issued without the pretext of convertibility.
The states also issued bills and notes.
The issue of paper money to finance the war has been viewed as a tax on real cash balances
(Friedman 1969). Just like any tax, a government with monopoly power can calculate the
revenue-maximizing rate of taxation. Modern studies have estimated the revenue-maximizing
rate of inflation in emerging countries in the late twentieth century that had a history of high
inflation in the twentieth century as between 100-350% per year (Easterly, Mauro and Schmidt-
Hebbel 1995. Rockoff (2016) calculates that the average rate of inflation during the
Revolutionary war was about 22% per year, which suggests that the American revolutionary
government was very conservative in its use of inflationary finance.


   3.3. The Assignats in the French Revolution
In the eighteenth century, France was unable to follow the British example of tax smoothing
(Bordo and White 1991). As White (1989, 1995) demonstrates, France's tax collection was both
inefficient and corrupt. In 1759, in the midst of the Seven Years War, the Crown was forced to
suspend repayment of the principal on a variety of short-term debts. Later, the continuing fiscal
crisis after the war eventually led to a partial bankruptcy in 1770. The government attempted
to restore fiscal balance until the American War of Independence led to large deficits.
Subsequent reforms were unsuccessful (White 1995). By 1787, the Parliament realized that the
Crown would not be able to balance its budget. According to White (1995) the fiscal crisis
precipitated the French Revolution when the Parliament refused to sanction new taxes or
loans.
After the end of the monarchy, the National Assembly chose to seize the lands of the Church
and sell them through auction and use the proceeds to cover the deficit and redeem the



                                                                                                   7
unfunded debt. This led to the creation of the assignats, notes backed by the value of the
Church properties. As the Revolution continued, attempts to redeem the assignats ceased and
they were increasingly used to cover the fiscal deficits. Once war broke out in 1792, the
government fully covered the deficits with assignats. The issue of assignats led to increasing
inflation and by 1795 a hyperinflation. The assignats were similar to other schemes in the
eighteenth century to issue note based on the nominal value of land. Rhode Island had a similar
experience. It increased note issuance, which led to inflation that increased the nominal value
of the land. This led to further money issue, eventually leading to hyperinflation.


Modern Wars
Below we discuss the financing of four major wars in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries in
the UK and the US. In all cases, the majority of wartime expenditures was financed by
borrowing and running fiscal deficits. The fiscal deficits were also accommodated to a differing
degree by expansionary monetary policy, leading to inflation and the inflation tax. There were
numerous minor wars that were also funded by taxation that did not involve debt issue or
seigniorage. A major modern exception was the Korean war which the U.S., which was primarily
financed by raising taxes (See Ohanian 1997).


   3.4. The Napoleonic Wars: Great Britain
The war against France was initially financed in the traditional eighteenth-century style of tax
smoothing. According to O' Brien (1967), 90% of wartime expenditure between 1793 and 1798
were covered by borrowing. The massive scale of expenditures required far greater
expenditures, so large deficits persisted for a longer than previous wars, which increased
pressures on government finance (see figure 3).
Britain fought the wars of the eighteenth century on the specie standard but the circumstances
of the late 1790s forced a suspension of payments in February 1797. Pressure on the Bank of
England's (BoE's) gold reserves began with a financial crisis at the outbreak of war in 1793. As
the war continued the BoE had increasing difficulty in financing the government's war demand
(short-term bills) amid demands from commerce and maintaining convertibility. To prevent the



                                                                                                   8
perceived collapse of the BoE in the face of both a massive external drain and a run on the
country banks occasioned by fears of a French invasion, the government finally allowed the
bank to suspend specie payments on February 26, 1797.
After the Bank suspended specie payments, the government was again able to sell much of its
short-term debt to the BoE. Historians generally viewed accommodation of both government
and private borrowing as the way in which the bank contributed to war finance (Fetter1965,
Schumpter1938, Silberling 1923 and Viner 1937). Both the BoE's note issue (figure 4) and the
price level (figure 5) rose considerably during the period.
At the time, there was heated debate between the Bullionists and anti-Bullionists over whether
the inflation was caused by monetary or real forces, but the availability of better data supports
the former view (Bordo and Schwartz 1980,1981). The fact that private borrowers could
discount commercial and government paper freely at the five per cent usury ceiling when the
nominal interest rate was surely higher, reflecting inflation rate up to 10% annually, suggests
that the indirect mechanism originally pointed out by Thornton (1802) was important. 6
The British experience in the first modern world war with inflationary finance set the stage for
war finance in later wars in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. However, its contribution
was modest accounting for less than 10% of the fiscal deficit (Bordo and White 1991 Table 3).


    3.5. The US Civil War 1861-1865
Unlike the American Revolutionary War, the Federal (Union) Government had access to capital
markets and financed most of its Civil War expenditures by borrowing (62%), then taxes (21%)
and lastly seigniorage (13%) (Friedman and Schwartz 1963). The ratio of debt-to-GDP increased
from negligible to 35%, far less than during the Revolutionary War (Hall and Sargent 2020).
Within a year after hostilities began, the Federal Government found it increasingly difficult to
obtain favorable terms for its bonds and following the suspension of specie payments in
December 1861 began in February 1862 the issue of fiat money, greenbacks that were non-


6
 More recently Antipa and Chamley (2017) have challenged the Bullionist/monetarist
explanation arguing that according to the fiscal theory of the price level it was announcements
of unbacked (by future taxes) fiscal policy not the Bank of England's note issue that drove
movements in the price level.


                                                                                                   9
interest-bearing notes denominated in dollars and declared to be legal tender. These notes
were issued on the presumption that they would be convertible into specie but the date and
provisions for convertibility were not clearly stated. The total amount of greenbacks created
was $450 million. The greenbacks were supplemented by national bank notes issued by the
newly created (1863) national banking system. The average inflation rate in the Union was 25%
per year. Once hostilities ceased, efforts began to reverse the debt build up through running
primary budget surpluses to retire the greenbacks. However, it took until 1879 to restore price
stability and reduce most of the accumulated debt. 7


    3.6. World War I 1914-1918
The unprecedented scale and duration of World War I led all of the belligerents to engage in
massive fiscal expansion. The UK's debt-to-GDP ratio peaked at 140%, France close to 200% and
the US, which joined the war 3 years later, 35%, similar to the Civil War. The U.S.'s bond finance
accounted for the lion's share of the financing, followed by taxes and then seigniorage, with a
5% share (Friedman and Schwartz 1963). For all nations, the central bank acted as an engine of
inflation by following low interest pegs to aid the fiscal authorities. The Federal Reserve
discounted member bank bills, secured by government obligations at a fixed discount rate
below the market rate of interest. This policy generated a 10% per year growth in the M2
money supply and 12% inflation. In the UK, inflation ran at 25% per year. After the war the US,
UK and many other countries aimed to restore the gold standard by monetary contraction and
fiscal retrenchment according to the tax smoothing framework (Ahamed 1986, Bordo and
Bayoumi 2000). This led to a serious recession in 1920-21. Countries success in returning to a
gold standard depended on the extent of their monetary and fiscal expansion during the war
and the underlying political economy (Eichengreen 1992, Bordo and Hautcoeur 2007)


    3.7. World War II 1939-1945


7
  In the Confederacy (the Southern states), with much more limited access to the capital
markets and a smaller tax base, 60% of the war was financed by the issue of paper money. This
led to a hyperinflation. Confederate money and debt were declared worthless after the union
victory in April 1865 (Lerner 1956).


                                                                                                 10
World War II was financed in a similar manner. In the U.S, government spending increased to
32% of GDP, financed by taxes (42%), bond issuance (34%) and the inflation tax (24%)
(Friedman and Schwartz, 1963). The ratio of gross debt to GDP rose to 120%. The patterns were
similar in the UK.
During the war, the U.S.'s fiscal spending was accommodated by the Federal Reserve, which
gave up its independence to the Treasury, implementing a low interest rate peg (3/8% on short-
term Treasuries and 2 1/ 2% on long-term Treasuries) to minimize the costs of debt issuance
(Humpage 2016). The inflationary consequences of this policy were somewhat mitigated by
wage and price controls. Reflecting these controls, WPI inflation was 9% per year 1939-1945
and 4.5% per year during 1941-1945.
At the end of the war, policy makers feared a repeat of the deflation and recession that
followed World War I, reflecting tight monetary policies to maintain adherence to the gold
standard. It was widely agreed that it was the government's role to manage aggregate demand
(Stein 1994). They ignored the pent -up consumer spending demand and surge in business
investment that began once hostilities ceased and rationing ended. Consequently, the
accommodative low interest peg policy was continued, which fueled rapid inflation once price
controls were removed (WPI inflation averaged 11.5% per annum 1945-1948). In comparison to
the preceding big wars, the post-World War II era was not characterized by the deflation that
led to a return to gold convertibility, nor did the advanced countries shift to tight fiscal policies
as under the tax smoothing framework. The big debt build ups were gradually reduced by a
combination of inflation, rapid growth and financial repression (Grossman 1990, Aizenman and
Marion 2010, Reinhart and Srbancia 2015)


   4. Peacetime Episodes of Fiscal Expansion and High inflation


In this section we consider several examples where expansionary fiscal policy was associated
with inflation in peace time: the high inflation in France in the 1920s; the recovery from the
Great Contraction in the US in the 1930s; the Great Inflation in the US 1965-1979 and the Great
Inflation in the UK 1965 to 1980.



                                                                                                   11
   4.1. France in the 1920s
Most of the defeated powers after World War I faced hyperinflations that collapsed their
economies, tax bases and fiscal systems and generated extreme political dysfunction
(Eichengreen1992). France stood out as a major victor from the war, but experienced high
inflation associated with fiscal instability. France's fiscal experience in the 1920s is a good
example of fiscal dominance that has resonance for the recent Fiscal Theory of the Price Level
(Leeper and Walker 2011).
A contrast between Great Britain, which followed a policy of active monetary policy and passive
fiscal policy, helps make the case (Bordo and Hautcoeur 2007).
Both countries emerged from World War I with more than a doubled price level (figure 6), a
high ratio of debt-to-GDP (figure 7), large fiscal deficits (figure 8) and a devalued exchange rate
(figure 9). France was in worse shape than Britain in all dimensions but not by much. The key
difference between the two countries was their fiscal and monetary stances after the war.
France had a higher debt ratio, more short-term debt and a big monetary overhang. France had
extensive destruction of its physical capital stock but also a faster growth rate than Britain.
The UK was able to manage a successful stabilization and resumption to the gold standard at
the original parity beginning in 1919 and culminating in April 1925. France delayed policy
stabilization, going back to gold in December 1926 with an 80% depreciation in the franc. More
importantly, France had 6 years of rapidly rising prices. This was consistent with the FTPL model
of Leeper and Walker (2011), Cochrane (2019), as the rise in the price level reduced the real
value of the national debt. Fiscal balance was retired in 1926 by a political compromise
between the left and the right that involved rising taxes and reducing government expenditure.
France's fiscal problems in the 1920s are well known (Eichengreen 1992). First, like Britain,
France financed World War I with a combination of taxes, debt and seigniorage, but it raised
taxes by less and relied more on debt financing (see figures 7 and 8). In both France and the UK,
the central banks absorbed Treasury bills and pegged short-term interest rates.
Second, France did not have the same political commitment to stabilization as the British, for
three reasons: a) reparations ­the belief that German reparations would pay for reconstruction;



                                                                                                  12
b) a political struggle between the left and the right over who would cover the fiscal deficit
once it became apparent that the Germans would not pay (the left wanted to impose a capital
levy and the right wanted to raise excise and other taxes); and c) the French had monetized
more of their short-term debt than did the British and consequently had a larger monetary
overhang, requiring more deflation to get back to the pre-war parity. Moreover, the
government had to repay its short-term debt to the Banque de France, which in turn would
raise the deficit and the debt.
The political tug of war continued for seven years with several changes of government and
many finance ministers. Instead of raising taxes and cutting expenditures sufficiently to balance
the budget, the government kept issuing short-term bills that were difficult to sell and roll over,
and consequently were absorbed by the (passive) Banque de France. This led to inflation and a
depreciating exchange rate.
The political impasse was finally broken in July 1926 when a revolt by left-wing deputies in
Parliament led to an invitation to Raymond Poincare (center right) to take over the government
and to rule by decree. He raised taxes, cut expenditures and was able to borrow dollars from JP
Morgan and Lazards and use the funds to conduct a bear squeeze on speculators selling the
franc short. This stabilized the franc, which was then pegged to gold at a greatly depreciated
rate. 8


    4.2. The Recovery from the Great Contraction in the US 1933-1936
Friedman and Schwartz (1963) and Meltzer (2005) attribute the Great Contraction in the U.S.
from 1929-1933 when output and prices each fell by a third to a collapse of the money supply
brought upon by a policy failure of the Federal Reserve. The contraction ended in March 1933.
Friedman and Schwartz attribute the subsequent recovery to the bank holiday that ended the
fourth banking panic, as well as President Franklin Delano Roosevelt's decision to leave the gold


8
 Bordo and Hautcoeur (2007) simulate a model of the French economy in the 1920s and show
that it was impossible for France to engineer a British style stabilization and resumption. This is
because following the British route of consolidating debt and deflation would have increased
French debt unsustainable levels. This suggests that France had to have a huge increase in the
price level and a major devaluation to achieve fiscal equilibrium.


                                                                                                 13
standard and devaluing the US dollar by close to 40%. They argued that recovery was fueled by
an increase in the monetary gold stock, reflecting FDR's gold purchase policy following the
advice of George Warren, and the profits from the currency devaluation that greatly expanded
the monetary gold stock and gold inflows from Europe, which accompanied capital flight from a
growing political uncertainty. This view was empirically supported by Romer (1992).
Recently the Friedman and Schwartz position has been challenged by Eggertson (2008) who
posited that it was a fiscal/monetary regime change brought about by FDR`s abandoning the
gold standard that led to a rise in inflationary expectations. 9
Jacobson, Leeper and Preston (2019) argue that the reflation can be explained by unbacked
fiscal expansion after the US left the gold standard. They argue based on the FTPL that
adherence to the gold standard meant that any fiscal expansion had to be fully backed by
future taxes. Once the gold standard constraint was removed, the Treasury could run unbacked
fiscal deficits. Then according to the FTPL this would lead to a rise in nominal debt which in turn
would lead to an increase in household expenditure and by a wealth effect would raise the
price level. Consistent with Meltzer (2005), they emphasize that the Fed was not following
active monetary policy. Hence, similar to the French case in the 1920s, inflation could be
attributed to an active fiscal and passive money regime.
The evidence is based on a large increase in emergency expenditure measures (New Deal
programs including the WPA, AAA and CCC) that were not ( perceived by the public to be)
backed by future taxes. This allowed gross nominal debt to rise by 40% in 7 years. The increase
in nominal debt raised wealth and nominal aggregate demand. This evidence combined with
the results from vector auto regression analysis (VARS) lead them to conclude that fiscal
expansion explained the 1930s reflation.


    5. The Great Inflation 1965 to 1982




9
 Also see Jalil and Rua (2017), who also attribute the recovery to a change in inflationary
expectations.


                                                                                                14
We focus on two recent important episodes of peacetime inflation associated with fiscal
expansion in the U.S. and the U.K.


     5.1 The Great inflation in the U.S. 1965-1979
Following the Federal Reserve ­Treasury Accord of February 1951 that released the Fed's policy
making from the Treasury's fiscal needs, the Fed was led by Chairman William McChesney
Martin, a fiscal conservative, consistent with the conservative fiscal policies of the Eisenhower
Administration (Meltzer 2010, Stein 1994).
The underlying ideology of macroeconomic policy changed from classical orthodoxy to
Keynesianism in the 1960s, as the Kennedy and Johnson administrations placed the highest
priority on increasing US growth and reducing unemployment using aggregate demand
management policies and relying on the Phillips Curve as their guideline.
Council of Economic Advisors Chairman Walter Heller and then Arthur Okun perceived that the
welfare costs of inflation were lower than the costs of unemployment. The Keynesians also
believed that fiscal policy was a more potent tool of demand management than monetary
policy, and both monetary policy and fiscal policies should be used to fine-tune the business
cycle (Stein 1994).
The confluence of activist fiscal policies and the persistence of deficits accommodated by
monetary ease dominated the inflationary environment of 1965-1980. The story was similar in
the UK. In addition, both in the US and UK, policymakers believed that inflation was caused by
cost-push factors rather than easy money and favored incomes policies--wage and price
controls to combat inflation.
The 1964 Kennedy tax cut increased the fiscal deficit (See figure 10), and the Fed began
accommodating fiscal policy through its even keel operations (Meltzer 2010, Humpage 2015) 10.
Martin attached considerable importance to cooperating with the administration and his


10
   "Even keel" refers to the Fed's policy of holding interest rates steady during Treasury funding
operations. Beginning in the 1960s the Fed increasingly held rates below what its policy
instincts suggested as the Treasury kept increasing its funding operations. Humpage and
Meltzer's calculations suggest that even keel may have explained up to half of the Fed's
monetary expansion.


                                                                                                15
concept of central bank independence was "independent within the government". As a
consequence, money growth began increasing along with fiscal deficits (see figure 11).
Inflation had been modest through 1965 and then accelerated with the buildup in government
expenditures for the Vietnam War and President Lyndon Baines Johnson's Great Society
programs (figure 12) and monetary accommodation. In 1966-1967, the Fed's monetary
tightening led to the Credit Crunch and mini-recession when rising rates surpassed the
regulation Q ceiling rate on time deposits and led to a decline in mortgage finance. In response,
Congress and particularly LBJ placed extreme pressure on the Fed to maintain monetary ease,
and the Fed refrained from raising rates as deficit spending on the Vietnam War and domestic
programs boosted aggregate demand. LBJ's verbal attack on Martin on a visit to his Texas
ranch following the FOMC's decision to raise the discount rate by 50 basis points in late 1965
was identified by Meltzer and others as an experience that significantly weakened Martin's
anti-inflation resolve (Meltzer 2010). Inflation increased and so did inflationary expectations
and bond yields. The Fed did not begin serious tightening monetary policy until after LBJ
announced that he would not seek re-election for President in March 1968. By then, inflation
had risen to 4% from its 1.25% average during 1960-1965.
Meltzer (2010 chapter 4) summarized Fed policy during this early stage of the Great Inflation as
prioritizing unemployment over inflation, reflecting both ideology--the adoption of Keynesian
doctrine--and political pressures to avoid rising unemployment. The tug and pull between the
ideologies led to alternating periods of expansionary monetary policy (and fiscal policy)
followed by tightening and then back again. The monetary expansion would generate lower
unemployment and higher inflation with a lag, followed by Fed tightening aimed at reducing
inflation. The subsequent rise in unemployment led to political pressure that would encourage
the Fed to abandon its tightening. Meltzer believed these actions convinced the public that the
Fed did not attach high priority to inflation, which became more and more persistent as
inflationary expectations became embedded in the public conscience. 11 The persistence of
inflationary expectations and the failure of the Fed to address it became a critical theme of the
1970s.


11
     For further explanations of the Great Inflation see Bordo and Orphanides 2013.


                                                                                                  16
Richard Nixon campaigned for President on a fiscally conservative platform of rolling back the
expansionary aggregate demand policies and the liberal agenda of the preceding Democratic
administrations. Although Nixon was influenced by the views of Milton Friedman and posited a
greater role for free markets, monetary gradualism to reduce inflation, and full employment
balanced budgets, his real focus was foreign policy and not economics, and he did not follow his
platform on either fiscal or monetary policy. Nixon appointed Arthur Burns, who had been a
close advisor since 1960 and a student and friend of Milton Friedman, as Chairman of the Fed.
Burns was viewed as an advocate of sound money but not monetary rules (Meltzer 2010, Wells
1994). In fact, his views on inflation were eclectic, and tilted toward incomes policies--wage
and price controls--as a way to combat inflation.
When Burns became Fed Chair in February 1970, inflation was high and the economy was in
recession generated by tight monetary policy and the 1968 "Vietnam War tax surcharge".
Worried about budget deficits, the Nixon Administration did not rollback the Johnson
surcharge, adding to the recession and rising unemployment in 1970. Although inflation
remained above 6%, Burns was reticent to tighten monetary policy and instead began formally
advocating wage and price controls, arguing that the key determinant of inflation was cost-push
pressure by big labor unions and large firms with considerable market power. 12
Nixon pressured the Fed to lower interest rates aggressively (from 8% to 4.9% by year-end
1970). Inflation receded to 3.5% by year-end, but inflationary expectations did not fall
commensurately. The U.S. was facing mounting international financial tensions stemming from
an erosion of credibility of its monetary system and inflation that was contributing to pressures
on U.S. gold reserves. In August 1971, with full support of Burns, Nixon cancelled the direct
international convertibility of the US dollar into gold, effectively abandoning the Bretton Woods
system, and imposed wage and price controls (Bordo 2018).
Burns purposely pursued easy monetary policy during Nixon's 1972 Presidential election
campaign, upholding his promise to Nixon on the day that he was installed as Chairman "You




12
  See Shultz (2018) who unearthed a letter from Burns to Nixon dated June 22 1971 when he
explicitly advocated wage price controls.


                                                                                                 17
see to it: no recession" (Wells 1994 page 42). 13 During 1972, as the economy recovered strongly
from recession, the Fed was purposely slow to raise rates, so money supply accelerated sharply.
This spurred aggregate demand in 1973 while the wage and price controls constrained
measured inflation, generating strong real growth. The wage and price controls generated
widespread economic distortions, undercutting productivity and the government's credibility.
(Stein 1994).
The Arab oil embargo and surge in oil prices beginning in November 1973 generated a deep
recession and higher inflation, and greatly exacerbated the distortions imposed by the wage
and price controls. The Fed lowered rates, accommodating the negative oil price shock. When
the price controls were actually lifted in April 1974, inflation soared over 11% by year-end. This
depressed real incomes, exacerbating and extending the recession through early 1975 and
lifting the unemployment rate above 10%.
In response to concerns about high unemployment and poor economic performance, the Fed
lowered rates aggressively from 12% in Fall 1974 to 5.2% at year-end 1975 and 4.7% in early
1977. The Fed's monetary base--bank reserves plus currency--and the broader monetary
aggregates accelerated throughout the decade.
Despite the modest fiscal policy responses to the deep 1973-1975, persistent deficits emerged
in the 1970s, a new peacetime characteristic of government finances. Longer-run projections of
significant increases of spending on entitlement programs and persistent budget deficits
received significant attention.


The second half of the 1970s involved high and rising inflation that stemmed from easy
monetary policy by the Burns-led Fed, and various non-monetary strategies by the Carter
Administration to corral inflation that were based on the belief that inflation derived from cost-
push pressures (Greenspan, Kahn, Kosters and Daly 1978). Inflationary expectations became




13
  Nixon also said about Burns, "I respect his independence. However, I hope that
independently he will conclude that my views are the ones that should be followed' (Wells
1994 page 42)


                                                                                                18
embedded in financial and economic behavior. This culminated in a loss of global confidence in
the US dollar and a currency crisis in late 1978.
As inflation rose, the Fed and the Carter Administration did not want to tighten monetary policy
because the costs of reducing inflation were perceived to be too high (Burns 1978). Congress
pushed for lower unemployment and enacted the Full Employment Act of 1978 that amended
the Employment Act of 1946, mandating the goals of 4% unemployment with inflation not over
4%. It also instructed the government to take reasonable means to balance the budget and
achieve a balance in trade. The Congressional debate was driven largely by the frameworks
provided by activist Keynesianism and the Phillips Curve, without regard to the monetary
sources of inflation. This legislation had little immediate impact on monetary or fiscal policies
during the remainder of the 1970s.
In the four years 1976-1979, nominal GDP rose at an average annual rate of 11.75%. Real
economic growth held up through 1978, as inflationary expectations were slow to rise to reflect
the situation, but the higher inflation eroded the underlying fundamentals. It reduced real
purchasing power and raised real taxes by pushing taxpayers into progressively higher tax
brackets, reducing real disposable incomes. The higher inflation also increased the cost of
capital and harmed businesses. (Feldstein 1983).
The rising inflation and the unwillingness of the Fed to tighten monetary policy and reduce
inflation, along with the persistence of budget deficits, eroded confidence and the
government's credibility. In February 1978, President Carter announced that he would not
reappoint Burns as Fed Chairman and subsequently replaced him with G. William Miller, who
maintained an accommodative monetary policy until Volcker became Chair in August 1979.
The Carter Administration favored wage and price controls to control inflation, and in October
1978, imposed a wage-price guidelines program that assigned voluntary limits of 7% increase
on wages and 5.75% increases on prices and an array of government sanctions. These sanctions
were monitored by the Council on Wage and Price Stability, which had been established by the
Nixon Administration to manage the failed wage and price controls of 1971.
Carter's wage-price guideline programs only reinforced the government's lack of a credible anti-
inflation policy and accentuated the falling US dollar. Facing crisis, the Carter administration



                                                                                                    19
proffered a massive scheme to offset the dollar collapse that would involve a sharp increase in
interest rates, coordinated intervention to prop up the dollar supported by an international
pool of reserves including funds from West Germany, Switzerland and Japan, and the pledge to
issue foreign currency-denominated US government debt, so-called Carter bonds (Bordo,
Humpage and Schwartz 2015).
This rescue package stabilized the US dollar and financial markets. However, economic
performance was deteriorating and a second oil price shock that resulted from a sharp decline
in Iranian oil production doubled oil prices and slowed real GDP to fractional growth in 1979.
Stagflation--the combination of high inflation and poor real economic performance with rising
unemployment--had enveloped the economy. The high inflation and rising unemployment
were inconsistent with a downward-sloping Phillips Curve. Policymakers were faced with poor
economic performance and policies that required remedy.


Volcker's aggressive disinflation monetary policy. The biggest concern facing policymakers was
that reducing inflation would harm the economy and raise unemployment. Many, including
Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisors under President Ford,
advocated a more gradual monetary tightening while Paul Volcker argued that aggressive
tightening was required to reduce inflationary expectations. He made clear those intentions to
President Carter who nominated him to become Fed Chairman and in his confirmation hearings
before the Senate (Volcker 1979). In October 1979, when inflation was nearly 12%, the Volcker-
led Fed began its aggressive anti-inflation monetary tightening.


Through April 1980, the Fed raised interest rates from 11.5% to 17.6% and slowed money
growth. Concerned with inflation and excessive use of credit, President Carter tried to restore
discipline through credit controls on consumers and technical tax policy adjustments that would
raise government tax receipts. Carter's actions backfired, as many consumers believed that he
had put a ban on credit card purchases, which generated a deep recession in the second
quarter of 1980.




                                                                                                 20
The Fed backed away from its monetary tightening, lowering interest rates to 9% in July 1980.
When economic growth resumed, the Fed more than doubled rates to 19% by early 1981,
generating a marked deceleration in money growth. The Fed maintained its restrictive
monetary policy through June 1982.
President Reagan entered office in January 1981, and the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981
dramatically lowered taxes while government spending was increased, nearly exclusively for
defense. Recession persisted through year-end 1982, in response to the restrictive monetary
policy and adjustment to lower inflation. Inflation receded below 9% by December 1981 and to
3.8% by December 1982. Inflationary expectations adjusted to the new monetary regime while
the fiscal policies set the stage for stronger growth. The US dollar strengthened dramatically.
Even as the real economy rebounded, with robust real GDP growth averaging 6% in 1983-1984,
inflation remained below 4%, its lowest sustained rate since 1967.
Volcker's strategy hinged critically on the Fed's credibility to impose a persistent monetary
policy that would achieve low inflation (Bordo, Erceg and Levin 2017). Critics and public outcries
were loud, but the Volcker-led Fed persisted. The Fed received full support from President
Reagan.
Volcker's successful disinflationary monetary policy ushered in the Great Moderation, a
sustained period of moderate inflation, economic expansion and prosperity. The lessons
learned from Volcker's policies are historic.




   5.2 Monetary and Fiscal Policy Interactions in the Great Inflation in the UK 1965 to 1980


The inflation performance of the UK was considerably worse than the G10 average. Inflation
peaked in 1980 at 25% versus the US at 13.5%. Bordo, Bush and Thomas (2020) argue that the
UK experience can best be characterized as one of fiscal dominance under which fiscal deficits
by the Treasury (referred to as the Public Sector Borrowing Requirement, PSBR) was
accommodated by the Bank of England (which at the time was not independent from the
Treasury).



                                                                                                  21
Two deep fundamentals that underlay the UK experience were: first adherence to the pegged
(adjustable) exchange rates (and the capital controls) of the Bretton Woods System (Bordo
1993). Under the BWS once the UK declared current account convertibility in December 1958,
financial (monetary and fiscal) policy was constrained by the pegged exchange rate and the
state of the balance of payments. The expansionary fiscal/monetary policy leading to a rise in
nominal income (referred to as Go policy) would lead to a balance of payments (current
account) deficit reflecting an increased demand for imports, a decline in international reserves
and often a speculative attack on the pound (a currency crisis). The crisis would then be
resolved by a rescue by the IMF, G10 leading to a policy of contractionary fiscal/monetary
policy (Stop policy). This would continue until nominal income had contracted sufficiently to
remove the deficit and replenish international reserves (see figure 13).
A second fundamental was that the real growth of the UK economy and the growth of
productivity were lower than its trading partners. These factors contributed to overvalued
nominal and real exchange rates, which in the presence of the peg led speculative attacks and
currency crises. These forces led to contractionary effects on the British economy and created
reasons for fiscal and monetary policies to offset them.
A final important factor was the role of the trade unions who strongly resisted downward wage
movements and made it difficult for the monetary authorities to follow tight financial policies.
This helped create a ratchet in the inflation rate.




   5.3. Active Fiscal and Passive Monetary Policy in the 1960s
The UK Treasury generally followed expansionary policies in this period. It ran persistent and
rising deficits that were mostly accommodated by expansionary Bank of England policies. There
were a number of justifications for these policies. The first was the belief in the efficacy of
Keynesian aggregate demand management policies to offset business cycle fluctuations and to
maintain full employment. Keynesian thinking dominated the Treasury, the Bank and the
government as a whole. Related to this was the Phillips curve tradeoff that a reduction in the
unemployment rate could be accomplished at the expense of higher inflation. Second, it was



                                                                                                  22
believed that expansionary aggregate demand policies would not only reduce the output gap
but would also raise the long-run growth rate and even reduce the inflation rate. This view
associated with the work of Nicholas Kaldor (1966) posited that expansionary fiscal policy
would raise investment and in turn the growth of technical change and the capital stock. The
rise in growth in turn associated with increasing returns to scale in industry would both raise
real wages and reduce inflation. Empirical estimates and forecasts of the British growth rate in
the 60s by the National Institute of Economic and Social Research (NIESR) justified this "Going
for Growth Strategy" Estimates of potential annual growth rates of 6%, were way above the
historical trend growth rate of 2.5 %. A final important rationale for expansionary fiscal policy
was to improve the living standards of labor. The idea had several strands that were accepted
by both the Conservatives and Labour parties. First was the power of the trade unions who
continually pushed for higher wages and for redistribution from capital to labor. Second was
the fear of social unrest should living standards decline, as was perceived to have been the case
in the interwar period. This there was a postwar consensus for full employment and for
sustained real growth.
A serious problem with these views is that they conflated aggregate demand with aggregate
supply. British policy makers continued to believe that aggregate demand policy could stimulate
the economy and also increase the underlying growth rate.
The BWS period from the late 1950s until the breakdown of Bretton Woods can be
characterized by Go-Stop policy (Dow 1964). To maintain full employment and raise growth
rates, successive government of both parties pursued expansionary fiscal policy (increasing
government expenditure and reduced taxes (see figure 14) which in turn were accommodated
by expansionary monetary policy. These expansions, which lasted 2-3 years, always ended
when the economy hit the balance of payments constraint. On several occasions (1959, 1961,
1964, 1967) this led to a speculative attack on the Bank's international reserves and a currency
crisis (see Bordo, MacDonald and Oliver 2009), which required rescue loans from the IMF, G10,
BIS and the Federal Reserve. Once reserves were restored, pressure increased on the
government to fiscally expand and the economy would transit again into the Go phase. During
the Go phase not only would the economy recover but prices would rise and as the 60s



                                                                                                  23
progressed inflation became a growing problem. Moreover, as inflation increased so did
inflationary expectations. This meant that after each successive stop period the underlying
inflation rate would be reduced but not entirely. This led to an upward ratchet in the inflation
rate as the monetary authorities renewed expansionary policy.
A key belief in the 1960s and 1970s in the UK and later the US was that inflation was not caused
by expansionary aggregate demand, especially by expansion in the money supply as was argued
by Milton Friedman and the monetarists. Rather, it was caused by cost-push forces--the
increasing power of trade unions to raise wages and the increasing power of industry to push
prices up to keep up with the rise in wages, leading to a wage price spiral (DeCeccio and Nelson
2013).
The solution to the cost-push problem was to impose incomes policies: wage price guidelines,
and later wage price controls. It was not understood that wage price controls would only make
the problem worse by creating suppressed inflation, which distorted the real economy. As
Milton Friedman once stated "suppressed inflation was like filing a kettle with water, putting it
on the stove and turning on the burner and ten putting a brick on top of the kettle."
The Go stop policies of the 1960s turned into a hyper-Go phase after the collapse of the BWS in
1971-72. Now the imperative to "Go for Growth" was no longer hobbled by the balance of
payments constraint and so Go fiscal policy accommodated by expansionary monetary policy
went into overdrive. The best example of this was the Barber boom of 1971 to 1973. In 1973,
the monetary authorities attempted to reduce the accelerating inflation by raising interest
rates and the Treasury reducing government expenditures. But it was short-lived.
The boom ended with the first oil price shock in late 1973, which led to a downturn in the real
economy. However, the oil price shock was accommodated in 1974 by expansionary financial
policies and the Go phase returned. The policies to raise aggregate demand to offset the
decline in real income associated with a change in the relative price of oil led to a decline in the
exchange rate, declining international reserves and increasing inflation.
The Go Phase of inflation led to a massive run up in prices to 25% per year by 1975 and a severe
drop in the exchange rate. This led to a new sterling crisis in 1976 precipitating an IMF mission
that urged the monetary authorities to reduce domestic credit and the budget deficit (Roberts



                                                                                                  24
2017). This external intervention was the catalyst that led officials in the BOE to pay more
attention to the behavior of the monetary aggregates and the monetarist views of Friedman,
Brunner and Meltzer that inflation was a monetary phenomenon that could only be contained
by monetary contraction.
The Great inflation continued through the 1970s, reaching a peak in 1980 of 18% as a result of
the end of exchange control and a surge of bank credit expansion (James 2020 page 83). As in
the U.S , the Great Inflation ended consequent upon a major regime change in 1979-1980
when Margaret Thatcher came to power and applied the monetarist medicine. Led by Alan
Walters, her special advisor, the Treasury put in an ambitious plan to both reduce fiscal deficits
by cutting expenditures and raising taxes and by having the Bank adopt the monetarist recipe
of monetary targeting of broad money (sterling M3) and significantly reducing money growth
(See figures 13 and 15).
The strategy, similar to that followed by Paul Volcker in the U.S., was very successful in reducing
both inflation and inflation expectations considerably by 1983 and ending the Great Inflation in
the UK. As in the US, the disinflation was accompanied by a decline in real GDP and a rise in
unemployment.


   6. Recent Episodes
The Great Financial Crisis (GFC) of 2008-2009 and the pandemic of 2020 are two modern
episodes of surges in deficit spending that illustrate the linkages between deficits and inflation.
Both involved high budget deficit spending and easy monetary policies. This section reviews
the policies around the GFC and identifies the important factors why the spike in deficit
spending and the Fed's unconventional monetary easing did not generate higher inflation. It
then analyzes the differences in macroeconomic responses to the pandemic, which may raise
the risks of higher inflation. The section concludes with a brief discussion about how the
government's rising debt may impinge on the Fed's monetary policy and a possible rising risk of
fiscal dominance.


   6.1. The Great Financial Crisis 2007-2008



                                                                                                 25
In the years preceding the GFC, there were persistent deficits and inflation rose above the Fed's
2% objective. President George W. Bush campaigned as a fiscal conservative but cut taxes in
response to the recession of 2001 and the 9/11 attacks and increased spending.
Early in the expansion, from 2002- 2004, the Greenspan-led Fed was excessively concerned
with the possibility of deflation, and maintained easy monetary policy, keeping its policy rate
below the rate of inflation. This facilitated the environment for the debt-financed boom in
housing (Taylor 2007). Inflation and inflationary expectations rose and the US dollar
depreciated.
The Fed's gradual but persistent policy rate increases contributed to a reversal in the debt-
finance booming housing market beginning in spring 2006. This depressed expectations and
generated sizable losses in mortgage-backed debt securities and complex derivatives. A shift
toward risk aversion damaged short-term funding markets in fall 2007, requiring a liquidity
infusion by the Fed, and mounting financial stresses followed.
Fiscal and Monetary Responses to the GFC. Besides the Fed aggressively lowering its interest
rates from 5.5% in October 2007 to 1% in November 2008, the government was slow to
respond to the increasing signs of financial stresses. Dysfunctional financial markets and severe
risk aversion in late 2008 finally elicited coordinated responses from the Treasury, Federal
Reserve and Congress.
Congress enacted the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 that authorized financing
of the Treasury's Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) that provided $700 billion, or 4.8% of
GDP, of capital infusions into the largest banks through purchases of toxic assets.
The Fed initiated its first round of quantitative easing (QEI) in November 2008, primarily
purchases of mortgage-backed securities (MBS) aimed at the dysfunctional mortgage market.
Fed Chairman Bernanke emphasized that QEI was "credit policy" because it focused on MBS,
and stated that the Fed would unwind its purchases "on a timely basis" in order to reduce
inflation risks (Bernanke 2008)
This was followed by the Economic Recovery and Jobs Act (ERJA), a fiscal stimulus package of
$780 billion in deficit spending that was signed into law by President Obama in January 2009.
The combined government spending and emergency loans of ARJA and TARP, approximately



                                                                                                  26
10.3% of GDP, is far less than spending increases during major wars, but was the largest
peacetime spending since the Great Depression of the 1930s.
The Fed initiated QEII in March 2009, which involved more purchases of MBS and also
Treasuries. This was followed by a Fed maturity extension program, so-called Operation Twist,
of selling short-term Treasuries and buy longer-term Treasuries, which lengthened the duration
of its portfolio holdings in an effort reduce bond yields. It was largely considered ineffective,
having little sustained impact on bond yields (Ehlers 2011).
In 2012, amid moderate economic growth but a lingering high unemployment rate, the Fed
initiated QEIII, open-ended asset purchases of Treasuries and MBS. QEIII continued through
October 2014, raising the Fed's balance sheet to $4.5 trillion from its average of $900 billion
balance prior to the GFC. The Fed anchored interest rates to zero until the end of 2015.


Inflation concerns following the financial crisis. Even in the initial stages of recovery from the
deep recession, when the unemployment rate hovered around 10 percent, there were
concerns that the surge in money supply stemming from the Fed's unconventional QEs
ballooning balance sheet and sustained zero interest rates would lead to higher inflation. At the
same time, soaring deficits were a worry. Government debt rose to 91% percent of GDP, the
highest since World War II (figure 15), and the Congressional Budget Office forecast significant
further in rises in in its long-run projections (CBO 2010), reflecting the aging population and
higher costs of Medicare and Medicaid.


Why didn't inflation rise? In the decade of sustained economic expansion that followed the
GFC, inflation remained low and fears of rising inflation dissipated. By decade-end, with the
unemployment rate at a 50-year low, the Fed expressed concern that inflation was too low
(Powell 2019). Numerous factors may explain the constrained inflation. The primary reason why
inflation stayed low is that the unprecedented monetary easing, including the Fed's massive
balance sheet and sustained zero interest rates, and the record deficit spending, did not
stimulate any sustained acceleration in aggregate demand (Levy 2017). This constrained excess
demand and product pricing and wages.



                                                                                                    27
The monetary base (MB)--bank reserves plus currency--grew over 100% in response to the
Fed's QEI and 25% with QEII and QEIII, but M2 growth picked up only modestly and temporarily
in response to QEI and then decelerated significantly (figure 16). In effect, the Fed's QEs
increased the supply of bank reserves, but banks increased their demand for reserves rather
than providing credit to the economy. There was little if any influence on broader money
growth, credit lending or aggregate demand. Thus, the money multiplier (M2/MB), the
relationship between the Fed's high-powered money and broader money supply, collapsed
(figure 17). At the same time, money velocity (NGDP/M2) receded as the demand for money
rose as an adjustment to lower interest rates 14. The economic responses to the 2009 fiscal
stimulus was also modest. Some observers attributed the lackluster response to the poor
structure of the fiscal initiatives within the ARJA (Feldstein 2011).
Even with the massive Fed response to the financial crisis, nominal GDP averaged just 3.8
percent during 2010-2013. This resulted in 2 percent real growth and 1.8 percent inflation.
Subsequently, during the four years following the Fed's QEIII and sustained zero interest rates,
nominal GDP growth did not accelerate, averaging 4 percent (Levy 2018). Over the decade,
from 2010-2019, nominal GDP averaged 4 percent, with 2.25 percent real growth and 1.75
percent inflation.


The Fed's easy monetary policy may not have generated stronger economic activity because of
a combination of risk averse behavior by banks and the non-financial sector and changes in
some of the Fed's operating procedures and regulations that may have created bottlenecks in
the monetary transmission channels (Jordan 2016 and Nelson 2020). The Fed began paying
interest on excess reserves in October 2008, which reduced the cost of holding reserves and
deterred lending (Ireland 2020). It changed from managing the effective funds rate through a



14
   See Anderson, Bordo and Duca (2017) who compare the drop in velocity in the 1930s with
the GFC. Velocity recovered after World War II reflecting a reduction in uncertainty, financial
innovation and rising interest rates, whereas in the aftermath of the GFC it did not snap back
for close to a decade after the crisis ended. Their model of the long-run behavior of M2 velocity
finds that raised levels of uncertainty (seen in measures of the liquidity premium) associated
with the Dodd Frank Act of 2010 is a key determinant of the slow bounce back in velocity.


                                                                                               28
corridor system to a floor system, which dramatically changed the conduct of short-term
funding markets and expanded the Fed's role. Following the GFC, risk averse banks--
particularly big banks that faced the Fed's stress tests and intense credit reviews--tightened
credit standards and constrained credit. According to Federal Reserve data collected from
commercial banks, bank commercial and industrial (C&I) loans fell significantly from Sept 2008
through Dec 2010 and did not regain prior levels until late 2014, while consumer loans fell even
more, not regaining their prior peak until Q1 2016 (Federal Reserve 2020).


The weak aggregate demand growth fell shy of expectations laid out by Fed Chair Bernanke and
forecasts by the Fed's FRB-US macroeconomic model, which projected strong growth and
higher inflation (Bernanke 2012). Although asset prices were pumped up and risk-taking
flourished there was little pickup in growth of M2 or nominal GDP (Levy 2017). The moderate
economic growth that did occur lowered unemployment but constrained inflation. Inflationary
expectations receded, reinforced by the non-acceleration of wages.
The low inflation became an increasing concern for the Fed which worried that if sustained it
could lead to a downward spiral in inflationary expectations, which with the zero lower bound
on interest rates would constrain the Fed's ability to fight a future economic downturn.
However up to then stable low inflation had been associated with sustained economic
expansion, and inflationary expectations had remained fairly closely anchored to 2%. During
the decade, inflation in the UK, Europe, Japan and other advanced nations remained low, and
global central banks expressed the same concerns as the Fed about low inflation.


   6.2. The Pandemic of 2020.
On the eve of the pandemic, the Fed's balance sheet was enlarged and its policy rate was low,
and budget deficits were high and government debt was projected to rise sharply. The
pandemic and mandated government shutdown generated a deep economic contraction, with
real GDP plunging 9% in the second quarter 2020, the fastest in history. In March, risk
premiums and volitility spiked in financial markets as the stock market fell dramatically, yield
spreads of corporate bonds and other debt instruments soared and the U.S. treasury market



                                                                                                   29
became temporarily dysfunctional. The government responded with unprecedented monetary
and fiscal stimulus.
Fiscal initiatives, which included the CARES Act, involved approximately $3 trillion in new deficit
spending, or 13% of GDP. The Fed promptly lowered its policy rate to zero, purchased over $2
trillion of Treasury securities and MBS, provided short-term liquidity and purchased corporate
and municipal bonds and made direct loans to businesses. In less than two months, the Fed had
increased its balance sheet from $4.5 trillion to $7 trillion.
The government's responses were similar in certain ways to wartime in magnitude and
initiatives that harnessed and redirected private sector resources to combat the pandemic.
Unlike many wars, taxes were not increased, so all of the increases in government spending
were debt-financed.
The contractionary economy and insufficient aggregate demand temporarily eased inflation
(Levy 2020), but some have argued that there may be risks of higher long-run inflation
(Goodhart 2020).
In striking contrast to monetary policy during and following the GFC, both the monetary base
and M2 have surged (Levy 2020). During March-May 2020, while the Fed's QE and increase in
supply of bank reserves increased the monetary base 51%, and its year-over-year rise through
September was 50.2%. M2 rose 20.2% during March-September, lifting its year-over-year rise
to 24%. Risk averse businesses drew down unused lines of credit from their banks and left
them as deposits counted in M2, also generating a surge of C and I loans (figure 18). This
business risk aversion partially reversed over the summer. Household saving and bank deposits
soared, reflecting the "forced" consumer saving by the pandemic and government shutdowns
and the sizable portion of the government's generous income support fiscal policy that was
saved.
The aggressive monetary and fiscal actions appeared to have supported the economic recovery
in the third quarter of 2020 (Edelberg and Sheiner 2020 and Powell 2020). The simultaneous
surges in bank deposits and the rate of personal saving (refected in a drop in the income
velocity of money of several monetary aggregates) suggest that a significant amount of




                                                                                                30
deferred consumer purchasing power remains at the end of 2020, and may be spent as the risks
and fears of the pandemic abate, boosting aggregate demand (figure 19).


The Fed's new strategic framework. In response to its fears of low inflation and the zero lower
bound, the Fed adopted a new strategy that explicitly favors higher inflation and views higher
inflationary expectations as an important aspect of achieving its new objective (Powell 2020
and Clarida 2020). This strategy involves an asymmetric flexible average inflation targeting
(FAIT) that involves a makeup strategy of higher inflation following a period of sub-2% inflation
and employment mandate of "maximum inclusive employment", that emphasizes "shortfalls"
rather than "deviations" from the maximum (Powell 2020). This reinterpretation of its dual
mandate and the Fed's signal that it would not tighten preemptively in response to higher
anticipated inflation it has been argued may pose risks of higher inflation (Levy and Plosser
2020 ).
Under this monetary regime, any future reduction in productivity and potential growth could
add to inflation pressures. The economic environment of the 1970s provides a warning. Then,
stagflation resulted from sustained monetary ease and double-digit growth of aggregate
demand while tax and regulatory policies distorted economic behavior and constrained
potential growth.


Risks of fiscal dominance and influences on monetary policy. Some have argued that the
rising fiscal deficits and debt since the Covid 19 pandemic began in March 2020 may possibly
impinge on monetary policy in the future. Sustained deficits may raise the risk of fiscal
dominance, as we have seen in the past (Sims 2020). This could occur along several dimensions.
First, the massive deficits and Treasury bond issuance contributed to financial instability in
March 2020 that led the Fed to come to the rescue. The jump in Treasury bond issuance in mid-
March 2020 associated with a spike in the government's cash flow deficit, combined with
abrupt selling of treasuries, squeezed the balance sheets of the primary dealers in treasuries
and resulted in illiquidity and dysfunction in the treasury market (Duffie 2020). The Fed
intervened, purchasing over $1.5 trillion of Treasuries in a six week period and easing capital



                                                                                                  31
requirements of primary dealers. Some argue that persistent high deficits and Treasury bond
issuance may raise the risks of future problems. Boskin (2020) and others expressed concern
that without support from the Fed the domestic and foreign demand for Treasuries ultimately
may become inelastic, and a curtailment of demand may drive up yields.
Second, although there is no evidence or any indication that the Fed has taken into
consideration the impacts of its policies on government finances, the increased sensitivity of
debt service costs to interest rates (CBO 2020) highlights the importance of Fed policies.
At its June 2020 FOMC meeting the Fed signalled that it would anchor its policy rate to 0%
through 2023 and that it would continue purchasing Treasuries and MBS. The Fed has been
aware that its policies are widely considered a factor that has kept bond yields low, and it is
careful to avoid policy changes that may jar financial markets (Federal Reserve 2020).
Third, the Fed's independence from the fiscal authorities may also be jeopardized by Congress's
ability to tap the Fed's massive asset holdings or the net profits it remits to the Treasury to
finance future expenditures. Fiscal legislation to replenish the Highway Trust Fund in December
2015 established a precedence for such action. The Fed currently holds 20% of total publicly-
held debt and it pledges to purchase an additional new $80 billion in Treasury securities per
month, approximately the equivalent of 60%-70% of new deficits during 2021-2023. There is
evidence that some members of Congress view the Fed's massive balance sheet and the net
profits it remits to the Treasury as possible sources of funding (Levy 2017) . Indeed some have
argued that Congress may appropriate funds from the Fed without any legal recourse (Plosser
2018). Moreover, some have argued that the Fed's new programs to purchase corporate and
municipal bonds (Bordo and Duca 2020a and 2020b), and to make direct loans to businesses,
have thrust the Fed into credit and fiscal policies that have been traditionally conducted by the
Treasury and Congress (Judge 2020 and Gilchrist et al 2020).
Goodhart and Pradhan (2020 ) argue that pressures for more deficit spending may continue to
mount in the future, reflecting demographics, social pressures stemming from income and
wealth inequality, the need to upgrade infrastructure, and other demands. They anticipate that
these demographic and fiscal pressures will boost aggregate demand while constraining
aggregate supply, ushering in an environment of higher inflation.



                                                                                                  32
The pandemic has elicited activist fiscal and monetary policies in the U.S. and other countries..
The CBO projects persistent deficits and sharp increases in government debt under current law
(CBO 2020). Whether persistent fiscal deficits alone without monetary accommodation is
inflationary, as posited by the fiscal theory of the price level, is an open question. US budget
realities in the light of the pandemic and the lessons from history highlight the future risks of
fiscal dominance.


   7. Conclusion: Some Lessons for Policy


We posed the question, under what circumstances do increased fiscal deficits lead to inflation?
Our historical survey of key advanced countries leads to the conclusion that the state of nature-
-war or peace--is a key determinant of the connection between fiscal deficits and inflation. Our
survey of the history of major wars shows how inflationary finance was developed in the
eighteenth century and became an important component of war finance. Early central banks
like the Bank of England were established expressly to aid the government's military aims.
Beginning with the Napoleonic wars, the Bank of England aided the government's war aims by
freely discounting Treasury bills and the commercial paper of private agents providing war
material.
In the US, limitations to government `s ability to tax and to issue debt led to the issuance of
continentals and greenbacks. In the world wars of the 20th century, the central banks pegged
short-term and long-term rates to aid the Treasury's funding. Setting the central bank's
discount rate below the natural rate encouraged private sector borrowing and, in a Wicksellian
manner, led to commercial bank note expansion.
Fiscal deficits have been long associated with monetary finance in emerging countries with
underdeveloped financial systems and weak fiscal administration and the issue of fiat money.
This was long condemned by classical monetary doctrine. We describe several cases in
advanced countries in which peacetime fiscal deficits were associated with unbacked fiscal
expansion and dominance of the central bank by the fiscal authorities: France in the 1920s,
when paralysis in governance led to the Banque de France freely absorbing the government's



                                                                                                    33
short-term debt and issuing fiat money; the US in the 1930s, after FDR left the gold standard,
and pursued aggressive unbacked fiscal expansion; and the U.S. and UK in the 1960s-1970s,
when the central banks accommodated the expansionary fiscal policies with loose monetary
policies fueling inflation.
Two key factors seem to lie behind the peacetime adoption of fiscal dominance: political
dysfunction/political pressure and flawed doctrine. In the 1920s, the dysfunctional French
government could not agree on how to finance its expenditures, by default leading to the
Banque de France's printing press. In the 1960s, the Martin-led Fed was pressured by LBJ to
avoid contractionary policy, while in the early 1970s Arthur Burns gladly accommodated Nixon's
demands. In the UK, fear of union disruption was a key force in its Go stop policies.
In both countries, Keynesian views and belief in the Phillips curve tradeoff gripped the
policymaking debate, and that inflation was generated largely by cost-push forces and not
expansionary monetary policy, and could only be offset by incomes policy. In the UK, there was
a belief that expansionary financial policy could raise the growth rate.
The Great Inflation was ended by the successful tight monetary policies of Volcker-Thatcher in
1979-1982 that led the way to the Great Moderation--20 years of moderate inflation and
generally healthy economic performance. Central banks gained their independence and
pursued flexible inflation targeting strategies that gained credibility.
Since the Great Moderation it seemed unlikely that advanced country central banks would
willingly run high inflation policies. Expansionary monetary policy prevailed during and after the
GFC, yet for the reasons we describe, inflation remained subdued. During the pandemic, central
banks have shifted to highly expansionary policies as fiscal authorities have implemented
record-breaking deficits that have pushed debt ratios close to WWII levels (and beyond in the
US). Currently,inflation in the US is well below the Fed's 2% target. What are the risks that
could trigger moderate or even high inflation?
One possibility is that the unprecedented peacetime deficits and monetary accommodation
raise the risks of sustained (money growth fueled) excess demand. Also the Fed's new strategic
goal of raising inflation may inadvertently run the risk of unanchoring inflationary expectations.
Second, the mounting debt could exert fiscal dominance over monetary policy.



                                                                                                 34
The lessons from our historical survey are: avoid war, be cautious of sustained monetary
accommodation of fiscal deficits, avoid fiscal dominance, maintain central bank independence,
keep inflationary expectations anchored, and pursue pro-growth economic policies. The
evidence suggests that ignoring the lessons from history could be at the policy makers' peril.


Figure 1. United States: Government Debt (% of GDP)




Source: George Hall and Thomas Sargent (2020) " Government Debt and Taxes in Eight U.S. Wars and Two Insurrections"
Handbook of Historical Economics. We thank George Hall for providing the data.

Figure 2. United Kingdom: Government Debt (% of GDP)




Source: data kindly provided by Ryland Thomas,Bank of England




                                                                                                                      35
Figure 3. Great Britain: Real Deficits (Surplus)




Source: Figure 2 in Bordo, M. D., & White, E. N. (1991). A tale of two currencies: British and French finance during the
Napoleonic Wars. Journal of Economic History, 303-316.

Figure 4. Great Britain: Log of Money Stock




Source: Figure 8 in Bordo, M. D., & White, E. N. (1990). British and French finance during the Napoleonic Wars (No. w3517).
National Bureau of Economic Research.




                                                                                                                              36
Figure 5. Great Britain: Log of the Price Level




Source: Figure 9 in Bordo, M. D., & White, E. N. (1990). British and French finance during the Napoleonic Wars (No. w3517).
National Bureau of Economic Research.


Figure 6. Price Level (1910=100)




Source: Figure 1 in Comments by Michael D. Bordo in Walker, Todd B. and Leeper, Eric Michael, Perceptions and
Misperceptions of Fiscal Inflation (December 1, 2011). BIS Working Paper No. 364, Available at SSRN:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=1970290 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1970290




                                                                                                                              37
Figure 7. Debt to GDP




Source: Figure 2 in Comments by Michael D. Bordo in Walker, Todd B. and Leeper, Eric Michael, Perceptions and
Misperceptions of Fiscal Inflation (December 1, 2011). BIS Working Paper No. 364, Available at SSRN:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=1970290 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1970290

Figure 8. Budget Deficit (% of GDP)




Source: Figure 3 in Comments by Michael D. Bordo in Walker, Todd B. and Leeper, Eric Michael, Perceptions and
Misperceptions of Fiscal Inflation (December 1, 2011). BIS Working Paper No. 364, Available at SSRN:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=1970290 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1970290




                                                                                                                38
Figure 9. Nominal Exchange Rates




Source: Figure 4 in Comments by Michael D. Bordo in Walker, Todd B. and Leeper, Eric Michael, Perceptions and
Misperceptions of Fiscal Inflation (December 1, 2011). BIS Working Paper No. 364, Available at SSRN:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=1970290 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1970290


Figure 10. US Budget Balance (% of Potential GDP)




Source: Figure 6 in Bordo, M. D. (2020). The Imbalances of the Bretton Woods System 1965 to 1973: US Inflation, The Elephant
in the Room. Open Economies Review, 1-17.




                                                                                                                          39
Figure 11. US M2 Growth 1960 - 1982 (% change)




Source: Figure 7 in Bordo, M. D. (2020). The Imbalances of the Bretton Woods System 1965 to 1973: US Inflation, The Elephant
in the Room. Open Economies Review, 1-17.


Figure 12. US CPI Inflation 1960 - 1982 (y-o-y % change)




Source: Figure 8 in Bordo, M. D. (2020). The Imbalances of the Bretton Woods System 1965 to 1973: US Inflation, The Elephant
in the Room. Open Economies Review, 1-17.




                                                                                                                          40
Figure 13. UK Money Growth and CPI Inflation (% change on 4 qtrs. earlier)




Source: Data from Michael Bordo, Oliver Bush and Ryland Thomas (2019) "UK Monetary and fiscal Policy Interactions in the
Great Inflation" Bank of England

Figure 14. UK Current Account and Public Sector Net Borrowing (% of GDP)




Source: Data from Michael Bordo, Oliver Bush and Ryland Thomas (2019) "UK Monetary and fiscal Policy Interactions in the
Great Inflation" Bank of England




                                                                                                                           41
Figure 15. US Government Debt (% of GDP)




Source: Office of Management and Budget and Congressional Budget Office



Figure 16. US Monetary Base and Money Stock (M2) - (y-o-y %)




Source: Federal Reserve Board/Haver Analytics




                                                                          42
Figure 17. US - M2 over Monetary Base




Source: Haver Analytics


Figure 18. US ­ Commercial Banks: Deposits and C&I Loans (USD billion)




Source: Federal Reserve Board/Haver Analytics




                                                                         43
Figure 19. US ­ Personal Saving and Deposits: All Commercial Banks (USD billion)




Source: BEA/Haver Analytics




                                                                                   44
References


Shagil Ahmed (1986) "Temporary and Permanent Government Spending in an Open Economy:
Some Evidence for the United Kingdom" Journal of Monetary Economics 1vol 17. no.2 197-221.


Joshua Aizenman and Nancy Marion (2010) "Using Inflation to Erode Public Debt" UC Santa
Cruz (mimeo).


Leonall Anderson and Jerry L. Jordan (1968) "Monetary and Fiscal Actions: A Test of Their
Relative Importance in Economic Stabilization". Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review
November.


Pamfila Antipa and Christophe Chamley (2017) "Monetary and Fiscal Policy in England During
the French Wars (1793-1821) Boston University (mimeo).


Robert Barro (1987) "Government Spending, Interest Rates, Prices and Budget Deficits in the
United Kingdom. Journal of Monetary Economics vol 20. No. 2 221-245.


Robert Barro (1979) "On the Determination of Public Debt" Journal of Political Economy. Vol 87
No.5 Part 1. October pp 940-971.
Ben Bernanke (2008) "Federal Reserve Policies in the Financial Crisis", Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System, December.

Ben Bernanke (2012) "Monetary Policy Since the Onset of the Crisis", Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City Jackson Hole Symposium, August 31.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), "Minutes of the Federal Open
Market Committee, November 4-5, 2020".


Michael Bordo and John Duca ( 2020a) " How New Corporate Bond Programs Dampened the
Financial Accelerator in the Covid-19 Recession" NBER Working Paper 28097 October.



                                                                                                45
Michael Bordo and John Duca ( 2020b) " How the New Fed Municipal Bond Facility Capped
Treasury Yield Spreads in the Covid -19 Recession" Rutgers University (mimeo) Novembver


Michael Bordo, Andrew Levin, and Mickey Levy (2020) "Incorporating Scenario Analysis into the
Federal Reserve's Policy Strategy and Communications" NBER Working Paper June.


Michael Bordo, Oliver Bush and Ryland Thomas (2019) "UK Monetary and fiscal Policy
Interactions in the Great Inflation" Bank of England (mimeo).


Michael Bordo (2018) "The Imbalances of the Bretton Woods System 1965 to 1973: U.S.
Inflation, the Elephant in the Room" NBER WP 25409. December.


Michael Bordo, Christopher Erceg, Andrew Levin and Ryan Michaels (2017) "Policy Credibility
and Alternative Approaches to Disinflation" Research in Economics vol 7 (3) pp 442-460.


Michael Bordo and Athanasios Orphanides (2013) The Great Inflation: The Rebirth of Modern
Central Banking. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


Michael Bordo, Ronald MacDonald and Michael Oliver (2009) "Sterling in Crisis 1964-1967"
European Review of Economic History, October.


Michael Bordo and Pierre Cyrille Hautcoeur (2007) "Why Didn't France Follow the British
Stabilization After World War I?" European Review of Economic History 11, 3-37.


Michael Bordo and Tamim Bayoumi (1998) "Getting Pegged: Comparing the 1879 and 1925
Gold Resumptions" Oxford Economic Papers.




                                                                                              46
Michael Bordo (1993) "The Bretton Woods International Monetary System: A Historical
Overview" chapter 1 in Michael Bordo and Barry Eichengeen (eds) A Retrospective on the
Bretton Woods System: Lessons for International Monetary Reform. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.


Michael Bordo and Eugene White (1991) ": A Tale of Two Currencies: British and French Finance
During the Napoleonic Wars" Journal of Economic History Vol 51 Issue 2 303-316.


Michael Bordo and Anna Schwartz (1981) "Money and Prices in the Nineteenth Century: Was
Thomas Tooke Right?" Explorations in Economic History 18(2) pp97-127.


Michael Bordo and Anna Schwartz (1980) "Money and Prices in the Nineteenth Century: an Old
Debate Revisited" Journal of Economic History. Vol XI No 1. (March).
Michael Boskin (2020) "Are Large Deficits and Debt Dangerous?", NBER Working Paper 26727,
February.
John Brewer (1989) The Sinews of Power, War, Money and the English State 1650-1783. New
York: A Knopf.
Arthur Burns (1979) "The Anguish of Central Banking" The Per Jacobsson Foundation,
September.

Forrest Capie (1986) "Conditions in Which Very Rapid Inflation Has Appeared" Carnegie
Rochester Series on Public Policy Vol 24 pp 115-168.

Richard Clarida (2020), "Fed Vice Chair Richard H.Clarida on U.S. Monetary Policy", The
Peterson Institute for International Economics, August.

John Cochrane (2019) `The Fiscal Theory of the Price Level' Hoover Institution (mimeo).

Congressional Budget Office (2011), Long-Term Budget Outlook, June.

Congressional Budget Office (2020), The 2020 Long-Term Budget Outlook,
www.cbo.gov/publication/56516.

Riccardo DiCecio and Edward Nelson (2013) "The Great inflation in the United States and the
United Kingdom: Reconciling Policy Decisions and Data Outcomes" chapter 8 in Michael Bordo


                                                                                          47
and Athanasios Orphanides The Great Inflation: The Rebirth of Modern Central Banking.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press

P.M. Dickson (1967) The Financial Revolution in England. London: MacMillan

JCR Dow (1964) The Management of the British Economy 1945-1960. London: Cambridge
University Press.

Darrell Duffie (2020) "Still the World's Safe Haven: Redesigning the U.S. Treasury Market after
the Covid-19 Crisis", The Brookings Institution.

Robert Eagly (1969) "Monetary Policy and Politics in Mid Eighteenth Century Sweden" Journal
of Economic History December. Vol 20 No.4 739-757.

William Easterly, Paulo Mauro, Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel (1995) "Money Demand and Seigniorage
Maximizing Inflation" journal of Money, Credit and banking vol 27 No.2 (May) 583-603.

Wendy Edelberg and Louise Sheiner (2020) "What could additional fiscal policy do for the
economy in the next three years?", The Brookings Institution, October 9.

Gautti Eggertson (2008) "Great Expectations and the Ends of the Depression" American
Economic Review 98(4) 1476-1511.

Torsten Ehlers (2011), "The Effectiveness of the Federal Reserve's Maturity Extension Program
Operation Twist 2: the portfolio rebanancing channel and public debt management", BIS
Papers No 65, September.

Barry Eichengreen (1992) Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and The Great Depression. New
York; Oxford University Press.


Martin Feldstein (1983) Inflation, Tax Rules, and Capital Formation, National Bureau of
Economic Research, University of Chicago Press.

Martin Feldstein (2011) "The Economy Is Worse than You Think, Wall Street Journal, June 8.

Frank Fetter (1965) Development of British Monetary Orthodoxy 1793- 1815. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press


Klas Fregert (2018) "Sveriges Riksbank: 350 Years in the Making" chapter 3 in Rodney Edvinson,
Tor Jacobson and Daniel Waldenstrom (eds) Sverige Riksbank and the History of Central
banking. New York: Cambridge University Press.



                                                                                              48
Klas Fregert and Lars Jonung (1996) "Inflation and the Switches Between Specie and Paper
Standards in Sweden 1668-1931: A Public Finance Interpretation" Scottish Journal of Political
Economy 43: 419-443.

Milton Friedman (1969) The Optimum Quantity of Money Chicago: Aldine

Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz (1963) A Monetary History of the United States 1867-
1963. Princeton: Princeton University Press

Milton Friedman (1956) Studies in the Quantity Theory of Money. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Simon Gilchrist, Bin Wei, Vivian Yue and Egon Zakrajsek (2020) "The Fed Takes on Corporate
Credit Risk: An Analysis of the Efficiency of the SMCCF", NBER Working Paper 27809,
September.

Charles Goodhart (2020) ""Inflation after the pandemic: Theory and practice", voxEU, June 13.

Charles Goodhart and Manoj Pradham (2020) The Great Demographic Reversal: Aging
Societies, Waning Inequality, and the Inflation Revival, Palgrave Macmillan.

Alan Greenspan, Alfred Kahn, Marvin Kosters and Rudolph Oswald (1979) "On Carter's Anti-
Inflation Policy, American Enterprise Institute, ISBN: 0-8447-2144-1, February.

Herschel Grossman (1990) "The Political Economy of War, Debt and Inflation" in Philip Cagan
and William S. Haraf (eds) Monetary Policy in a Changing Environment. Washington DC.
American Enterprise Institute.

George Hall and Thomas Sargent (2020) "Debt and Taxes in Eight U.S. Wars and Two
Insurrections" Handbook of Historical Economics

Owen Humpage (2015) "Even Keel and the Great Inflation" Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland
Working paper 15/32 December.

Owen Humpage (2016) "Fiscal Dominance and U.S. Monetary Policy: !940-1975" Federal
Reserve Bank of Cleveland Working Paper 16/32 December.

Peter Ireland (2020) "End Interest on Bank Reserves", Shadow Open Market Committee,
October.

Peter Ireland and Mickey D. Levy (2017) "A Strategy for Normalizing Monetary Policy, Shadow
Open Market Committee.

Margaret Jacobson, Eric Leeper and Bruce Preston (2019) "Recovery of 1933" NBER WP 25629


                                                                                                49
March.

A.J Jalil and G Rua (2017) "Inflation Expectations in the U.S. in Fall 1933" Research in Economic
History (eds) S. Wolcott and C Hanes vol 33 pp 139-169.

Harold James ( 2020) Making a Modern Central Bank: The Bank of England 1979-2003.
Cambridge UK:Cambridge University Presss

Jerry Jordan (2016) "The New Monetary Framework", Cato Journal, Vol 36 (Spring/Summer),
pp. 367-383.

Kathryn Judge (2020) "Why the Fed Should Issue a Policy Framework for Credit Policy",
prepared for the Shadow Open Market Committee, September 30.

Nicholas Kaldor (1966) Causes of the Slow Rate of Growth of the United Kingdom. London.
Cambridge University Press.

Eric Leeper (1991) "Equilibria under `Active' and "Passive' Monetary and Fiscal Policy "Journal
of Monetary Economics 27(1) pp 129-147.

Eric Leeper and Todd Walker (2011) "Perceptions and Misperceptions of Fiscal Inflation" BIS
Working Paper no.364 November.

Eugene Lerner (1956) "Inflation in the Confederacy 1861-1865' in Milton Friedman, Studies in
the Quantity Theory of Money. Chicago: University of Chicago Press

Mickey D. Levy (2017) "Monetary Policy for Healthy Economic Performance" U.S. Congress
House Financial Services Committee, November Testimony.

Mickey D. Levy (2017) "Why Have the Fed's Policies Failed to Stimulate the Economy? Cato
Journal, 37 (1), 39-45.

Mickey D. Levy (2020) "Money Supply Spike: Sources and Implications", Berenberg Capital
Markets, July 1.

Mickey D. Levy (2020) "The Fed's Aggressive Response to the Crisis: What's Next?" Berenberg
Capital Markets, July 23.

Robert Lipsey (1960) "The Relationship Between Unemployment and the Rate of Change of
Money Wages in the U.K. 1862-1957: A Further Analysis" Economica New Series Vol 27 No. 100
(Feb), pp 1-31.

Allan Meltzer (2010) A History of the Federal Reserve Volume 2. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press


                                                                                                  50
Allan Meltzer (2005) A History of the Federal Reserve Volume 1 1913-1951. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press

Bill Nelson (2020) "Bill Nelson and the Fed's Policy Tools in the Post-COVID Economy", George
Mason University Mercatus Center, Podcast July 2020.

Patrick O'Brien (1967) "Government Revenues 1793-1815 A Study of Fiscal and Financial Policy
in the War Against France" Ph.D. Dissertation. University of Oxford

Lee Ohanaian (1997) "The Macroeconomic Effect of War Finance in the United States: World
War II and the Korean War" American Economic Review.

Jerome Powell (2019), "Opening Remarks" at Conference on Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools
and Communications Practices, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, June.

Jay Powell (2020) "New Economic Challenges and the Fed's Monetary Policy Review", Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City Jackson Hole Symposium, August 27.

Jay Powell (2020) "Recent Economic Developments and Challenges Ahead", NABE Virtual
Annual Meeting, October 6.

Carmen Reinhart and M.B. Sbrancia (2015) "The Liquidation of Government Debt" Economic
Policy Vol 30, Issue 82 April

Richard Roberts (2017) When Britain Went Bust--The 1976 IMF Crisis. London: OMFIF Press.

Hugh Rockoff (2016) " War and Inflation in the United Sates from the Revolution to the Persian
Gulf War" in Jari Eloranta et al (eds) Economic History of Warfare and State Formation. Studies
in Economic History. Pp 159-195.

Christina Romer (1992) "What Ended the Great Depression?" Journal of Economic History 52(4)
753-784.

Thomas Sargent and Neil Wallace (1981) "Some Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic" Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, Fall.

E. Schumpeter (1938) English Prices and Public Finance 160-1820" Review of Economics and
Statistics XX 21-32.

Anna J Schwartz (1973) "Secular Price Change in Historical Perspective" Journal of Money,
Credit and banking. Vol 5 no.1 February pp 243-269.




                                                                                             51
George P Shultz (2018) "Dreams Can Be Nightmares" Online Appendix. Journal of Economic
History June.

N. Silberling (1923) "British Prices and Business Cycles" Review of Economics and Statistics.
October.

Christopher Sims (2020) " How to Worry About Government Debt" Markus Academy webinar.
Princeton University Bendheim Center for Finance. October 15

Christopher Sims (2011) "Stepping on a Rake; the Role of Fiscal Policy in the Inflation of the
1970s' European Economic Review Vol 55(1) pp 48-56 January.

Kevin Hassett, Casey Mulligan, Timothy Fitzgerald and Cody Kallen (2020) "An Analysis of Vice
President Biden's Economic Agenda: The Long-Run Impacts of Its Regulations, Taxes and
Spending", The Hoover Institution, October 15

Herbert Stein (1990), The Fiscal Revolution in America, The American Enterprise Institute.

Herbert Stein (1994) Presidential Economics. Third Edition Washington DC: American Enterprise
Institute

Henry Thornton (1802) An Inquiry into the Nature and Effects of the Paper Credit of Great
Britain. London.

Wyatt C. Wells (1994) Economics in an Uncertain World Arthur F. Burns and the Federal
Reserve 1970-78. New York: Columbia University Press.

Eugene White (1995) "The French Revolution and the Politics of Government Finance 1770-
1815" Journal of Economic History June. Vol 51, No 2 227-255.

John Taylor (2007) "Housing and Monetary Policy", Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Jackson
Hole Economic Symposium.

Jacob Viner (1937) Studies in the Theory of International Trade. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Paul Volcker (1979) "Confirmation Hearings Before the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing
and Urban Affairs", July 30.




                                                                                                 52
