                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     TOWARD A UNIFORM CLASSIFICATION OF NURSE PRACTITIONER SCOPE
                         OF PRACTICE LAWS

                                    Benjamin J. McMichael
                                       Sara Markowitz

                                      Working Paper 28192
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28192


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2020




Alicia Gilbert provided excellent research assistance for this paper. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Benjamin J. McMichael and Sara Markowitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Toward a Uniform Classification of Nurse Practitioner Scope of Practice Laws
Benjamin J. McMichael and Sara Markowitz
NBER Working Paper No. 28192
December 2020
JEL No. I1,K0

                                          ABSTRACT

Over the last several decades, nurse practitioners have assumed increasingly important roles in
the healthcare system. However, some state scope of practice laws limit the ability of nurse
practitioners to deliver care by requiring physician supervision of their practices and prescribing
activities. A robust literature has evolved around examining the role of these scope of practice
laws in various contexts, including labor market outcomes, healthcare access, healthcare prices,
and the delivery of care for specific diseases. Unfortunately, these studies use different, and
sometimes conflicting, measures of scope of practice laws, limiting their comparability and
overall usefulness to policymakers and future researchers. We address this salient problem by
providing a consistent coding of nurse practitioner scope of practice laws over a 23-year period
based on actual statutory and regulatory language. Our classification of scope of practice laws
solves an important problem within this growing literature and provides a solid legal foundation
for researchers as they continue to investigate the effects of these laws.


Benjamin J. McMichael
School of Law
University of Alabama
101 Paul W. Bryant Drive, East
Tuscaloosa, AL 35487
bmcmichael@law.ua.edu

Sara Markowitz
Department of Economics
Emory University
Rich Memorial Building
1602 Fishburne Dr.
Atlanta, GA 30322
and NBER
sara.markowitz@emory.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28192
Introduction

       Over a decade after the passage of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), access to healthcare

remains an important policy priority at the national and state levels. The recent COVID-19

pandemic has served to emphasize the importance of access to care, as state governments across

the country implemented various initiatives to shore up their healthcare systems in the wake of the

pandemic. Some of these initiatives focused on removing legal barriers that prevent providers like

advanced practice registered nurses (APRNs) from caring for patients to the full extent of their

knowledge and training. The idea behind these policies was to increase the capacity of the existing

healthcare workforce to increase access to care and provide more resources to address the COVID-

19 pandemic. This move to eliminate barriers echoes the more general debate over the appropriate

way to regulate APRNs that has increasingly attracted the attention of policymakers and

researchers over the last decade.

       APRNs are registered nurses (RNs) with advanced degrees and training in primary and

specialty care. APRNs are certified to practice in one of four roles: certified registered nurse

anesthetists (CRNAs), certified nurse-midwives (CNMs), clinical nurse specialists (CNSs) and

nurse practitioners (NPs). These nurses examine patients, provide diagnoses, order tests, provide

treatment, and prescribe medications. APRNs are a small but important part of the health care

labor force. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), in 2019 there were 251,100

employed nurses working as NPs, CNAs and CNMs (BLS 2019). This number represents only 7

percent of the 2.9 million registered nurses, and an even smaller fraction of the total number of

diagnosing and treating practitioners, at about 4 percent. However, NPs, the largest group within

the APRN category, represent a substantial portion of primary care providers. The 2019 data

shows 153,980 general practice physicians (including family practitioners, internists and general



                                                2
practitioners) compared to 200,600 NPs. These nurses play critical roles in the health care system

by performing many of the same tasks as primary care physicians and often practice in areas where

physicians are in short supply (McMichael 2018). This paper will focus on NPs, leaving a

discussion of the other types of APRNs to future work.

        Although nationally certified, NP practice is governed by state scope of practice (SOP)

laws. These laws govern the legal ability of licensed health care professionals to provide medical

services. They define providers' roles, articulate oversight requirements (if any), and govern

practice and prescriptive authorities. State laws vary along all of these dimensions, but foremost

is the oversight requirement imposed on individual providers. In many states, NPs must practice

under the supervision of or in collaboration with physicians, and these requirements may be

imposed through various means, such as practice protocols or other collaborative agreements.

Other states allow NPs to practice to the full extent of their training, education, and experience

without oversight from physicians. This is termed "full practice authority" (FPA). Over the past

few decades, state SOP laws have been evolving from different forms of oversight towards FPA.

Currently, 29 states have adopted SOP laws that grant FPA to NPs. 3

        The movement towards FPA has not been without controversy.                          State legislatures

frequently engage in SOP battles that pit physician advocacy groups against nurse advocacy

groups. In 2019, thirty bills in twelve different states were introduced regarding NP SOP with

only two enacted (Scope of Practice Policy 2020). Critics of FPA contend that oversight

requirements are necessary to protect the public health, while proponents argue that NPs provide

care that is similar in quality to that of MDs rendering oversight as unnecessary and costly.




3
 This total does not include California which passed a bill granting NPs FPA on September 29, 2020. This bill has
not yet been codified and is not yet effective.

                                                       3
       Given the controversial nature of these laws and that the variation in time and state

generates a viable "natural experiment" for policy analysis, it is no surprise that the academic

literature evaluating the effects of changing SOP laws is proliferating. Outcomes studied include

the quality of care, health care costs and prices, employment, wages, and patient access to care.

Adams and Markowitz (2018) summarize the results of the literature published until early 2018.

Since then, quite a few additional studies have been published and more are in progress. However,

one troubling feature of the literature published to date is that many authors rely on different

categorizations of the SOP laws. Some authors examine laws that only pertain to practice authority,

while others focus only on prescription authority. Still others combine practice and prescription

authority. The sources for the laws also vary, with some authors using classifications that are

meaningful to nurse advocacy groups but not necessarily appropriate for studying economic or

public health outcomes.      The disparate classifications make interpreting, summarizing, and

comparing results across studies rather difficult. We seek to provide some clarity to this issue. In

the pages below, we first describe the features of the laws, followed by a description of the different

law categories used by researchers. We then present a database of SOP law changes over time that

we believe will be useful to academic researchers. Our legal research has been conducted and

verified by legal scholars, and we provide citations to current SOP laws to facilitate the continued

development of a consistent classification scheme.

       Our goal here is not to argue that any previous study used an incorrect categorization of

SOP laws. Rather, we seek to provide a resource to the academic community for consistency in

SOP law definitions and the timing of adoption for SOP laws. Consistency in these definitions

serves two important functions. From the perspective of researchers, consistency will facilitate the

comparison of different results and provide greater context for interpreting results more generally.



                                                  4
From the perspective of policymakers, consistency will provide clearer guidance on which SOP

laws are most salient and better insight into which laws should be changed to achieve specific

outcomes.



Main Components of SOP laws

       SOP laws are a subset of the more familiar occupational licensing laws. While the latter

govern everything from entry requirements for particular professions to continuing education

requirements, the former are limited to regulating what services members of a profession may

provide and the conditions under which they may provide those services. With respect to NPs, not

all SOP laws are equally relevant to the economic and public health outcomes that are the focus of

most academic and policy-related work. For example, the ability to sign disabled person placards

and death certificates falls within the ambit of SOP laws. But the ability to sign such documents is

only relevant in limited situations. The two most important--and two most studied--aspects of

NP practice governed by SOP laws are physician oversight requirements and prescriptive

authority.



Physician Supervision Requirements

       At their most basic level, physician oversight requirements come in two categories: (1)

some amount of physician involvement in an NP's practice is required and (2) an NP may practice

independently of any physician involvement. Within the first category, states differ in how they

require physician involvement in NPs' practices. States may require physician "supervision" of

NP practices or they may require that NPs "collaborate" with physicians as a condition of treating

patients. While the details of a "collaboration" system generally differ from the details of a



                                                 5
"supervision" system, neither system permits an NP to provide healthcare without physician

involvement.

         Many states require that a physician's involvement with an NP practice be reduced to

writing, and the final document may need to be filed with the state board of nursing or medicine

or kept on file at the NP's place of business. Some states require collaborative practice agreements

(CPAs). A CPA is a written statement that defines the joint practice of an NP and a physician. The

CPA specifies the rights and responsibilities of each party along with the requirements for

physician consultation. Additionally, some states require written protocols as part of the CPA.

These protocols outline the specific details of the NP practice such as the medical conditions the

NP may treat, the treatments that may be provided, and the drug therapies that may be prescribed.

         Collaboration and supervision often come with legislated administrative responsibilities

including chart review, chart certification, and on-site supervision requirements. The specific

nature of these requirements may be relevant for individual providers, 4 but the existence of some

or all of these legally mandated responsibilities is key for economic and public health outcomes in

general. The legal requirement of maintaining a relationship with a physician--even if the

specifics of the relationship are not particularly arduous--necessarily tethers NPs to physicians

and undermines their ability to compete in markets for healthcare services. Accordingly, whether

physician involvement is legally mandated as "collaboration" or "supervision" matters relatively

little: both forms of involvement have the same legal effect.




4
 It is relevant to note that though, there is no systematic evidence suggesting that providers actually comply with these
requirements.

                                                           6
Prescriptive Authority

           Laws governing prescriptive authority determine what medications NPs may prescribe to

patients. Prescription drugs are classified into two main groups of controlled and non-controlled

substances. Under the Controlled Substances Act, 5 drugs may be placed on one of five schedules

depending on their potential for abuse and accepted medical uses. Drugs placed on schedule I have

a high potential for abuse and no accepted medical uses. Heroin, for example, is a schedule I

controlled substance. No provider may legally prescribe a schedule I controlled substance. Drugs

placed on schedule II similarly have a high potential for abuse but have some medical uses.

Examples of schedule II controlled substances include many opioids, such as morphine and

fentanyl. Schedules III through V include drugs that have accepted medical uses and are organized

in declining order of potential for abuse. For example, anabolic steroids are schedule III controlled

substances and pregabalin is a schedule V controlled substance that can treat certain types of

seizures. Non-controlled substances that still require a prescription are also referred to as legend

drugs. These have a low potential for abuse and include drugs such as antibiotics, asthma

medications, insulin, and blood pressure medications (USDOJ 2006).

           Classifying NP SOP laws pertaining to prescriptive authority presents a different set of

challenges than classifying physician oversight requirements. These challenges stem from

differences in how medications themselves are regulated. One option is to classify NP prescriptive

authority as including all medications other than schedule I controlled substances or not. This

option, however, faces several problems. First, certain drugs--such as buprenorphine and

clozapine--require all providers to obtain additional certifications to prescribe them. Second, some

states permit providers to recommend cannabis--a schedule I controlled substance--and some



5
    See 21 U.S.C. § 801 et seq.

                                                  7
states treat NPs and physicians differently in their ability to recommend it. Third, some states

restrict NPs from prescribing very specific medications (such as weight loss drugs). Complicating

this problem is the fact that many states have their own version of the federal Controlled

Substances Act, and states need not perfectly duplicate the federal scheduling process.

       Given these issues, simply classifying NPs as being allowed to prescribe all non-schedule-

I drugs or not may not yield an entirely accurate classification. A clearer approach is to consider

what NPs may prescribe and the supervision requirements for prescribing. Defining NP

prescriptive authority in this way avoids the problem that laws unrelated to SOP may impact the

ability of NP to prescribe certain medications. This approach is also consistent with the goals of

research that seeks to evaluate the impact of NP-specific restrictions on the ability of NPs to

provide care.



Literature Review

       Table 1 lists 17 studies from the economics, legal, and public health literatures that evaluate

the effects of changing state SOP laws for NPs and other APRNs on a variety of related outcomes.

Table 1 does not contain an exhaustive list, rather it reports recent high-quality studies that utilize

difference-in-difference methodologies to draw conclusions. The studies covered use either state-

based panel data sets or individual-level datasets that span multiple years. There are a number of

additional studies published on the topic that rely on identification via cross-sectional variation,

but these are excluded since these studies do not address the endogeneity of SOP laws in the

analyses.

       The focus of Table 1 is how each study classifies the SOP laws. Column 1 indicates how

laws are classified when the study or models within the study considers only practice authority.



                                                  8
Column 2 is similar but pertains to studies or models that only consider prescription authority.

Column 3 indicates studies or models that combine practice and prescription authority into one

measure such as FPA. In columns 4 and 5 we present the data sources and main results,

respectively. Note that we use the term "full practice authority" when the law specifies that APRNs

practice without oversight from physicians in both practice and prescription authorities. We use

the term "independence" when a SOP law does not require any oversight from a physician in

practice authority or in prescription authority, but not jointly.

        The different coding schemes used in this literature can be summarized as follows: (1)

Practice authority only, (2) Prescription authority only, (3) Controlled substances allowed, (4)

Practice authority and prescription authority included in models separately, and (5) Practice

authority and prescription authority considered jointly. Of the 17 studies in the list, 4 studies

examine either only practice authority in the models, or include practice and prescription authority

separately. This coding scheme may result in a misclassification or misrepresentation of how the

laws work in practice depending on the outcome (including both health outcomes and labor market

outcomes) under consideration. Focusing on practice authority and prescriptive authority jointly

will often be necessary. Since a nurse's job is to diagnose and treat, and treatments often include

prescribing, it often will not make sense to evaluate practice authority in the absence of prescription

authority. Note that some state laws allowed independent practice if the NP did not prescribe. For

example, Arizona permitted this type of independent practice prior to 1999, and Arkansas currently

allows independent practice if the NP does not prescribe. Understanding the effects of independent

practice authority is relevant, but it is important not to conflate this with full practice authority. In

addition, entering practice authority and prescription authority separately into the models can be




                                                   9
problematic when states change both simultaneously as often does, especially when moving to

FPA. This can lead to a problem of multicollinearity.

       Six studies include models that examine prescription authority only. Four of these studies

model this authority as independence in prescription, while two model it as the ability to prescribe

controlled substances regardless of oversite requirements. There is no instance of a state law

granting independence in prescription authority without granting independent practice authority

so independence in prescription implies independence in practice. However, states do vary as to

whether NPs can prescribe controlled substances, and if so, up to what schedule. In general,

granting NPs authority to prescribe a narrower range of medications than physicians would not be

considered FPA since the limitation on prescription drugs is not reflective of the education and

training received by NPs. Hawaii is an example here. Until 2009, the state granted independence

in practice and prescription authorities so long as no controlled substances were prescribed.

Otherwise, collaborative practice agreements with protocols were required. Regarding the two

studies (Perry 2012 and Stange 2014) that examine whether or not prescription of controlled

substances is allowed regardless of oversight requirements, it is not clear that this dimension yields

results that are comparable or relevant to the policy debate regarding full practice authority.

       Five studies examine FPA versus less than FPA. This distinction is the most relevant for

the current policy debate regarding the movement to FPA. However, this trend is fairly recent and

may not provide enough variation for studies using older data. In addition, using the category of

less than FPA results in the loss of information within those state laws. In other words, states that

require only a CPA are lumped together with states that require a practice protocol or may not

allow controlled substance prescriptions. Although we do not present this finer level of detail in




                                                 10
the table of laws below, we urge researchers to consider whether these details are relevant to and

important for the outcomes and time periods under consideration.

       Each categorization scheme has advantages and disadvantages. Before offering

recommendations on the best approaches, however, it is important to accurately identify which

law was in place in each state and year. And prior studies have not always relied on accurate

sources of legal information when classifying laws.



Classifying Scope of practice Laws

       When classifying SOP laws, many studies rely on the Nurse Practitioner Annual

Legislative Update (NPALU) as the source for the SOP laws. This source publishes annual state-

by-state summaries of SOP laws pertaining to practice, reimbursement, and prescription. While

this source offers a long history of changes to SOP laws--the first version was published in 1989--

it is not aimed at researchers. The publication offers insights for practicing NPs and for those

engaged in political activities to change SOP laws. Using this publication in research presents

salient problems. The enactment dates given in the publication may not necessarily coincide with

the dates that certain laws become effective--the publication provides dates that laws were passed

in some instances. It also does not appear to track all sources of law for all states. The annual

updates sometimes refer to changes in rules and regulations--in addition to statutes--but not every

regulatory change is captured by the annual updates. Our goal is not to criticize this source--it

offers valuable information that appears to be quite useful to its primary audiences. We only mean

to highlight some potential problems with using the annual updates as the sole source of SOP law

changes for the purpose of academic research into the effects of the laws on related outcomes.




                                                11
         Indeed, having independently classified state laws ourselves, we are sympathetic to the

difficulties of accurately classifying SOP laws over 51 jurisdictions and multiple decades. To begin

to fill the need for a consistent legal classification scheme based on the review of statutes,

regulations, and court cases, we have compiled a new categorization of state SOP laws. Our

categorization meets the need for a consistent classification scheme that is based on statutes,

regulations, and court cases and that aligns with current policy discussion, i.e., FPA and the

components of FPA.

         Table 2 presents our classification of the SOP laws pertaining to NPs from 1998 to 2020.

It includes the month and date a state first granted NPs FPA, current statutory and regulatory

citations, and notes about state laws that researchers working on specific questions may find

useful. 6 Our data sources are state statutes and state board of nursing rules and regulations. We

begin our classification in 1998 because, prior to 1998, Medicare did not directly reimburse NPs

for their services. Instead, Medicare paid them only for services provided incident to physician

services, and many private insurers maintained similar restrictions. Thus, NPs were effectively

tethered to physicians under federal law even if state law granted them autonomy. This means that

any effects of state law changes prior to 1998 would be muted by federal law. Following the

passage of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997, Medicare (and many private insurers) began directly

reimbursing NPs, thereby cutting the federal-law tether to physicians (Frakes and Evans 2006).

         In Table 2, states are classified as granting NPs FPA if they do not legally mandate any

form of supervision by or collaboration with physicians as a condition of NPs practicing and they

do not restrict the prescriptive authority of NPs. If a state requires either supervision or

collaboration (with or without written protocols), it is classified as restricting the practices of NPs.


6
 These notes are particularly relevant for certain states, like Maryland, that could arguably be coded as granting FPA
at different times.

                                                         12
Similarly, if a state does not grant NPs prescriptive authority without requiring physician

supervision, it is not classified as granting FPA. If a state has allowed NPs to practice with FPA

since before 1998, it is classified as always allowing FPA. If a state has never granted NPs FPA

between 1998 and 2020, Table 2 states that directly. For those states that have changed their laws

since 1998 to grant FPA, Table 2 reports the month and year that the relevant statute or regulation

first became effective.

        It is relevant to note that this effective date may differ from the date the legislature passed

the bill and the date the governor signed the bill. Additionally, the legal effective date for statutes

may not match the practical effective date. For example, many states require state agencies or

boards to pass regulations or implement new application or certification systems to fully

implement FPA statutes. In these states, NPs may not acquire FPA in practice until several months

after the legal effective date of the relevant statute.

        Table 2 focuses on NPs since they are the largest group (76 percent) of APRNs (BLS 2018).

While some types of occupational licensing laws often apply to all four types of APRNs--NPs,

CNMs, CNSs, and CRNAs--this is not generally true of laws conferring independent practice

authority and full prescriptive authority. We recommend that any researcher focusing on CNMs,

CNS, and CRNAs conduct the legal research relevant and specific to the nurses and outcomes

under consideration. We would like to note, however, that CNMs are often treated the same or

similarly as NPs, whereas CNSs and CRNAs are often treated quite differently.

        Table 2 does not specifically include information on whether NPs must sign collaborative

practice agreements, supervision agreements, or protocols as a condition of practicing. Legally,

these are different mechanisms by which states require physician involvement in NP practices and

all amount to requiring physician supervision of NPs, even if they use slightly different language



                                                   13
and intend a slightly different connotation. However, researchers focusing on questions in certain

contexts may want to consider the nature of the collaborative practice agreements required by the

states of interest. The nature of these agreements may differ in different contexts, e.g., rural health

clinics and hospitals.

        In general, the SOP-law classification reported in Table 2 represents the best available

information on which states maintained specific SOP laws in the first two decades of this century.

To demonstrate that this information is the best available, we provide current statutory and

regulatory citations to current SOP laws in Table 2. These citations can be used as the basis for

both validating and updating the coding of SOP laws. A comparison of the laws and dates

presented in Table 2 with those used in prior work will reveal a number of differences. Our goal

in providing a consistent coding of laws is not to highlight errors in prior work. As noted above,

finding, parsing, and coding the laws of 51 jurisdictions over several decades is a highly complex

legal task. Instead, our primary goal is to provide a single source of information that will allow

future work to clearly and consistently identify when different states granted FPA to NPs. This

source of information will not only provide a sound legal foundation for future empirical work but

will also facilitate comparisons of results across studies. If more researchers adopt a consistent

coding scheme, it will be easier for researchers and policymakers to understand and compare the

results of disparate studies.



Recommendations for Researchers

        As researchers continue to investigate the role of SOP laws in the provision of healthcare

and the labor markets for healthcare providers, several recommendations may facilitate the

generation of accurate empirical results that are both policy-relevant and comparable across



                                                  14
studies. As noted above, our recommendations here pertain to researchers focusing on NPs (and

CNMs). Researchers focused on CRNAs and CNSs (as well as other healthcare providers like

physician assistants) will need to conduct additional legal research.

           Our first major recommendation for researchers focused on NPs is to consider using the

legal classification scheme outlined above. Using both the practice authority and prescriptive

authority classifications, researchers will be able to examine the primary policy levers that are

currently under discussion.

           Our second major recommendation concerns how the classification scheme described

above is deployed. For most outcomes, researchers will likely want to consider a variable that

identifies states with FPA (a state grants NPs independence and full prescriptive authority). For

example, when focusing on labor market outcomes, a joint variable for full practice authority is

likely to be most appropriate since labor market decisions are often based on all characteristics of

the job, rather than one aspect such as prescription authority. 7 When focused on medical care and

health outcomes, the choice of examining the joint variable or the separate variables will depend

on the outcome under consideration. For example, analyzing the effect of NP SOP laws on the

price or use of common medical examinations (such as pediatric visits) may require considering

full practice authority since these services tend to include diagnoses and pharmaceuticals. For

other outcomes, such as medication errors or opioid overdoses, understanding the different effects

of independence and full prescriptive authority might be important and could require a separate

consideration of NP independence and a more detailed description of prescriptive authority. The

one caveat here is that some states have changed practice and prescription authorities

simultaneously so including these as separate variables in linear regression models could result in



7
    See Markowitz and Adams (2020) for a detailed discussion of SOP on labor market decisions.

                                                         15
a multicollinearity problem. Researchers should carefully consider which mechanisms of effect

they are attempting to isolate and consider which coding scheme is most appropriate for their study

setting.

           Third, and relatedly, as researchers develop their projects, they should determine whether

additional legal information is required. For some outcomes, other laws may interact with SOP

laws in important ways. Identifying these other laws and how they may modulate the effect (or

not) of NP SOP laws is an important preliminary step in all studies. In many cases, no other

relevant laws will exist. But in some cases--often those of most interest to researchers--other

legal regimes may be relevant. Examples include medical liability laws, laws pertaining to

reimbursement, and SOP laws for other practitioners. Understanding these other regimes is

important both for designing a study correctly (e.g., controlling for other relevant factors) and for

interpreting the results of the study.

           Fourth, we recommend that researchers adopt a more consistent terminology. For various

reasons, different ways to describe essentially the same law have emerged. Our intent is not to

blame researchers for using different terminology--there are often good editorial reasons to do so.

Rather, we hope to encourage the development of consistency so that studies can more easily be

compared to one another. We recommend the term "full practice authority" be used to describe

SOP that does not legally mandate any form of supervision by or collaboration with physicians as

a condition of NPs practice including prescription authority. We also recommend that researchers

be clear when describing independence in one aspect of practice or prescription but not both.

           Our final recommendation concerns SOP requirements that are not based in law. An

emerging trend in the SOP literature is to examine the effects of hospital- or clinic-imposed

requirements on APRNs (Pittman et al. 2020). These institutions often have authority to restrict



                                                   16
the practices of APRNs to a greater extent than state law does. These restrictions are necessarily

based on the contracts that exist between APRNs and these institutions and should not be treated

as interchangeable with statutes and regulations. One important reason for this is that the

restrictions will only apply at the relevant institution and would not affect the APRN at other places

of practice. Another important reason concerns the interpretation of these restrictions, which will

necessarily occur under contract law. Courts may use similar legal tools when interpreting

contracts, statutes, and regulations, but contract interpretation is nonetheless different than

statutory or regulatory interpretation. Thus, a requirement imposed by statute may have a different

impact than the same requirement imposed by a healthcare institution via contract. We do not mean

to suggest that institution-specific SOP requirements are unimportant; we only mean to caution

against treating these requirements the same as SOP laws.




                                                 17
References

Adams, E. K., & Markowitz, S. (2018). Improving efficiency in the health-care system: Removing
anticompetitive barriers for advanced practice registered nurses and physician assistants. Policy
Proposal, 8: 9-13.
Alexander, D., & Schnell, M. (2019). Just what the nurse practitioner ordered: Independent
prescriptive authority and population mental health. Journal of Health Economics, 66: 145-162.
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) (2019). May 2019 National Occupational Employment and
Wage Estimates United States. Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor,
Washington DC. https://www.bls.gov/oes/current/oes_nat.htm#29-0000

Frakes, M.A., & Evans, T. (2006) An Overview of Medicare Reimbursement Regulations For
Advanced Practice Nurses. Nursing Economics, 24: 59­65.

Grecu, A. M., & Spector, L. C. (2019). Nurse practitioner's independent prescriptive authority and
opioids abuse. Health Economics, 28(10): 1220­1225.

Kandrack, R., Barnes, H., & Martsolf, G. R. (2019). Nurse practitioner scope of practice
regulations and nurse practitioner supply. Medical Care Research and Review (in press)
Kleiner, M. M., Marier, A., Park, K. W., & Wing, C. (2016). Relaxing occupational licensing
requirements: Analyzing wages and prices for a medical service. The Journal of Law and
Economics, 59(2): 261-291.
Kurtzman, E. T., Barnow, B. S., Johnson, J. E., Simmens, S. J., Infeld, D. L., & Mullan, F. (2017).
Does the regulatory environment affect nurse practitioners' patterns of practice or quality of care
in health centers?. Health services research, 52: 437-458.
Markowitz, S., Adams, E. K., Lewitt, M. J., & Dunlop, A. L. (2017). Competitive effects of scope
of practice restrictions: Public health or public harm?. Journal of Health Economics, 55: 201-218.
McMichael, B. J. (2018). Beyond Physicians: The effect of licensing and liability laws on the
supply of nurse practitioners and physician assistants. Journal of Empirical Legal Studies, 15(4):
732-771.
McMichael, B. J., Safriet, B. J., & Buerhaus, P. I. (2018). The extraregulatory effect of nurse
practitioner scope-of-practice laws on physician malpractice rates. Medical Care Research and
Review, 75(3): 312-326.
McMichael, B. J., Spetz, J., & Buerhaus, P. I. (2019). The Association of Nurse Practitioner Scope-
of-Practice Laws With Emergency Department Use. Medical care, 57(5): 362-368.
McMichael, B.J. (2020a). Healthcare Licensing and Liability. Indiana Law Journal, 95(3): 821--
881.
McMichael, B.J. (2020b). Occupational Licensing and the Opioid Crisis. UC Davis Law Review
54 (in press).

                                                18
Muench, U., Whaley, C., Coffman, J., & Spetz, J. (2020). Scope-of-Practice for Nurse Practitioners
and Adherence to Medications for Chronic Illness in Primary Care. Journal of general internal
medicine (in press).
Perry, J. J. (2012). State-granted practice authority: Do nurse practitioners vote with their
feet?. Nursing research and practice, 2012.
Pittman, P., Leach, B., Everett, C. Han, X., & McElroy, D. (2020). NP and PA Privileging in Acute
Care Settings: Do Scope of Practice Laws Matter?. Medical Care Research and Review, 77(2)
112­120.
Poghosyan, L., Ghaffari, A., Liu, J., Jin, H., & Martsolf, G. (2020). State policy change and
organizational response: Expansion of nurse practitioner scope of practice regulations in New
York State. Nursing Outlook (in press).
Scope of Practice Policy (2020). http://scopeofpracticepolicy.org/legislative-search/
Traczynski, J., & Udalova, V. (2018). Nurse practitioner independence, health care utilization, and
health outcomes. Journal of Health Economics, 58: 90-109.
Spetz, J., Parente, S.T., Town, R.J., & Bazarko, D. 2013. "Scope-of-Practice Laws for Nurse
Practitioners Limit Cost Savings That Can Be Achieved in Retail Clinics." Health Affairs, 32(11):
1977­84.

Stange, K.. 2014. "How Does Provider Supply and Regulation Influence Health Care Markets?
Evidence from Nurse Practitioners and Physician Assistants." Journal of Health Economics, 33:
1­27.

Timmons, E.J. 2017. "The Effects of Expanded Nurse Practitioner and Physician Assistant Scope
of Practice on the Cost of Medicaid Patient Care." Health Policy, 121 (2): 189­96.




                                                19
                                                            Tables and Figures

        Table 1: Literature

Study                    SOP Law Separate--   SOP Law Separate--     SOP Law          SOP Data Source          Main findings
                         Practice Authority   Prescription Authority PA and RX both   and Years Included
                         (PA)                 (RX)                   included

Alexander and Schnell                         Independent                             NPALU, state nursing     No effect on suicides.
(2019)                                                                                boards, state statutes   Independent RX
                                                                                      1990-2014                associated with fewer
                                                                                                               mental health related
                                                                                                               deaths, fewer days in
                                                                                                               poor mental health.
                                                                                                               Mixed results for
                                                                                                               prescription rates.
Grecu and Spector                             Independent for                         State statutes, 2003-    No effect on opioid
(2019)                                        schedule II CS                          2015                     treatment admissions
                                                                                                               nor mortality unless
                                                                                                               combined with a
                                                                                                               prescription drug
                                                                                                               monitoring program.
Kandrack et al. (2019)                                                  FPA           NPALU, 2010-2017         No effect on nurse
                                                                                                               supply
Kleiner et al. (2016)    Independent          Mutually exclusive                      NPALU, 1999-2010         Independent PA:
                                              categories:                                                      increased NP earnings,
                                              · Independent                                                    no effects on hours
                                              · Supervised/delegated
                                                (CS only under                                                 Independent RX: no
                                                supervision)                                                   effect on NP earnings,
                                              · Limited (no CS,                                                increased hours, lower
                                                legend under                                                   price for well-child
                                                supervision                                                    visits, no effect on

                                                                   20
                                                                                                                         infant mortality; no
                                                                                                                         effect on physician
                                                                                                                         malpractice insurance
Kurtzman et al. (2017)   Independent (no       Independent                                      NPALU, 2006-2011         No differences in
                         restrictions + sole                                                                             quality of care
                         authority by BON)                                                                               associated with either
                                                                                                                         independence in PA or
                                                                                                                         independence in RX
Markowitz et al.                                                         Mutually exclusive     NPALU, state statues     No difference in
(2017)                                                                   categories for CNMs:                            maternal health
                                                                         · FPA                                           behaviors; FPA
                                                                         · CPA                                           associated with small
                                                                         · CPA with                                      increases in infant
                                                                           protocols                                     health outcomes and
                                                                         · Supervisory, no                               fewer labor inductions
                                                                           RX.                                           and C-sections; no
                                                                                                                         effects on labor supply
                                                                                                                         of CNMs
McMichael, Safriet,      Independent                                     · FPA                  State statutes,          Independent in PA and
and Buerhaus (2018)                                                      · Physician            regulations, and court   RX associated with
                                                                           supervision          cases, 1999-2012         reduced physician
                                                                           required only for                             malpractice liability
                                                                           RX
                                                                         · Complete
                                                                           supervision
McMichael (2018)         Independent           · CS allowed              · FPA                  State statutes,          Independent in PA and
                                               · Limited RX authority    · Physician            regulations, and court   RX associated with
                                                                           supervision          cases, 2001-2003;        increased supply of
                                                                           required only for    2010-2015                NPs
                                                                           RX
                                                                         · Complete
                                                                           supervision


                                                                    21
McMichael, Spetz, and                                  FPA                 State statutes,          Independent in PA
Buerhaus (2019)                                                            regulations, and court   associated with
                                                                           cases, 2006-2015         smaller increase in
                                                                                                    emergency department
                                                                                                    use following
                                                                                                    Medicaid expansion
McMichael (2020a)                                      FPA                 State statutes,          FPA and malpractice
                                                                           regulations, and court   liability interact to
                                                                           cases, 1998-2015         affect C-sections and
                                                                                                    inductions
McMichael (2020b)                                      FPA                 State statutes,          FPA associated with
                                                                           regulations, and court   decrease in opioid
                                                                           cases, 2011-2018         prescriptions
Muench et al. (2020)                                   FPA                 NPALU, state nursing     FPA associated with a
                                                                           boards, state statutes   small increase in
                                                                           2008-2012                medication adherence.
Perry (2012)            CS allowed (Y/N),                                  NPALU, 1991-2003         NPs less likely to
                        regardless of oversight                                                     move from a state with
                        requirements                                                                CS authority
Spetz et al. (2013)                                    Independent in PA   NPALU, 2004-2007         Independent in PA
                                                       Independent in RX                            only associated with
                                                                                                    fewer RX payments
                                                                                                    and RX filled in retail
                                                                                                    clinics.

                                                                                                    Independent in PA and
                                                                                                    RX associated with
                                                                                                    higher RX payments
                                                                                                    and more RX filled in
                                                                                                    retail clinics
Stange (2014)           CS allowed (Y/N),                                  NPALU, 1996-2008         CS RX allowed is
                        regardless of oversight                                                     associated with more
                        requirements                                                                office visits. No

                                                  22
                                                                            effects on usual source
                                                                            of care and amount
                                                                            paid.
Timmons (2017)   Mutually exclusive                 NPALU, 1999-2012        No effects on claims,
                 categories:                                                care days, RX claims
                 · CS without
                   supervision
                 · CS with supervision
                 · No CS
Traczynski and                                FPA   NPALU, state statues, FPA associated with:
Udalova (2018)                                      BON rules and          decreased emergency
                                                    regulations, 1995-2012 room visit; increased
                                                                           appointment
                                                                           availability; increases
                                                                           in quality of care
                                                                           metrics




                                         23
         Table 2: Nurse Practitioner Scope of Practice Laws, 1998­2020

                       FPA Status                          Prescription        Controlled    Independence in
       State                        Practice Citation                                                                                     Notes
                       1998-2020a                            Citation          Substances    Practice if no RX
                                    Code of Ala. § 34-                      Allowed as of
                                                          Code of Ala. §
     Alabama             Never      21-85. Id. § 34-21-                     Aug. 2013
                                                          34-21-86.
                                    86.
                                    Alaska Admin.
                                                          Alaska Admin.
                                    Code tit. 12, §
      Alaska            Alwaysb     44.430. Id. §
                                                          Code tit. 12, §
                                                          44.440.
                                    44.445.
                                                                                            Allowed prior to     Arizona includes some restrictions on opioid
                                                                                            Dec. 1999.           prescribing. Independence in practice without
                                    Ariz. Rev. Stat. §    Ariz. Rev.                                             prescribing was allowed prior to 1999 but still required
                       December
      Arizona                       32-1601(22). Id. §    Stat. § 32-                                            the establishment of a relationship with a physician for
                         1999
                                    32-1651.              1651.                                                  consultation or referral. The physician's name had to
                                                                                                                 be submitted to the Board of Nursing even though no
                                                                                                                 collaboration agreement was required.
                                    067-00 Ark.           067-00 Ark.                       Yes
     Arkansas            Never      Code R. § 003. Id.    Code R. §
                                    § 004(VIII).          004(VIII).
                                    Cal. Bus &
                                                          Cal. Bus &
                                    Prof Code §                                                                  California passed a bill in 2020 to grant NPs FPA, but
     California          Never                            Prof Code §
                                    2835.7. Id. §                                                                the law is not yet effective.
                                                          2836.1.
                                    2836.1.
                                    Colo. Rev. Stat. §    Colo. Rev.
     Colorado          July 2010    12-38-111.5. Id. §    Stat. § 12-255-
                                    12-255-112.           112.
                                    Conn. Gen. Stat. §    Conn. Gen.
    Connecticut        July 2014
                                    20-87a.               Stat. § 20-87a.
                                                          Del. Code
                       September    Del. Code Ann. tit.
     Delaware                                             Ann. tit. 24, §
                         2015       24, § 193.
                                                          1935.
                                    D.C. Code § 3-        D.C. Code § 3-
District of Columbia    Alwaysb
                                    1206.01.              1206.01.
                                                                            Allowed as of                        Only NPs engaged in "primary care practice, including
                                    Fla. Stat. Ann. §     Fla. Stat. Ann.   Jan. 2017                            family medicine, general pediatrics, and general
      Florida          July 2020
                                    464.0123.             § 464.012.                                             internal medicine" may practice independently of
                                                                                                                 physicians.


                                                                                  24
                           Ga. Code Ann. §        Ga. Code Ann.
Georgia        Never
                           43-34-25.              § 43-34-25.
                                                                   Allowed as of      Prior to July 2009,
                                                                   April 2005         independent in
                           Haw. Rev. Stat.        Haw. Rev.                           practice if no RX
 Hawaii      July 2009     Ann. § 457-2.7. Id.    Stat. Ann. §                        and document a
                           § 457-8.6.             457-8.6.                            collegial working
                                                                                      relationship with
                                                                                      MD.
                           Idaho Code § 54-       Idaho Code §
 Idaho       July 2004
                           1402(1).               54-1402(1).
                                                                   NPs can only
                                                                   prescribe
                                                                   benzodiazepines
                                                  225 Ill. Comp.   and schedule II
                           225 Ill. Comp. Stat.
 Illinois   January 2018                          Stat. Ann.       narcotics in
                           Ann. 65/65-43.
                                                  65/65-40.        "consultation"
                                                                   with a physician
                                                                   (same bill from
                                                                   January 2018)
                                                                                                              Indiana allows NPs to practice with "all of the
                                                                                                              supervisory rights and responsibilities, including prior
                                                  Ind. Code
             Never­See     Ind. Code Ann. §                                                                   authorization, that are available to a licensed physician
Indiana                                           Ann. § 25-23-
               Note        25-23-1-19.4.                                                                      or a health service provider in psychology (HSPP)
                                                  1-19.5.
                                                                                                              operating in a community mental health center" when
                                                                                                              providing care to Medicaid patients.
                           Iowa Code §            Iowa Code §
  Iowa        Alwaysb      152E.3.                147.107.
                                                  Kan. Stat.
                           Kan. Stat. Ann. §
 Kansas        Never                              Ann. § 65-
                           65-1130.
                                                  1130(d).
                                                                   Allowed as of      Can prescribe
                                                                   August 2006        nonscheduled drugs
                                                                                      independently after
                                                  Ky. Rev. Stat.                      4 years of
                           Ky. Rev. Stat. Ann.
Kentucky       Never                              Ann. §                              experience
                           § 314.042.
                                                  314.042(10).                        prescribing
                                                                                      nonscheduled drugs
                                                                                      in collaboration with
                                                                                      a physician.

                                                                          25
                                La. Stat. Ann. §      La. Stat. Ann.
  Louisiana        Never
                                37:913.               § 37:913(8).
                                Me. Rev. Stat.
                                Ann. tit. 32, §       Me. Rev. Stat.
   Maine          Alwaysb       2102. Id. § 221;      Ann. tit. 32, §
                                Me. Code of Regs.     2210.
                                §02.380.008;
                                                                                                               Prior to Oct 1 2010, NPs had collaborative agreements.
                                                                                                               As of Oct 1 2010, NPs must file an attestation form
                                                                                                               with the state that declares the NP will collaborate with
                                                      Md. Code
                                Md. Code Ann.,                                                                 a named physician and will adhere the rules governing
                October 2010­                         Ann., Health
  Maryland                      Health Occupations                                                             the scope of practice for their certification, but the
                  See Note                            Occupations §
                                § 8-302.                                                                       attestation does not require the physician collaborator's
                                                      8-512(a)(2).
                                                                                                               signature and, once filed, NPs may practice
                                                                                                               independently. The requirement for attestation was
                                                                                                               eliminated Oct 1 2015.
                                Mass. Ann. Laws
                                                      1397 Mass.
                                ch. 112, § 80E. 244
Massachusetts      Never                              Code Regs.
                                Mass. Code Regs.
                                                      57(2.10).
                                4.02.
                                                                                        Physician delegation
                                Mich. Comp. Laws      Mich. Comp.                       no longer required
  Michigan         Never        Serv. §               Laws Serv. §                      for nonscheduled
                                333.17211a.           333.17211a.                       drugs as of April
                                                                                        2017
                                Minn. Stat. §         Minn. Stat. §
 Minnesota      January 2015
                                148.235.              148.235.
                                                      Miss. Code        Allowed as of
                                Miss. Code Ann. §
 Mississippi       Never                              Ann. § 73-15-     July 1 2002
                                73-15-20.
                                                      20.
                                Mo. Rev. Stat. §      Mo. Ann. Stat.
  Missouri         Never
                                334.104.              § 334.104.
                                                      Mont. Admin.
                                Mont. Code Ann. §
  Montana         Alwaysb                             R.
                                37-8-409.
                                                      24.159.1461.
                                                      Neb. Rev. Stat.
                                Neb. Rev. Stat.
  Nebraska       March 2015                           Ann. § 38-
                                Ann. § 38-2315.
                                                      2315.



                                                                              26
                                 Nev. Rev. Stat.                             Allowed as of   Cannot prescribe schedule II drugs unless 2 years/2000
                                                          Nev. Rev. Stat.
                                 Ann. § 632.237. Id.                         May 2001        hours clinical experience OR unless controlled
   Nevada          July 2013                              Ann. §
                                 § 639.1375. Id. §                                           substance is prescribed pursuant to a protocol approved
                                                          639.1375.
                                 639.2351.                                                   by a collaborating physician.
                                                          N.H. Rev. Stat.
                                 N.H. Rev. Stat.
New Hampshire      Alwaysb       Ann. § 326-B:11.
                                                          Ann. § 326-
                                                          B:11.
                                 N.J. Stat. Ann. §        N.J. Stat. Ann.    Allowed as of
 New Jersey         Never
                                 45:11-49.                § 45:11-49.        August 2004
                                                          N.M. Stat.
                                 N.M. Stat. Ann. §
 New Mexico        Alwaysb       61-3-23.2.
                                                          Ann. § 61-3-
                                                          23.2.
                                                          2020 N.Y.                          As of Jan. 2015, NPs need to attest to a collaborative
                                                          CLS Educ                           relationship with a physician, but are otherwise
                 January 2015­   N.Y. Educ. Law §         Consol. Laws                       independent in practice and prescriptive authority.
  New York
                    See Note     6902.                    Adv. Legis.                        Local NPs interpret the 2015 change in the law as
                                                          Serv. §                            allowing full practice authority (Poghosyan et al.
                                                          6902(3).                           2020).
                                 N.C. Gen. Stat. §        N.C. Gen. Stat.
North Carolina      Never
                                 90-18.2.                 § 90-18.2.
                                                          N.D. Admin.
                                 N.D. Cent. Code §
 North Dakota    October 2011                             Code 54-05-
                                 43-12.5-01.
                                                          03.1-03.
                                                          Ohio Rev.
                                 Ohio Rev. Code
    Ohio            Never                                 Code Ann. §
                                 Ann. § 4723.43.
                                                          4723.50.
                                 Okla. Stat. tit. 59, §   Okla. Stat. tit.
  Oklahoma          Never
                                 567.3a(6).               59, § 567.4a.
                                 Or. Rev. Stat. §         Or. Rev. Stat.
   Oregon          Alwaysb
                                 678.375(4).              § 678.390.
                                 63 Pa. Cons. Stat. §     63 Pa. Cons.
 Pennsylvania       Never
                                 218.2. Id. § 218.3.      Stat. § 218.3.
                                                                                             Regulations granting full practice authority were
                                  216-RICR-40-05-         R.I. Gen. Laws                     promulgated in January/February 2012. Rhode Island
 Rhode Island      Feb 2012
                                 3                        § 5-34-49.                         changed its statute to allow full practice authority in
                                                                                             June 2013. 5 R.I. Gen. Laws § 5-34-44.
                                                          S.C. Code          Allowed as of
                                 S.C. Code Ann. §
South Carolina      Never                                 Ann. § 40-33-      May 2004
                                 40-33-34.
                                                          34.


                                                                                   27
                                                     S.D. Codified
                               S.D. Codified
South Dakota   February 2017                         Laws § 36-9A-
                               Laws § 36-9A-12.
                                                     12.
                                                     Tenn. Code
                               Tenn. Code Ann. §
 Tennessee        Never                              Ann. § 63-7-
                               63-7-123.
                                                     123.
                                                     Tex. Occ.       Allowed as of
                               Tex. Occ. Code
   Texas          Never                              Code Ann. §     May 2003
                               Ann. § 157.0512.
                                                     157.0512.
                                                                                         Yes­See note   Prior to May 2016, independent in practice and
                                                     Utah Code
                               Utah Code Ann. §                                                         prescription only for schedules IV and V. Schedules II
   Utah         May 2016                             Ann. § 58-
                               58-31d-102.                                                              and III require a consultation and referral plan with a
                                                     17d-102(23).
                                                                                                        consulting physician.
                                                     04-030-170
                               Vt. Stat. Ann. tit.
  Vermont       June 2011                            Vt. Code R. §
                               26, §§ 1611, 1613.
                                                     8.5.
                                                                     (i) Schedules V
                                                                     and VI
                                                                     controlled
                                                                     substances on
                                                                     and after July 1,
                                                                     2000; (ii)
                                                                     Schedules IV
                                                                     through VI on
                                                                     and after January
                               Va. Code Ann. §       Va. Code Ann.
                                                                     1, 2002; (iii)
  Virginia      April 2018     54.1-2957. Id. §      § 54.1-
                                                                     Schedules III
                               54.1-2957.01.         2957.01.
                                                                     through VI
                                                                     controlled
                                                                     substances on
                                                                     and after July 1,
                                                                     2003; and
                                                                     (iv) Schedules II
                                                                     through VI on
                                                                     and after July 1,
                                                                     2006
                                                                                                        Prior to July 2005, a joint practice agreement was
                                                     Wash. Rev.
               July 2005­See   Wash. Rev. Code                       Prior to July 1,                   required for controlled substance prescriptions. The
Washington                                           Code Ann. §
                    notes      Ann. § 18.79.050.                     2000, Schedule                     JPA is a written agreement that describes how
                                                     18.79.050.
                                                                     V and legend                       collaboration will occur between the physician and the

                                                                            28
                                                                       drugs only.                   ARNP (i.e. when and how the ARNP will consult
                                                                       Effective July 1,             regarding the Rx of controlled substances).
                                                                       2000, schedules
                                                                       II-IV allowed.
                               W. Va. Code Ann.      W. Va. Code       Schedule II not
West Virginia     June 2016    § 9-4B-1. Id. § 30-   Ann. § 30-7-      allowed.
                               7-15b.                15b.
                                                     Wis. Stat. §
                               Wis. Stat. §
                                                     961.395
 Wisconsin          Never      961.395. Id. §
                                                     (2020); Wis.
                               441.16.
                                                     Stat. § 441.16.
                                                                       Authority to
                                                                       prescribe
                                                     Wyo. Stat.        Schedule II
                               Wyo. Stat. Ann. §
 Wyoming           Alwaysb                           Ann. § 33-21-     controlled
                               33-21-302.
                                                     120(a)(i)(A).     substances
                                                                       effective July 1
                                                                       2001.
     a
       Some states require a transition to practice period that requires an NP to be supervised for some amount of time before being granted
     full practice authority.
     b
       State has always allowed full practice authority since at least 1998.




                                                                              29
