                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             RULES, DISCRETION, AND CORRUPTION IN PROCUREMENT:
              EVIDENCE FROM ITALIAN GOVERNMENT CONTRACTING

                                     Francesco Decarolis
                                      Raymond Fisman
                                        Paolo Pinotti
                                      Silvia Vannutelli

                                     Working Paper 28209
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28209


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2020




We thank seminar audiences at Kellogg School of Management - Northwestern University,
University of Montreal and SIOE 2019. We also thank Juan Ortner and Giancarlo Spagnolo for
helpful comments. Decarolis gratefully acknowledges financial support from the European
Research Council (ERC-2015-StG-679217). The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Francesco Decarolis, Raymond Fisman, Paolo Pinotti, and Silvia Vannutelli. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Rules, Discretion, and Corruption in Procurement: Evidence from Italian Government Contracting
Francesco Decarolis, Raymond Fisman, Paolo Pinotti, and Silvia Vannutelli
NBER Working Paper No. 28209
December 2020
JEL No. D72,D73,H57,K42

                                           ABSTRACT

The benefits of bureaucratic discretion depend on the extent to which it is used for public benefit
versus exploited for private gain. We study the relationship between discretion and corruption in
Italian government procurement auctions, using a confidential database of firms and procurement
officials investigated for corruption by Italian enforcement authorities. We show that discretionary
procedure auctions (those awarded based on negotiated rather than open bidding) are associated
with corruption only when conducted with fewer than the formally required number of bidders or
employing discretionary criteria ("scoring rule" rather than first price). We further show that,
while these "corruptible" discretionary auctions are chosen more often by officials who are
themselves investigated for corruption, they are used less often in procurement administrations in
which at least one official is investigated for corruption. These findings fit with a framework in
which more discretion leads to greater efficiency as well as more opportunities for theft, and a
central monitor manages this trade-off by limiting discretion for high-corruption procedures and
locales. Additional results based on two standard tools for curbing corruption -- turnover and
subcontracting limits -- corroborate this interpretation. Overall, our results imply that discretion
may be under-utilized, given the high potential benefits as compared to the modest increment in
corruption.

Francesco Decarolis                              Paolo Pinotti
Bocconi University                               Bocconi University
Via Sarfatti 25                                  Via Rontgen 1
Milan, 20136                                     20136 Milan
Italy                                            ITALY
and EIEF                                         and fRDB
francesco.decarolis@unibocconi.it                and also BAFFI-CAREFIN Centre
                                                 paolo.pinotti@unibocconi.it
Raymond Fisman
Department of Economics Boston                   Silvia Vannutelli
University                                       270 Bay State Road
270 Bay State Road, 304A                         Boston, MA 02215
Boston, MA 02215                                 United States
and NBER                                         svann@bu.edu
rfisman@bu.edu
I       Introduction
     Governments often face a trade-off in the oversight and constraints they impose on
lower-level bureaucrats in carrying out their functions. Officials may use discretion to
better serve the public's interests, or exploit it for personal gain. The appropriate level of
discretion depends on the benefits of an agent's informational advantage relative to the
costs from his exploiting discretion for personal gain. From a public welfare perspective,
the agency problem is complicated by yet another layer of delegation ­ politicians or high-
level officials who determine the extent of discretion available to lower-level officials may
be overly risk-averse, to the extent that the electorate is more attentive to corruption
scandals rather than an efficient provision of public goods. Such incentives ­ whether
electoral or promotion-related ­ may then lead to insufficient delegation and discretion.
     In this paper, we study both the determinants and consequences of discretion in the
context of government procurement in Italy. Procurement accounts for a large fraction of
government expenditure worldwide; for example, for OECD countries the procurement-
to-spending ratio held steady at around 30 percent during 2007-2015 (OECD [2017]).
Furthermore, corruption is thought to result in substantial "leakage" from procurement
expenditures, even in more developed (and less corrupt) countries.1 Thus, understanding
how procurement rules might impact corruption is of interest in its own right, in addition
to serving as an apt setting for studying the trade-offs associated with discretion in
government bureaucracies more generally.
      Our work is enabled by the use of a confidential database obtained from the Agenzia
Informazioni e Sicurezza Interna (AISI), the Italian equivalent of the FBI. The database
lists individuals that have been flagged by the AISI as suspected of various crimes, in-
cluding corruption. By linking this list to administrative data on the top employees and
owners of Italian companies, we classify a firm as investigated for corruption if at least one
employee or owner was flagged by the AISI for suspected corruption. We then link the
resultant firm-level database to information on over 200,000 procurement auctions for the
construction and maintenance of public infrastructure held throughout Italy during 2000-
2016. The data include the near-universe of auctions involving the two most frequently
procured types of contracts: those involving either civic buildings, or roads, highways and
bridges. These data allow us to observe whether investigated firms participated in or won
each auction. Finally, we complement these firm-level data with similar information on
investigations for corruption charges involving the public officials in charge of awarding
(and follow-on monitoring) the contracts in our data (we use the same terminology of
    1
    A study sponsored by the European Commission reports that, in projects that were found to have
been corrupted, 13 percent of expenditures were lost due to corruption (Ferwerda and Deleanu [2013]).



                                                 2
"investigated" and "clean," or "non-investigated," that we use for businesses also for the
public officials in charge of the auctions). We know of no other database of corruption
risk for individuals and organizations that is comparable to ours.
     The scale and richness of our data are such that we may employ a range of fixed
effects and controls, which helps to rule out a number of alternative interpretations,
which inevitably arise in correlational results. For example, in our analyses that look
at the characteristics of auctions won by firms under investigation for corruption, we
may include over 6,000 procurement authority (PA) fixed effects, so that we identify the
relationship based on the selection of different auction mechanisms by the same entity
(e.g., a municipality), or PA-year fixed effects so that we identify the relationship based
on the selection of different auction mechanisms in the same place during the same year.
The latter specification allows us to account for any potential unobserved time-varying
shocks at the procurement authority level.
      We begin by examining the types of auctions that are most often won by investigated
firms. We show that two auction arrangements are significantly more likely to lead to a
contract being awarded to an investigated firm: first, so-called scoring rule auctions, which
involve (potentially subjective) non-price criteria in selecting a winner, are 1 percentage
point (6 percent) more likely to be won by investigated firms, relative to first-price (non-
discretionary) auctions. Auctions that use "negotiated" procedures in which procurement
officials invite bidders (rather than allow for open bidding) are no more likely to be won
by firms investigated for corruption, relative to open auctions. However, when we look at
the subset of negotiated auctions in which officials fail to invite the requisite number of
bidders (which we take to be an indication of abuse of discretion), we find a 1.9 percentage
point (11 percent) higher probability of an investigated winner. While more at risk of
selecting investigated firms, we also find that scoring rule auctions are associated with
lower cost overruns and higher award prices, while negotiated procedures are associated
with lower delays and higher award prices. In line with earlier work by Coviello et al.
[2017], we interpret these features as an indication of improved contract execution.
     We then link the choice of discretionary auctions to characteristics of procurement
administrators that deploy them. In particular, we look at whether the choice of dis-
cretion is affected by whether the auction was administered by an individual that the
AISI has flagged as suspected of corruption, and also whether the auction occurred in a
municipality in which the AISI has identified at least one such official. The first of these
analyses aim to examine whether individual procurement officials prone to corruption are
more likely to select (corruptible) discretionary auctions; the second examines whether
locales where suspected corruption is present tend to use "corruptible" discretionary auc-
tions. Our results show effects that go in opposite directions: public officials suspected of


                                             3
corruption are 2.9 percentage points more likely to use one of the two discretionary auc-
tion types we flag for concern (discretionary criteria or discretionary procedures with too
few invited participants). By contrast, discretionary auctions are 1.9 percentage points
less common in "corruption-suspected" municipalities.
      We argue that these results are most easily reconciled with classic models of del-
egation put forward by Holmstrom et al. [1982] and applied to the bureaucratic del-
egation problem by Epstein and O'halloran [1994]. In our context, greater discretion
allows for more efficient implementation of government projects by well-informed and
well-intentioned procurement officials, which must be traded off against the higher prob-
ability of leakage by corrupt officials. If the choice of auction design is one of the primary
means of oversight by a (non-corrupt) central monitor, then less discretion will be allowed
in locales where the probability of corruption is higher. When possible, however, corrupt
officials deploy discretion, to the benefit of corrupt firms.
      This interpretation is supported by two further pieces of evidence focused on meth-
ods that, like the selection of the auction procedure and criteria, are often used to curtail
corruption: rotation of procurement officers, and tighter limits on subcontracting. Both
tools also entail costs: officer turnover destroys the accumulation of the skills essential
for procurement design and management, while constraints on subcontracting limit the
discretion employed by firms in executing contracts. In findings that parallel our results
on limits on procurement discretion discussed in the first part of our analysis, we find
that both tools are more extensively used in "corruption-suspected" municipalities. In
particular, focusing first on turnover, we show that the average proportion of auctions
administered by each official is lower in the set of "corruption-suspected" municipalities,
which we take as an indication of higher turnover among procurement officials. The
implied effect of suspected corruption on turnover is very large, with a 22 percent (6.82
percentage points) lower fraction of contracts managed by an average official in "corrupt"
versus "non-corrupt" municipalities (and a nearly identical effect on the value of the con-
tracts managed). Second, we look at subcontracting, which is typically considered the
main channel for funneling public money into the cash needed for bribes and kickbacks.
Indeed, we show a series of results indicating that firms investigated for corruption sub-
contract more often and ­ conditional on subcontracting ­ they are more than 60 percent
more likely to delegate subcontracts to other investigated firms and to award a larger
share of all subcontracts to investigated firms. But subcontracting is also a tool for the
efficient allocation of job tasks, especially for more complex projects. When inspecting
regional procurement regulations on subcontracting rules, we find that regions in which
corruption is less of a concern are more apt to loosen regulations on subcontracting,
whereas regions where corruption is more of a concern implement tighter subcontracting


                                              4
rules.
     Overall, the empirical findings in this study offer a new, detailed assessment of the
extent of ­ and the mechanisms involved in ­ corruption in infrastructure procurement.
On the fundamental question of whether a central legislature or senior bureaucrat chooses
to impose excessively strict constraints on lower-level officials, while our analyses do not
allow for decisive welfare calculations, we argue that the data provide suggestive evidence
of overly strict constraints. This argument is exemplified by the consequences of a mid-
2000s reform in which the Italian legislature loosened regulations governing the use of
negotiated procedures. Whereas such contracts could only be deployed for relatively
small projects (under e300,000) in the early 2000s, by 2011 the limit had been raised to
e1,000,000. This change, motivated by the government's desire to stimulate the economy
by reducing the procedural times to award public contracts, led to a massive increase in
the share of auctions held via negotiated procedures, from 10 percent in 2006, to 60
percent by 2012. Yet the vast majority of these were conducted with the legally required
number of bidders, and hence the loosening of rules had at most a very small effect
on the fraction of contracts awarded to firms under investigation for corruption. And in
locations in which officials might have exploited discretion, their use was relatively limited.
Indeed, calculations based on our estimates imply a 0.05 percent increase in investigated
winners overall between the periods before and after the increase of the threshold for using
negotiated procedures. This appears to be a small cost when compared to improvements
in contracting quality from discretion, such as a 14 percent reduction in delays.
     The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In the sext section we review the relevant
literature and discuss how our findings contribute to it. We then provide a detailed
overview of Italian procurement data as well as our data on corruption investigations.
This is followed by a presentation of the main results on discretion in auction design. We
then outline a simple model of corruption and oversight, in order to organize and interpret
the results. This interpretation is supported through additional evidence on turnover and
subcontracting. Finally, we present concluding comments and discuss policy implications.


II       Literature
     Our paper sits at the intersection of several distinct literatures, and we organize our
discussion of this related work around what we see as our five main contributions.
    Taken as a whole, our results suggest that greater discretion had only a limited
impact on corruption (but did reduce delays, and plausibly also costs). This first contri-
bution is relevant to our understanding of the efficiency-corruption trade-off in delegation.
The seminal study of Banfield [1975] observed that reducing discretion may limit corrup-

                                              5
tion, albeit at the expense of constraining honest public officials from exercising their
judgment to the benefit of public welfare. This links to the rich and extensive literature
on government decentralization and delegation. Huber and Shipan and Bendor et al.
[2001] provide earlier overviews of this body of research; we see our work as correspond-
ing to their models of "ex ante constraints" (as in the reduced use of discretion that we
study here) rather than ex post monitoring.2
     Our second contribution is a new measurement of corruption in public contracts that
is plausibly more credible and more accurate than prior measures. There is a vast and
growing body of work on the political and economic analysis of corruption (see Olken and
Pande [2012] and Burguet et al. [2016] for recent surveys of corruption that review and
synthesize various models of delegation), which reflects the potential importance of cor-
ruption to the functioning of government, and the correspondingly substantial resources
devoted to fighting corruption. Thus, we see it as a useful contribution to be able to
quantify that 17 percent of public works in Italy are awarded to investigated firms.3
     Our third contribution concerns the strengths and weaknesses of different procure-
ment methods to limit corruption risks. Our finding that discretion has limited impact
overall on corruption is in line with Bandiera et al. [2009], who analyze centralized ver-
sus decentralized public procurement and show that excessive payments for standardized
goods are driven more by inefficiency than corruption.4 Our results provide evidence on a
well-defined source of inefficiency, namely excessively rigid contracting procedures. Sev-
eral other studies link procurement methods and oversight to project outcomes. Notable
contributions include Brierley [2020], who shows that greater oversight may backfire if
   2
      Related work by Bandiera et al. [2020] investigates delegation in public procurement by experi-
mentally varying the amount of autonomy granted to procurement officers. They find that shifting
decision-making rights from monitors to officers reduces procurement prices. While our analysis also
indicates that discretion improves procurement outcomes, our study focuses on a different type of chan-
nel (the choice of award procedures and criteria) and a different outcome (the risk of selecting criminal
contractors). More broadly, given the monitoring function of hi gher-level governments, our findings
also relate to the literature on the costs and benefits of decentralization (e.g., Bardhan and Mookherjee
2006).
    3
      Our work also relates to the studies linking procurement to firm political connections, although our
measure of corruption risk is clearly distinct. Mironov and Zhuravskaya [2016] document how firms
with public procurement revenue increase the tunneling of funds to politicians around elections. They
also document that more corrupt locales tend to award contracts to less productive firms. Auriol et al.
[2016] show that politically connected companies are more likely to win auctions with limited competition,
which they take to be an indication of corruption. A similar approach is taken by Baltrunaite et al. [2018]
in the setting of Italian auctions, in linking political connections to discretionary auctions. Brogaard
et al. [2016] show that contracts won by politically connected firms in the U.S. tend to have poorer
performance. Our work is distinct from these earlier efforts in a number of ways. Most importantly, we
have an unusual country-wide measure which allows us to identify firms as potentially corrupt.
    4
      Along similar lines, several recent studies have shown that limiting the discretion of procurement
officials is most valuable when the skills or abilities of the public buyers are lower; see Best et al. [2019],
Bucciol et al. [2020] and Decarolis et al. [2020].



                                                      6
politicians themselves are corrupted (a result in the spirit of the classic study of hier-
archical corruption in Indian canals by Wade [1982]), Lewis-Faupel et al. [2016], who
document the positive impact of e-procurement on road quality in India and on execu-
tion time Indonesia, possibly by limiting interactions with corrupt public officials, and
Djankov et al. [2017], who document the correlation across countries in procurement rules
and practices and link these to survey-based measures of road quality. The central role of
competition in curtailing corruption that we uncover parallels the recent work of Colon-
nelli and Prem [2017], which also points to the role of limited competition in creating
rent-seeking behavior in Brazilian procurement. At the macroeconomic level, these are
key results for the larger objective of assessing the quality of fiscal policy, as underscored
by the recent interest in opening up the black box of "Big G" [Cox et al., 2020].
      The fourth contribution relates to the heterogeneous impact of procurement rules
across different public organizations. In particular, we show that discretionary auctions
are relatively rare in high-corruption areas, but are commonly deployed by individual
administrators under investigation for corruption. While these two findings are, at least
superficially, in tension with one another, as we discuss below they follow from a simple
model that is very much in line with standard theories of delegation. This framework also
allows us to interpret our findings concerning the variation across municipalities in officer
turnover and subcontracting. Overall, our results indicate that governments are aware of
the trade-off created by discretion, and take it into account in the extent to which it is
allowed in different areas. This latter finding was suggested by Coppier et al. [2013], who
noted that there is greater discretion in (low-corruption) U.S. and U.K. procurement.
Coviello et al. [2017], in their investigation of the economic impacts of allowing greater
discretion in the public procurement of works in Italy, also notice that higher-corruption
provinces tend to use less discretionary auction procedures. We are, to our knowledge,
the first to identify this relationship systematically based on local variation in corruption.
     Our fifth and final contribution is to the debate on anti-corruption policies in public
procurement. While there is much theoretical work in this area (see, e.g., Ortner and
Chassang [2018], for one recent contribution), there are scant empirical findings. The
few exceptions include Olken [2007], which provides a comparative analysis of central-
ized audits versus grassroots participation in monitoring, and Di Tella and Schargrodsky
[2003], which presents evidence on the combined effect of public officials' wages and cor-
ruption audits. Colonnelli and Prem [2017] provide causal estimates of the real economic
impact of anti-corruption audits, showing that positive economic effects of corruption
crackdowns are concentrated in government-dependent sectors and suggesting that pro-
curement was a key channel through which corruption occurred. Our findings on the
role of firm competition to limit the corruption risk of discretionary auction procedures


                                              7
and criteria, as well as our discussion of turnover and subcontracting, is be relevant for
this more policy-relevant research agenda. We return to policy considerations in our
conclusion.


III     Background and data collection

III.A     Institutional details on Italian procurement
     In recent years, Italian regulations that govern public procurement underwent a
number of reforms as a result of, among other things, the passage of European Union
Procurement Directives aimed at creating a common set of rules for public procurement
in the EU. In particular, these reforms aimed to improve the design of source selection sys-
tems, i.e., the process for evaluating bids. We study public contracts under the "ordinary
regime," which sets the procurement rules for most projects, excluding secret military
contracts and some strategic infrastructure projects.
    Source selection systems under the ordinary regime vary along two main dimensions:
the awarding procedure and the selection criterion. Starting with the first dimension,
there are two primary procedures for awarding contracts: open auctions and negotiations.
Open auctions are "ordinary" procedures for the assignment of procurement contracts
in which all firms eligible to execute public contracts can bid. In these procedures, the
contracting officer overseeing the project has little discretion in the choice of contractor.
These auctions presume the feasibility of accurately defining, from the outset, the relevant
scope and technical specifications of the contract.
     Negotiated procedures are, by contrast, marked by significant discretionary powers.
The contracting officer consults a set of prospective contractors and may negotiate the
conditions of the contract with one or more of them. Given their discretionary nature,
negotiated procedures are treated as exceptional, and admissible only under specific con-
ditions: for the most part, they are permitted only for contracts below a given monetary
threshold. Above this threshold, negotiations are allowed only when there is some ur-
gency in fulfilling the contract, or when a previous attempt to run an open auction failed
to elicit any bids.
     The second key aspect of contracting is the specification of the criterion for determin-
ing the winner. Both open and negotiated procedures can use either the "lowest price"
criterion or a "scoring rule" criterion (also known as "most economically advantageous
tender" criterion). In the first case, the enterprise offering the lowest price is awarded the
contract, provided that this offer is judged to be reliable, that is, the offer is not so low
as to be unrealistic. The second approach allows for the accounting of a broader range


                                              8
of considerations beyond price, as specified in the call for tender. Non-price parameters
of a bid may include both hard and soft elements. An example of a quantitative (hard)
parameter could be the number of engineers that will work on the specific project, while
an example of a soft element is the aesthetic quality of the proposed solution. There are
a few limits that regulations place on the choice of parameters. In particular, criteria
must all pertain to the bid and not the firm, so that past performance cannot be used
as a parameter. But procurement officials enjoy wide margins of discretion in setting the
parameters (possibly to the advantage of specific firms) and their associated weights.5
     As one might expect, the full set of regulations governing procurement are far more
complex than we can describe here, and we defer to Decarolis and Giorgiantonio [2015] for
a more in-depth discussion. However, we observe that, beyond some modest differences,
the set of procedures and criteria governing Italian procurement are quite general. By
definition, Italian procurement rules also characterize the institutional framework in the
EU more generally. But they also reflect procurement rules in a much broader set of
countries, as documented in a recent survey by the World Bank [2017].
     One particular feature of procurement rules does warrant further elaboration, given
our focus on delegation and discretion by individual procurement officials. Whenever not
expressly constrained by national or local rules, the choice of both the awarding procedure
and the selection criterion is delegated to the contracting officer overseeing each contract
(the "Responsabile Unico del Procedimento", or RUP). This public official is selected from
among management-level bureaucrats in the relevant public administration (PA), unless
none is available for this role (in which case special rules apply). The RUP is nominated
via a formal act by the PA's top official, which in municipalities is the mayor.
      The RUP is in charge of managing the entire contracting process, from the project
definition phase, through the bidding phase, to the awarding and realization of the con-
tract. Thus, the RUP has considerable control over how the contract is structured. But
this discretion has to be exercised within the regulatory constraints imposed by Euro-
pean, national and local regulations, and it is subject to oversight both internally within
the PA, and from third party auditors (at the local, national and, in certain cases, Eu-
ropean level; see Figure ??). A RUP who wishes to use a discretionary procedure or
criterion may aim to be appointed to oversee auctions that are amenable to such meth-
ods, and conditional on the project may select more discretionary approaches. However,
it is difficult to make strong inferences about a RUP's intent merely from the selection
   5
    An illustrative example may help convey this point. In 2007, the Italian Supreme Court confirmed
the conviction of a group of public officers and business owners for rigging multiple scoring rule auctions
in the Santa Maria Capua Vetere municipality. The scheme involved public officials drafting calls for
tenders following the recommendations of favored firms: parameters in the scoring formula emphasized
elements that advantaged pre-identified firms, e.g., by specifying the use of a specific brand of machinery.


                                                     9
of discretionary auctions. A socially-motivated procurement official may also choose a
negotiated procedure to expedite project execution and (with the interests of the munic-
ipality at heart) even manipulate contract amounts to facilitate their use. We thus rely
on detailed data on RUP and firms described below to discern whether discretion is more
plausibly used for self-serving reasons.


III.B      Data
III.B.1     Procurement Data

     Our procurement data come from a database provided by the Public Contracts Ob-
servatory at the Italian Anticorruption Authority (ANAC), the public entity that oversees
public procurement in Italy. Since 2000, ANAC has monitored all public contracts above
the threshold reserve price of at least e150,000 until 2010, and e40,000 thereafter. Our
dataset contains the universe of ANAC data for the years 2000-2016 and for the two
main types of public works: those involving civic buildings (OG01), or transportation
infrastructure such as roads, highways, and bridges (OG03).6 For each contract, we have
detailed information about the contracting phase, including the start and end date of
the bidding process, the type of contracting authority, the auction procedure used to
award the contract, the selection criterion, the number of bidders, and the identity of
the winning bidder. The data also include information on auction outcomes, such as
the initial project value, the winning discount and the total effective costs, the expected
and effective contractual duration, the extent of subcontracting, and the identities of
subcontracting firms. Finally, for a subset of auctions, we observe all of the bids.
     We observe 5 types of contracting authorities in the data: central administrations,
municipalities, other local administrations (regions and provinces), state-owned enter-
prises, and "decentralized administrations" (specifically, hospitals and universities). For
each authority, we know the identity of the RUP managing each contract, and for most
of them we also know the exact geographic location (the exceptions include central gov-
ernment administrations, decentralized regional administrations (such as hospitals and
universities), and also highways and railways that span geographic boundaries). Local
institutions ­ municipalities in particular ­ play the largest role in public works pro-
curement. Local governments account for 72% of total projects awarded (53% municipal
councils, 14% provincial councils, 3% regional governments). While about half of the
   6
     The procurement of public infrastructure is subdivided by law into 13 job types (OG01,...,OG13).
OG01 and OG03 are the most relevant categories which, combined together, represent half of all public
contracts for infrastructure, in terms of number of contracts as well as money spent. Although the data
contain CPV codes, which refer to more detailed sub-categories, OG codes are more reliable since this
latter classification is the only one required by law.


                                                  10
contracts in our database are awarded by municipal councils, they are relatively small
projects, with an average value of e527,000, as compared to an average value of e847,000
for provincial and regional governments, and over e1.5 million for hospitals and univer-
sities. There is also a wide range in the number of contracts per contracting authority.
There are 1,266 municipal councils that awarded only a single contract (mean population
of 1,404), whereas the municipality of Rome alone awarded 3,519 contracts.
     As previously noted, the contracting authority can choose between two main types
of awarding procedures, open and negotiated. If the latter is selected, we additionally
observe the number of firms invited to participate in the auction, and for all auctions
we see the number of firms that present offers (the number of bidding firms is, by def-
inition, less than or equal to the number of invited offers). Furthermore, we observe
the identity of the winning firm and of all of its subcontractors, and, for auctions held
after 2010, also the identity of all participants. Under normal circumstances, negotiated
procedures require a minimum number of invitations. When we observe fewer than the
legally mandated number of invitations, we flag the auction as involving potential abuse
of discretionary procedures (denoted by the variable DiscretP roclowN ). Conversely, we
denote as DiscretP rochighN negotiated auctions with the legally mandated number of
bidders. Finally, we denote all negotiated procedures (both highN and lowN ) by the
variable DiscretP roc. Note that a below-minimum number of invited bidders does not
automatically indicate abuse ­ it may instead result from a contract's urgency or a lack
of qualified firms.
      Auctions may be awarded based on a price-only system or one that incorporates a
wider set of considerations (i.e., scoring rule auctions).7 Since scoring rule auctions allow
for a range of non-price (and potentially subjective) parameters set by the RUP and
thus involve more discretion than first-price auctions, we define an auction as having a
discretionary criterion (denoted by the variable DiscretCrit) if it is awarded via a scoring
rule.
     To capture the two types of discretionary auctions we will emphasize, we define a
summary measure, Discretion, which denotes auctions for which DiscretP roclowN = 1
or DiscretCrit = 1. While in principle DiscretP roclowN and DiscretCrit can both
occur simultaneously, this is rarely the case in practice since the regulations tend to favor
negotiations for smaller value (or urgent) contracts, while the scoring rule system is used
for complex projects and requires more time to award the contract since a commission,
   7
    A third alternative is also available, the so-called average bid auction (ABA). The ABA is a variant
of the first-price auction in which the winner is the firm offering the lowest price among a subset of
"non-excluded" offers. The ABA induces higher participation and subcontracting, as well as bid coor-
dination (Decarolis [2018], Conley and Decarolis [2016]), but for our analysis, we simply view it as a
non-discretionary auction. Hence, we will not treat it separately from the other first-price auctions.


                                                  11
and not just the RUP, evaluates the bids.
     Beyond our measures of auction procedure and criterion, we include a number of
other auction attributes as controls. Most importantly, we control for the auction re-
serve price (Reserve), which is the monetary value, reported in the call for tenders,
above which the PA is unwilling to pay for the contract. Price bids are expressed as
discounts over this reserve price. In our analysis, the reserve price will enter linearly (in
logarithm) as a control in many of our specifications, as well as via a series of dummy
variables for contracts in various reserve price ranges, which correspond to thresholds
which triggered stricter rules and/or monitoring of an auction, with cutoffs of e100, 000;
150, 000; 300, 000; 500, 000; 1, 000, 000, and 1, 500, 000. At these threshold values, both
the publicity requirements of the call for tenders and the set of eligible bidders change.
     The auction database provides us with additional information that we will exploit in
the analysis. In particular, we observe the identity of the firm winning the auction and
the identities of those receiving subcontracts (if any). Information on each firm includes
its name and the location where it was incorporated, as well as a unique social security
identifier, which provides the link to the criminal investigations data. Finally, we also
observe some standard procurement auction outcomes, including delivery time, price and
(for about half of our sample of auctions8 ) the total costs for completion. Data on the
expected contractual duration as well as the effective total completion time allow us to
construct a measure of contractual delay (Delay ) and cost overrun (Extra Cost). Since
Delay can be positive or negative and has extreme outliers, we use an inverse hyperbolic
sine transformation. The final price of the winning bid is expressed as a discount over
the reserve price (Discount) and, similarly, Extra Cost is calculated as the difference
between the final price and the awarding price, over the initial reserve price.

III.B.2     Criminal Investigations Data

     A contribution of this study is to introduce a new measure of criminality in public
procurement. As previously noted, in the procurement data we observe bidders' and
subcontractors' identities. For each firm, we then obtained the full list of its owners
and top managers through the Company Accounts Data System. This is a proprietary
database maintained by CERVED Group that we observe for four separate years: 2006,
2011, 2014 and 2016. For each firm, the union of all owners and managers recorded in any
of these four periods represents the set of individuals connected to the firm in our analysis.
For each individual, their record of criminal investigations (which we will describe shortly)
was coded, and this information was aggregated across firm-linked individuals to obtain
   8
    For a detailed discussion of the reasons behind limited data availability, see Decarolis and Palumbo
[2015].


                                                  12
a firm-level measure of potential criminal status. We use the same criminal investigations
database to determine the suspected criminality of each RUP in our data.
      Records of individuals' criminal investigations were analyzed for us by AISI (Italy's
internal intelligence and security agency) using a centralized archive, the Sistema D'Indagine
Interforze (SDI), which is a primary source of information that police officers and intelli-
gence agencies use to identify potential targets for further investigation.9 This database
contains reports of all individuals investigated by any of the Italian police forces: state po-
lice (Polizia di Stato ), finance police (Guardia di Finanza ), military police (Carabinieri ),
and environmental police (Guardia Forestale ).
     An entry in the SDI database typically occurs after a police force, based on a pre-
liminary investigation, determines that there is sufficient evidence to open a formal in-
vestigation. This investigation might or might not lead to a court case and, if so, to a
conviction. Therefore, court cases are clearly a subset of the entries in the SDI database
(see Figure A.2). The resulting sample of suspect offenders thus includes individuals that
were convicted, acquitted, or never charged. The latter two groups plausibly comprise a
large number of offenders whose guilt could not be proven in court. Indeed, corruption
cases are generally complex, and convictions relatively rare. This is particularly true in
Italy, where the trial must go through three levels of judgment (Primo grado, Appello, and
Cassazione ) within a relatively short statute of limitation ­ between 6 and 12 years. For
these various reasons, official data on (convicted) offenders may greatly understate the
extent of corruption.10 Note that the investigated individuals are unaware that they are
under investigation, unless the case is formally brought to a criminal court. For the same
reason, unless a formal court case has begun, a PA cannot exclude firms from auctions
even if their owners/managers are investigated for corruption charges.
     AISI searched the SDI database for all managers and owners we identified as associ-
ated with each firm, and flagged those who had been investigated for corruption and other
related crimes. Specifically, the following categories of crime were considered: corruption,
malfeasance and embezzlement; abuse of power and undue influence; and violations in
public auctions. Based on the individual-level records extracted from SDI, suspected
criminals in 3,848 firms winning a contract over the period 2000-2016 were identified
   9
     The SDI data have been previously used in research by Pinotti [2017]. Our access to the data is
enabled via a framework agreement between AISI and Bocconi University.
  10
     Decarolis and Giorgiantonio [2019] analyze the universe of court sentences for corruption in public
auctions finding that only 2% of the firms awarded public contracts were thus implicated. In the same set
of auctions, our measure flags 17% of contract winners as potentially criminal (note that Decarolis and
Giorgiantonio [2019] use a smaller and different set of auctions than the one used in our paper). While
the SDI data do not suffer to the same extent from the under-reporting problem that afflicts judicial
data, they may include some false positives. In practice, the frequency of false positives is likely very
low, as police officers record suspect offenders in the SDI only in the presence of clear probable causes.



                                                   13
(9.8% of all firms winning at least one contract). We define InvestigatedWinner as an
indicator variable denoting that an auction was won by a firm ever associated throughout
our sample period (via employment or ownership) with at least one individual present in
the SDI database. This measure thus varies only across firms and not over time. This
approach is conservative, as the date at which suspect offenders are reported in the SDI
provides little information ­ if any ­ on the date an offense was actually committed.
     The SDI data also allow us to flag procuring agencies and public administrators as
suspected of corruption. For each auction, we observe the agency procuring the con-
tract and, within the administration, the RUP in charge of the specific contract. AISI
searched the SDI database for all RUPs, flagging those suspected of the same types of
crimes used to flag managers and owners (i.e., corruption, abuse of power, and so forth).
Overall, 6% of the RUPs in our sample (managing 9.7% of all contracts) were flagged
as "investigated." We use this list to identify auctions administered by an investigated
RUP (InvestigatedRU P ) and also administrations in which at least one investigated
RUP was employed during our sample period (16% of all public administrations, denoted
by InvestigatedP A, managing 40% of the contracts).
      In concluding our discussion of the criminality data, it is important to discuss the
issue of reverse causality. In our setting, this problem could occur if, for instance, a firm
would become more likely to be labeled as suspect when winning negotiated procedures
(with few participants) due to the police concentrating its (limited) monitoring efforts
on these types of procedures. We believe that, if anything, the opposite is in fact likely
to be true in our data, based on extensive discussions with the AISI representatives who
helped us in accessing the police data. These officials gave no indication that police
monitoring efforts are concentrated on public tenders characterised by the criteria and
procedures analyzed in this study. Furthermore, they emphasized that investigations
typically result from complaints to the police from a losing bidder, which are less likely for
negotiated procedures, for two reasons. First, there are simply fewer firms in negotiated
procedures. Second, since procurement officers open themselves up to scrutiny when
bidders complain, it is also reasonable to assume that officials will use their discretion in
negotiated procedures to avoid inviting firms which, for any reason, are more likely to
report concerns to the police (this is even more the case if the public official is himself
corrupt and has a favored firm among the participants). Thus, while we cannot rule out
reverse causation entirely, we believe that if a differential monitoring intensity between
negotiated and open procedures is present, in our context it would most plausibly imply
that the estimates we present below represent a conservative assessment of the increased
corruption risks associated with reduced competition and discretion. Furthermore, while
it is not possible to observe a firm's ability to avoid investigation, the preceding discussion


                                              14
suggests this is not the case. RF (12/3): ***** I'm a bit confused by how this was
written - i think this sentence refers to the discussion above(?) ­ previously
this read, "evidence retrieved below" - i changed to "the preceding discussion"
but please fix if i'm totally confused However, one important observation from the
AISI is that monitoring efforts are concentrated in geographical areas where the presence
of criminal organizations has been previously detected, and as a result we will need to take
care in interpreting results involving variation at the municipality level in the presence of
investigated firms. (Though to the extent that these factors are time-invariant, our fixed
effects specifications account for these geographic factors.)

III.B.3     Descriptive Evidence

     We begin by presenting an overview of some of the main features of the data.
While in our main analysis we exploit within-municipality variation over time or (in
some cases) within-region variation across municipalities, the patterns in this subsection
explore trends across time and broad regional differences in procurement practices at a
relatively high level of aggregation.
     One important feature of our institutional setting is that the maximum reserve price
for negotiated contracts was increased from e100, 000 to e500, 000 in 2008, and then
to e1 million in 2011. As we show in Figure 1, this led to an increase in negotiated
contracts, and an accompanying decline in first-price auctions.
     Did this change result in more contracts awarded to investigated firms? In Figure 2,
we examine whether there is any obvious evidence in favor of this view in the aggregate
data. The figure plots the fraction of contracts won by investigated firms for three groups,
based on the relevant thresholds for the 2008 and 2011 expansions: contracts less than or
equal to e500, 000, those between 500,000 and 1 million, and contracts above 1 million. If
discretion led to greater corruption, we would expect a relative increase in the fraction of
contracts won by investigated firms in the e150, 000 to 500, 000 range in 2008 and 500, 000
to 1 million range in 2011.11 However, we observe no discernible change in any reserve
price interval after either reform (see Appendix Figure A.4). Given that the contract size
is endogenous ­ we observe sorting around each of the thresholds in every year in our
sample ­ it is not possible to provide a sharp interpretation of this "non-result." But
at the same time, it does fit with our overall set of findings that we document in the
remainder of the paper ­ discretion in itself does not necessarily promote corruption, and
  11
    Note that these reforms were not associated with any other substantial changes concerning bureau-
crats' discretion as, for instance, the 2011 reform came about not as an organic reform of the procurement
code generally, but as a targeted measure of the Berlusconi government to promote economic growth
by expanding the use of the less bureaucratic-intensive negotiated procedures. See Art. 4, sub. r, Law
Decree 70/2011, modifying Art. 122, sub. 7, Legislative Decree 163/2006.


                                                   15
monitors may take steps to ensure that its use is limited in locales in which discretion is
mostly likely to be abused.
     To provide a preview of why greater discretion might not have increased corrup-
tion, we consider two further cuts of the data. First, instead of comparing the fraction
of investigated winners by the contract reserve price (as in Figure 2), we present in
Figure 3 the fraction of investigated winners for three types of more discretionary auc-
tions: those with negotiated procedures and the legally mandated number of invited
bidders (DiscretP rochighN ); those with negotiated procedures and "too few" invited bid-
ders (DiscretP roclowN ); and scoring rule auctions (DiscretCrit). Over the full sample
period, we observe that negotiated procedures are only associated with criminal winners
for auctions when there are fewer than the legally mandated number of bidders. Scoring
rule auctions (which have potentially discretionary selection criteria) have the highest
rate of investigated winners. Combining these patterns with the general prevalence of
each type of auction, one may see why the increased use of negotiated procedures had
no discernible impact on the rate of investigated winners ­ as can be seen in Figure 4,
the increase came primarily from auctions with the legally mandated number of invited
bidders, a category for which we see a relatively low rate of corruption. Naturally, in
comparing the corruption of different auction types, we wish to control for a range of
municipality and auction attributes in comparing various types of auction mechanisms,
which we will do in our regression analyses.
      We next turn to a geographic comparison of auction procedures and outcomes, in
part to anticipate a second pattern in the data that may limit the effect of discretion
on corruption. Specifically, in Table 1 we compare auction characteristics for South,
Central, and North Italy over our full sample period, 2000-2016. Given the South's long
history with, and reputation for, corruption, it is perhaps unsurprising that the fraction
of auctions overseen by procurement officials suspected of corruption is notably higher in
the South relative to Central and North Italy (first row). In the second row, we show the
mean fraction of auctions won by firms suspected of corruption. Again, there is a North-
South gradient: investigated firms are more likely to win in the South relative to the North
and Central regions, though the difference is much more modest than for RUPs. We next
turn to the selection of auctions that, in the preceding figure, were associated with higher
levels of corruption, i.e., Discretion = 1 auctions (recall these are DiscretCrit = 1 and
DiscretP roclowN = 1 auctions). Notably, these are far more common in the (relatively
less corrupt) North (third row). In the last two rows, we look at the North-South choice of
discretion for auctions administered by investigated procurement officials and clean (non-
investigated) officials. Interestingly, across all areas investigated administrators select
discretion more often. The relative rarity of "corruptible" auction procedures in the


                                            16
high-corruption South suggests another potential explanation for the muted link between
the increase in negotiated auctions and investigated winners: problematic auctions are
used less often in locales where they are more apt to be corrupted.
      Naturally, these patterns are merely presented as motivation ­ there are many factors
that could account for the North-South differences we observe. We will attempt to account
for these factors when we focus on within-PA variation in our regressions. But overall, the
patterns in Table 1 offer descriptive evidence that is broadly consistent with the regression
analysis reported in the next section, and which will be useful for understanding how
Italian authorities may have limited the extent to which discretion can be exploited by
officials for private gain.
     Before proceeding to our regression results, we conclude this section with a presen-
tation of the summary statistics for our data in Table 2. Panel (A) provides summary
statistics at the auction-level for the whole sample of just over 200,000 auctions. Of
these, 37% are done using negotiated procedures, and 83% of auctions use the price-only
criterion. Investigated firms are awarded 17% of the contracts and investigated RUPs
administer 10% of all auctions. The average number of bidders across all auctions is 27,
but for negotiated procedures, the average number of invited bidders is 7. Relative to an
average reserve price of nearly e1 million, the final price entails, on average, a 7% cost
overrun (relative to the initial reserve price), and the average delay is 63% relative to the
originally specified contractual duration.
     Panel (B) reports summary statistics at the level of the public administrations award-
ing contracts. We observe 14,024 administrations out of which 16% have at least one
RUP suspected of corruption. 52% of public administrations are in the North, 35% in
the South, and 13% in the Center. In terms of administration type, local PAs award
most contracts, with municipalities representing 57% of the PAs in the dataset (though
they administer only 53% of auctions). Of the 7,985 municipalities observed, 67% have
fewer than 5,000 inhabitants, while only 1% of municipalities have more than 60,000 in-
habitants. The average administration awards 15 contracts over the sample period, with
an average total value of nearly e1.5 million.


IV      Empirical Analysis
      We now turn to examine the relationship between the choice of auction mechanism
to firms and officials suspected of corruption. We first examine the link from the type of
auction to whether it is won by an investigated firm, and then turn to look at the choice
of auction of investigated public officials. We will then use the framework in Section V
to interpret these patterns in terms of the tradeoff invoked by expanding discretion.

                                             17
IV.A        Discretionary auctions and investigated winners
       We employ throughout variants on the following specification:



         InvestigatedF irmxay = Discretionxay + Controlsxay + a + y + xay                                (1)

for auction x conducted by contracting authority a in year y . We include contracting
authority fixed effects to account for local differences in the choice of procurement mech-
anisms as well as (localized) differences in corruption; the year fixed effects absorb shifts
over time in the prevalence of discretionary contracts as well as corruption. Finally, as
controls, we include a linear term for the logarithm of the reserve price as well as a set
of fixed effects for various size thresholds.12 We use robust standard errors clustered at
the level of the contracting authority throughout.
     Because this expression employs a large number of contracting authority fixed effects,
our empirical approach might raise concerns if discretion only varies within a small,
selected pool of administrations. However, as shown in Table 3, this is not the case:
many administrations experience variation in the various measures of discretion analyzed
and, moreover, these administrations do not appear to be selected in any obvious way.
      We present these results in Table 4. In columns (1) and (2) we show results using
DiscretP roclowN and DiscretCrit respectively as our measure of discretion, and in col-
umn (3) we include both as covariates. The coefficient on each variable is stable across
all specifications and significant at least at the 1% level in all cases. The coefficient
on DiscretP roclowN of 0.02 implies that auctions employing negotiated procedures with
"too few" invited bidders are associated with a 12% higher probability of being won by
an investigated firm. The coefficient on DiscretCrit is approximately half as large. In
column (4) we add the variable, DiscretP rochighN , as a covariate, which denotes auctions
that are done via discretionary procedure, but with the requisite number of bidders. The
coefficient on DiscretP rochighN is very small (0.0013), and we can reject at the 99% level
that it is even half as large as the coefficient on DiscretP roclowN . (We can reject at
the 0.1% level that the two coefficients are equal). Finally, in column (5) we use the
summary discretion measure, Discretion, pooling together both DiscretP roclowN and
DiscretCrit. The coefficient of 0.012 implies that more discretionary auctions are asso-
ciated with a 7% higher probability of being won by a criminal firm. Columns (6) ­ (10)
repeat these analyses, limiting the sample to auctions administered by municipal councils,
  12
    In practice, the point estimates we report below are quite insensitive to the inclusion/exclusion of
these covariates. For example, if we include only year fixed effects as controls, the estimate is about 0.003
higher than what we report below, a difference of about 30 percent as compared to the fully saturated
specifications.

                                                     18
as this is the sample we will focus on in analyzing whether the patterns we document are
robust to controls for municipal attributes. The patterns are broadly similar, though the
coefficients on the two distinct discretion variables are much closer in magnitude, and the
coefficient on the pooled discretion measure is larger.
     The correlation between the choice of discretionary auction and the selection of
an investigated firm as winner is robust to a range of considerations. In addition to
procurement administration fixed effects, we may include region × year or even province ×
year fixed effects (a total of 1,770 additional fixed effects), and the point estimates remain
quite similar. We may also amend the definition of InvestigatedW inner to make it more
­ or less ­ inclusive. In Appendix Table A.1, we show the results using a definition that
focuses more narrowly on corruption (restricting attention only to firms investigated for
(i) corruption, malfeasance and embezzlement or (ii) abuse of power and undue influence,
but excluding those investigated for (iii) violations in public auctions) and in Appendix
Table A.2, we expand the definition to include firms associated with individuals suspected
of waste management crimes. The inclusion of the latter group is at the suggestion of anti-
corruption authorities, who indicated to us that it is a common area for organized crime
and corruption. In both cases, we observe broadly similar patterns to those reported in
Table 4. Finally, in Appendix Table A.3 we include procurement-authority-by-year fixed
effects. While being more demanding and restrictive, this specification greatly improves
identification, as it allows us to take into account any unobserved time-varying shocks at
the authority level. Notably, results are remarkably similar to the ones of Table 4.
    In Appendix Table A.4, we explore whether the higher rate of investigated winners for
DiscretP roclowN and DiscretCrit auctions is the result of selection into the participants'
pool, or selection of the winner (conditional on the pool of bidders). We run a specification
analogous to the one in equation (1), but now using data at the bidder level:

      InvestigatedBidderixay = Discretionxay + Controlsixay + a + y + xay                 (2)

     As noted in our data description, bidder-level data are only available for starting
in 2011. We observe a positive coefficient on DiscretP roclowN across all specifications,
with a value of 0.011 ­ 0.012 (significant at the 1 percent level). No other variable
is significant. These findings provide some suggestive evidence that (uncompetitive)
negotiated procedures may be corrupted by directing invitations to investigated firms,
whereas scoring rule auctions may be corrupted by tailoring the selection criteria to
favored firms, rather than foreclosing entry into bidding.




                                             19
IV.B       Investigated administrators and the choice of discretion
     In Table 5, we explore the choice of discretion as an auction mechanism. We begin
with results that most closely parallel those of the preceding section, with public ad-
ministration fixed effects. In column 1 the dependent variable is Discretion, while in
columns 2 and 3 we distinguish between the effect on DiscretP roclowN and DiscretCrit.
In all cases, the coefficient on InvestigatedRU P is positive (significant at least at the 5%
level), indicating a higher use of discretionary auctions; comparing columns 2 and 3, the
point estimate is more than twice as high for discretionary criterion auctions, though the
base rate of discretionary criterion auctions is also much higher.13
     In the remainder of the table, we introduce InvestigatedP A as a covariate. Since
this variable varies only at the PA-level, we can include only coarser fixed effects. In
Table 5 we employ fixed effects for each of the country's 20 regions, and in Appendix
Table A.6 we use a finer partition, with fixed effects for each of 110 provinces. (Recall
that, for a subset of procurement authorities (hospitals, highways, and so forth), we do
not have a mapping to a specific geographic location; thus auctions conducted by these
PAs are dropped from specifications with region or province fixed effects.) In columns
4 and 5 we include InvestigatedRU P and InvestigatedP A respectively as covariates,
with Discretion as the outcome variable. Note that, by definition, these variables are
positively correlated ( = 0.45). It is intriguing, therefore, that their coefficients are of
opposite sign (significant at the 1% level). Specifically, PAs that have had at least one
administrator suspected of corruption are 7.7% less likely to use discretionary auctions
(a coefficient of 0.017 relative to a base rate for Discretion of 0.22) while, for a given
municipal council, a corrupt administrator is 8.6% more likely to use a discretionary auc-
tion (0.019/0.22). In column 6, we include both variables ­ as might be expected given
their strong positive correlation, in this specification the magnitude of each coefficient
increases, nearly doubling for both InvestigatedRU P and InvestigatedP A. Columns
7 and 8 repeat the specifications from column 6, which include both InvestigatedP A
and InvestigatedRU P , but using our two distinct discretion variables as the outcomes,
DiscretP roclowN and DiscretCrit. In these specifications, the relationships between
both variables and discretion are driven by the selection of DiscretCrit auctions (though
we refer back to column 1 to emphasize that, with finer fixed effects, there is a dis-
cernable positive relationship between InvestigatedRU P and the choice of discretionary
procedures).14
  13
      In Table A.5, we explore the direct effect of InvestigatedRU P on investigated winner. The effect
is positive and significant, albeit small in magnitude. The estimates for the other coefficients remain
qualitatively identical to those in the baseline estimates in Table 4.
   14
      Replicating the specifications in Table 5 using as dependent variable DiscretP roc, we find no rela-
tionship between investigated RUPs or PAs and this outcome; see the Appendix Table A.7.


                                                   20
IV.C        The direct benefits and costs of discretionary auctions
     We now turn to describe the benefits of discretion. The main official motivation
for encouraging negotiated procedures is speeding up administrative procedures. The
administrative burden is lighter for negotiated procedures than with open auctions: PAs
can publish shorter, less detailed calls for tenders, and these calls have shorter minimum
mandatory publicity periods (about half of the 52 days typically required for open tenders,
but even less if certain conditions are met). The selection of the winning bid is also faster,
as typically the RUP selects the winner directly from among a small set of bidders. At
the opposite end of the spectrum, scoring rule auctions require the creation of ad hoc
commissions to evaluate bids and select winners.
     A different margin along which discretion can benefit PAs is by helping to reduce the
adverse selection effects of open, competitive bidding. As mentioned earlier, incomplete
contracts and non-contractible quality are a near-defining feature of contract procure-
ment. A first price open auction can be the most problematic allocation mechanism
when even just one opportunistic firm participates. Although several institutional fea-
tures in the system are geared toward limiting the problem of "too good to be true"
bids, discretion in selecting participants and bids can be a powerful tool (it is indeed the
pillar of private contracting). We provide some indication of these potential benefits of
discretion in Table 6. The table presents the results of specifications that parallel those
presented above, using the inverse hyperbolic sine of the contract's delay in implementa-
tion (Asinh(Delay )), the discount offered by the winning firm, and the extra cost realized
at the end of the contract as outcomes, in place of InvestigatedW inner.15 While delay is
a highly imperfect indication of performance ­ for example, it makes little sense to include
DiscretCrit as an explanatory variable, since execution time may be part of the scoring
rule to evaluate contracts ­ in the absence of ex-post quality evaluations of contracts, it
nonetheless provides one objective indication of the winning firm's performance.
     Table 6, column (1) includes Discret as an explanatory variable, along with fixed
effects for procurement administration and year, and flexible reserve price controls. As
would be expected if discretion speeds the completion of a contract, the coefficient on
Discret is negative, though small in magnitude and only borderline significant (p <
0.07). We distinguish between DiscretCrit and DiscretP roclowN in column (2), and find
that there is a much stronger negative relationship for negotiated procedures ­ recall
that, as we noted above, it is hard to interpret the relationship between discretionary
criterion and delay, as completion time may be a component of the scoring rule used to
  15
    All three outcomes are available only for a subsample of auctions. Therefore, we also test the
robustness of our main results in this restricted sample. Specifically, Table A.8 replicates results of Table
4 for the subsample of auctions for which we have either Delay, Discount or Extra Cost information.


                                                     21
evaluate bids. In column (3) we add a control for negotiated procedures ­ recall that this
captures auctions in which bidders must be invited to participate in the auction, whereas
DiscretP roclowN denotes negotiated procedure auctions in which "too few" participants
are invited. Interestingly, once one accounts for whether an auction is a negotiated
procedure ­ which itself is associated with much shorter delays ­ there is little incremental
effect of DiscretP roclowN on delay.
      The following columns of Table 6 repeat the regression analysis for the two other
outcomes. We observe a clear negative and economically large impact of discretion on
winning discounts: the coefficient on Discret implies a 4 percentage point lower discount,
relative to an average winning discount of 18 percent. Column 6 shows that most of
the drop is associated with discretionary criteria and, to a lesser extent, discretionary
procedures with too few bidders. Negotiated procedures with the appropriate number of
bidders more generally are associated with lower discounts, as indicated by the negative
coefficient on DiscretP rochighN , but the size of the effect is about half of that of the
discretionary criterion. Thus, it appears that discretion has a direct impact on increasing
the price paid by PAs by a significant amount, as expected if discretion were used to
select higher quality bids. In the final section, we will relate this increase of public cost
to the (potential) benefit for a corrupt RUP. Finally notice that the final price, inclusive
of cost overruns, is essentially unaffected by the choice of discretion, as the estimated
coefficients are either not significant or, in the case of discretionary criterion, significant
and negative, but small in magnitude.16


V        Conceptual Framework: Corruption and Oversight
     In this section, we lay out a very simple and intuitive model to interpret our em-
pirical results. The patterns documented above may be organized through the lens of
the theory of delegation, originally laid down by Holmstrom et al. [1982] and applied to
political economy settings in particular as outlined in Bendor et al. [2001] and Huber and
Shipan. Holmstrom et al. [1982] in particular describes the classical optimal delegation
problem with no transfers: a central monitor (the principal) trades-off the benefits of an
agent's discretion against the costs of self-dealing, without being allowed to link transfers
to the realized outcomes. This framework plausibly resembles the situation of the pro-
curement officers in our data, whose wages and careers are only weakly associated with
the performance of the contracts they supervise.
       Our simplified version of this style of model considers the task of a central monitor-
  16
     In Table A.9 we repeat the analysis but limiting the attention to contracts awarded by local author-
ities. Results are remarkably similar and of slightly larger magnitude.


                                                   22
ing authority (such as a regional government) that aims to limit corruption. Discretion
makes it easier for officials to abuse their positions if they choose to do so, but also
empowers civic-minded officials to execute contracts more efficiently. The principal has
limited information on the infrastructure needs of lower-level governments (e.g. munici-
palities), and hence receives a noisy signal as to the benefits of running an auction using
discretionary methods. As a result, infrastructure provision may be more efficient if lo-
cal officials ­ who have a stronger local presence and/or expertise ­ choose the auction
format. The misalignment results from potential self-dealing by corrupt local officials.
      More specifically, we assume that a central authority may choose whether to allow
procurement officials in administration a to run an auction with greater discretion. Let
d be a parameter that captures the potential benefit from discretion in implementing the
project so that, for example, the value of the project is v in the absence of discretion and
v + d if discretion is allowed. While v is perfectly observed, d is known only to the official
overseeing the project; others (including enforcement officials) observe only d ^ = d + . It
is possible that d < 0, so that discretion is socially destructive, whereas monitors may
still receive a positive signal. This assumption allows for the case that a civic-minded
official will choose not to use a discretionary auction.
     A further cost of discretion is that it provides opportunities for self-dealing, which
may be obfuscated precisely because of uncertainty in the value of discretion. We do
not aim, at this level of abstraction, to model the firm-official interaction. In our simple
framework, one can think of corrupt officials extracting kickbacks from firms, or prospec-
tive bidders corrupting procurement officials by offering bribes. For a potentially corrupt
administrator, we think of their theft decision as dictated by the private returns from
stealing s, less a punishment cost which is a function of detection probability ea , which is a
public-administration-specific parameter, so that his payoff function will be:  = s - ea s2 .
In the internal solution, this payoff function leads to a theft choice of s = 1/2ea .
     We assume that the monitoring authority may constrain a public administration
from utilizing discretionary auctions by setting a threshold for the signal of discretion's
benefit, accounting for both stealing (which is a function of the public administration's
enforcement efforts, ea ) and the probability that a contract is corrupted (which depends
on the share of corrupt public officials in administration the administration, pa ). A
risk-neutral monitor seeking to maximize the project value will then set a threshold
d^ = pa /2ea .
     This model captures the simple intuition that, in locations with weaker enforcement
or a higher prevalence of corrupt agents (which plausibly are correlated), there will be a
higher threshold set for the use of discretionary auctions. Hence, differences among ad-
ministrations in (pa , ea ) might lead to instances in which the monitor restrains discretion


                                              23
in situations in which it would be socially optimal to allow for it. But it also follows
that corrupt officials will use discretionary auctions more often since, by definition, non-
corrupt officials use discretion only when d > 0 whereas corrupt ones will do so whenever
the monitor allows it (i.e., the threshold is high enough).


V.A        Re-evaluating the overall effect of increased discretion
    In Section IV.A, we found that negotiated contracts with many bidders ­ which
constitute the vast majority of auctions with discretion ­ were won by investigated firms
at the same rate as open price-only auctions. While negotiated contracts with "too
few" bids and scoring rule auctions were won more often by investigated firms, we also
observed in Section IV.B that regional governments may take steps to limit the use of
these mechanisms in locales that are vulnerable to corruption.
     These findings naturally return us to the question of whether the limits to discretion
imposed by procurement regulations were too strict. Procurement regulations are the
result of a complex web of rules determined by the European Procurement Directives,
Italy's national procurement law and, in most cases, local rules (at the regional, provincial
and even municipality levels; see Figure ??). At the local level, there are many examples
of rules either limiting or expanding RUP's discretion: for instance, Calabria, Campania
and Sicily, the three regions with endemic criminal organizations, passed various regional
guidelines and regulations limiting the use of discretionary procedures or criteria.
     The most straightforward setting to explore the aggregate consequences of changing
the limits to discretion is to focus on the nationwide reforms that loosened the rules
on the use of negotiated procedures during the late 2000s. While our earlier discussion
emphasized the role of a local (regional) monitor that could set the minimum required
                                                 ^ , in the model above), we also discussed
expected benefit from discretion to activate it (d
the existence of national rules which set strict monetary thresholds on contract values to
determine which ones may be awarded via discretionary methods. This type of rule is
typical in procurement regulations, and indeed a similar setup is present in the US for
accessing the Simplified Acquisition Procedure.17
       The motive behind this form of regulation can be easily understood if one presumes
  17
     In the US, since the Federal Acquisition Streamlining Act of 1994, Simplified Acquisition Procedures
(SAP) were introduced to promote efficiency and economy in contracting by reducing administrative
costs and unnecessary burdens for agencies and contractors. Under the SAP, contracting officers can
select private contractors in more informal ways, for instance by getting oral (rather than written)
quotes and selecting the winner without the need for a formal comparative assessment among quotes.
The SAP applies to purchases of supplies or services whose anticipated dollar value does not exceed
the Simplified Acquisition Threshold, which has increased over time, reaching $ 150,000 as of 2014, and
making purchases under the SAP an even larger portion of federal procurement.



                                                   24
that the national regulator does not even observe the signal of the value of discretion for
a specific project, and we further augment our basic model to assume that the benefits
to the agent from stealing increase with project size.18 In this augmented framework,
setting a maximum project value beyond which discretion is forbidden can serve to limit
the risks from stealing.
     Note, however, that this additional rigidity imposed at the national level comes
at the cost of limiting discretion for local administrations and RUPs that would use it
for public benefit. This rigidity may further be excessive (relative to the social welfare
optimum) if political economy considerations lead to a large weight on theft by national
bureaucrats and politicians.19 A similar argument may be applied to a bureaucrat with
career concerns and reduced performance incentives: discretion will be under-utilized if it
increases the probability that an official will face a corruption investigation which, in the
Italian context, would defer any promotion until acquittal, without sufficient offsetting
rewards.20
     These changes led to only a modest increase in either of the auction types that we
have flagged as associated with corruption. For example, comparing auctions held prior to
2008 versus those held 2011 and later, the fraction of auctions for which DiscretP roc = 1
or DiscretCrit = 1 increases from 20.5% to 23.6%: while discretionary procedure auc-
tions increased substantially (from 0% to 12.7%) this increase was largely offset by a
substitution away from discretionary criterion (scoring rule) auctions. Taken at face
value, our regression coefficients imply a 1.5 percentage point increase in auctions won
by investigated firms for the incremental 3.1% of auctions conducted via discretionary
procedure or criterion. This calculation leads to a 0.05% increase in investigated winners
overall (0.031 × 0.015). Given our proposed framework, these results are unsurprising. In-
deed, recall that the increase in negotiated procedure auctions with the legally mandated
number of bidders is about 50% between 2008 and 2011. Thus, if these led to even small
   18
      Under this modification, the optimal stealing would become s = 2v ea , where v is the baseline project
size, as in Section V.
   19
      For example, reelection concerns may lead a politician to limit stealing per se ­ beyond its impact
on project outcomes ­ because of the negative publicity from revelations of corruption in public works.
The responsiveness of politicians to corruption scandals has been documented, in particular, through
a series of papers exploiting the richness of Brazilian data on corruption audits, including Avis et al.
[2017] and Ferraz and Finan [2011]. The former study documents a significantly lower rate of corruption
in municipalities in which mayors can run for reelection, while the latter estimates a structural model
of agency which illustrates that the reduction in corruption after an audit comes primarily from the
perceived non-electoral costs of engaging in corruption.
   20
      This is the well-known problem of low-powered incentives for public employees, which has been
documented across many countries and institutions (see, for instance, the analysis of Indian bank na-
tionalizations by Banerjee et al. [2004]). The problem may be exacerbated by the initial selection of
individuals choosing to become bureaucrats (as analyzed, for instance, through a randomized study of
initial public sector wage offers in Mexico by Dal Bo et al. [2013]) as well politicians (see the recent
review by Dal Bo and Finan [2018]).


                                                    25
efficiency gains relative to open first-price auctions, it would more than offset the loss
from the very small increment in corrupted auctions. We find this to be quite plausible
given our findings on the improvements contracting quality from discretion, such as a 14
percent reduction in delays.


VI       Additional Evidence: Tools to Limit Corruption
     To the extent that the limited use of discretion we observe is an indication of steps
taken to minimize local corruption (as we argue), it may be natural to consider other
tactics that a central authority might take to reduce opportunities of self-dealing in vul-
nerable PAs. In this section, we present additional evidence concerning two common
policies to curb corruption: job rotation and limits to subcontracting. Both policies are
extensively used in public procurement regulations, and both induce a trade-off between
reduced corruption risks and potential inefficiencies. In the case of turnover, the ineffi-
ciencies primarily involve frictions in the accumulation of human capital that is essential
for a well-functioning procurement processwhile in the case of subcontracting it stems
from constraints imposed on suppliers in how they arrange their production process. In
this section, we analyze the use of these two mechanisms for limiting corruption, for which
there is limited evidence on their efficacy in the literature. Moreover, while there is a
long and established theoretical literature on job rotation, there is no prior theoretical
(or empirical) work documenting the link between corruption and subcontracting.


VI.A       Administrator turnover in investigated municipalities
     Staff turnover is used in many settings to ensure the independence of officials. Rota-
tion of audit partners, for instance, was made compulsory for US public companies by the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. Intuitively, rotation can break the links between a corrupt
public official and firms with which he may collude and, moreover, rotation of officials
can speed up and/or facilitate revelations of corruption.21
     Although there are no formal provisions governing public official turnover in Italian
procurement law, rotation as an anti-corruption tool has often been invoked in policy
debate.We explore its usage within our data through a set of municipal-level analyses
relating InvestigatedP A to the average number of auctions handled by each RUP. Our
measure, T urnover, captures the average fraction of a PA's auctions during our sample
period that is handled by a given individual. In particular, if we define ia as the share of
  21
     See Choi and Thum [2003] for a formal argument on the conditions in which rotation will have these
effects and, more generally, for references on models of "horizontal competition" between public agents
as a corruption-fighting tool.

                                                  26
all contracts for public administration a that are awarded by official i, then our measure
of turnover is the complement of an HHI concentration index which, by construction,
ranges from zero to 10,000:

                                         2
                T urnovera = 1 - [       ja /10, 000]   for j = {1, ..., Ja }              (3)
                                     j


where j indexes each of the Ja officers in administration a throughout our sample period.
We take one minus the concentration index so that the measure is increasing in turnover,
i.e., T urnovera is higher if a given contract is less likely to be handled by an official that
oversees a large fraction of a's overall contract volume.
     T urnover is a public-administration-level variable, which is the level at which we
run this analysis. We are primarily interested in its relationship to our PA-level measure
of suspected corruption, InvestigatedP A, and control also at a fine level for geography,
via the following specification:

         T urnovera = InvestigatedP Aa + P opulationa + RegionR(a) +            a          (4)

In this specification, P opulation is a set of dummy variables for each 5,000 person inter-
val for municipalities with population less than 100,000, and dummy variables for each
100,000 person interval between 100,000 and 1,000,000 (the municipalities of Rome and
Milan, each with population greater than a million, are the omitted category). Region is
a set of dummy variables for each of Italy's 20 regions (the results are virtually identical
when we include 110 province fixed effects below). We present these analyses in Table 7.
We focus on our sample of municipalities, since turnover is so strongly correlated with
the size of a PA, and in this sample, we can control flexibly for population. In the first
column, we include only InvestigatedP A and population fixed effects. The coefficient on
InvestigatedP A is 0.075, significant at the 0.001% level, indicating that in municipalities
with at least one public official suspected of corruption, our T urnover variable is 23.7%
higher (0.075, relative to a mean of 0.35 for T urnover). The estimated effect increases
to 0.078 in column 2 when we include fixed effects for each of Italy's 20 regions, and is
virtually unchanged when we add 110 province fixed effects in column 3. In column 4 we
add third-order polynomials for population, as well as a control for the average number
of discretionary auctions in the municipality. These additions have little effect on the
estimated relationship between InvestigatedP A and T urnover.
     Finally, in the next four columns, we repeat the same analysis but using the share
of contract values. Hence, instead of the number of contracts awarded by a RUP relative
to the overall number of contracts in the PA, we calculate the total value of all contracts


                                              27
awarded by a RUP over the overall value of contracts awarded by the PA. To avoid issues
related to differential winning discounts, we use the initial reserve price instead of the
winning (or final) price. The results are nearly identical to those in the first four columns.


VI.B        Subcontracting by criminal firms
     Subcontracting is a distinctive feature of contract procurement that is often asserted
(and found in court cases) to be a channel for bribes and kickbacks. Payments to subcon-
tractors, recorded on the main contractor's books as legitimate works but never (fully)
performed by the subcontractor, may be used to generate cash for corrupt payments
and conceal bribes. Thus, we might expect an association between investigated winners
and investigated subcontractors. Yet there is a legitimate efficiency-based rationale for
subcontracting, especially for complex jobs involving heterogeneous tasks.22
     This trade-off inherent in the use of subcontracting may account for the divergent
approaches taken by Italian regional governments in constraining its use: as documented
in Decarolis and Giorgiantonio [2015], over the sample period that we analyze, several
northern regions and autonomous provinces (Valle d'Aosta, Bolzano, Friuli Venezia Giu-
lia, and Veneto) passed laws that expanded the scope for subcontracting beyond that
which was allowed by the national legislator. At the same time, Sicily's regional pro-
curement law introduced more stringent rules (relative to national standards) to limit
subcontracting, specifically mentioning its known association with corruption and crim-
inal infiltration.23 We do not have systematic contract-level information on whether a
specific call for tenders included limits to subcontracting. However, for a small set of 244
municipalities, we obtained this information from Decarolis and Giorgiantonio [2019].
The estimates analogous to those reported for turnover (see Appendix Table A.10) is also
positive, albeit insignificant (e.g., the t-statistics are generally below 1). While consistent
with a positive association between more at-risk administrations and greater limits to
subcontracting, we have insufficient data to explore this possibility with any rigor.
     Our data, however, offers a unique possibility to examine the extent to which subcon-
tracts are associated with suspected criminal behavior. To the extent that Investigated
  22
      For both a discussion of the subcontracting regulations in Italy and a model of the efficiency-
enhancing features of subcontracting see Branzoli and Decarolis [2015].
   23
      The national legislation allows subcontracting whenever expressly provided for in the call for tenders
but limited to 30% of the total contract value. The regional laws, instead, involved the following modifi-
cations documented in Decarolis and Giorgiantonio [2015]: "since 2005, Valle d'Aosta has provided that
­ in the presence of certain requirements ­ subcontracts whose value is less than e15,000 are not subject
to prior authorization from the contracting authorities; until October 2009, Bolzano established that the
use of subcontracting was admissible up to 40% of the total contract value, and not 30% as required
by national legislation; Veneto provided that the use of subcontracting was admissible up to 40% of the
total contract value."


                                                    28
W inner captures whether a firm is more likely to engage in self-dealing, we assert that, all
else equal, investigated firms will engage in more subcontracting, and furthermore, given
the between-firm collusion required in corrupt subcontracting relationships, we hypothe-
size that, conditional on subcontracting, investigated firms will tend to give subcontracts
to other investigated firms.
     The graphical evidence in Figure 5 is clearly suggestive of the relevance of the latter
hypothesis. In terms of both the probability that the contract will involve at least one
investigated subcontractor (left panel) and the share value of subcontracts to investi-
gated firms over the overall subcontract value (right panel), the evidence indicates that
investigated winners disproportionately select investigated subcontractors. This graph-
ical evidence is bolstered by the analyses presented in Table 8. Since the extent of
subcontracting will naturally vary by contract size and complexity, we introduce succes-
sively more controls to account for various auction attributes. The dependent variable,
InvestigatedSubcontractor, indicates that at least one subcontract was assigned to a firm
suspected of corruption. Note that, since these analyses condition on the existence of at
least one subcontract, the sample size is far smaller than in our earlier regressions. The
patterns indicate an extremely strong correlation between suspected corruption of the
winning firm and that of its subcontractors. The point estimate on InvestigatedW inner
indicates that corrupt firms are 3-5 percentage points more likely to subcontract to an-
other corrupt firm, which represents a 45-70 percent increase relative to the base rate of
subcontracting to investigated firms of 8 percent for clean (non-investigated) winners.
     We explore other subcontracting outcomes in Table 9. We begin with an indicator
variable for any subcontracting as the dependent variable in column 1; there is no signif-
icant relationship with InvestigatedW inner for this "extensive" margin measure. When
we look at the intensive margin in columns 2 and 3 ­ based on subcontracting value as a
fraction of total contract value, and number of subcontractors ­ we do observe that both
are higher for investigated winners. Thus, overall, we find some evidence that subcon-
tracting, in general, is higher in contracts won by investigated firms. In the remaining
three columns, we present alternative measures of subcontracting to suspected criminal
firms, to complement our results in Table 8: the fraction of investigated subcontractors
as a fraction of the overall number of subcontractors (column 4) and the share of subcon-
tract value going to investigated firms as a fraction of total subcontract value (column
5). In all cases, we find a strong and positive relationship with InvestigatedW inner.24
  24
    Finally, we investigate whether the relationship between InvestigatedW inner and
InvestigatedSubcontractor is mechanically induced by investigations of particular contracts. In
particular, one may be concerned that when an auction winner is suspected of corruption, the
investigation automatically extends to all subcontractors. If this were the case, we should observe
a strong, proportional increase in the number of investigated subcontractors as the total number of



                                                29
     In accordance with the judicial evidence, our findings might indicate that a corrupt
firm seeks corrupt subcontractors because it needs to create false invoices to facilitate
theft of project funds. Other, not mutually exclusive explanations, are also plausible.25
Regardless of the precise mechanism(s), however, it appears likely that the choices of
regional regulators ­ tighter subcontracting rules in the South, and looser rules in the
North ­ were consistent with the different features of subcontracting in high versus low
corruption areas. To the extent that corruption risks vary across regions, but the com-
plexity of projects (for which subcontracting would be beneficial) does not, these regional
reforms likely enhance the efficacy of the public procurement process.


VII        Conclusions
     We present evidence suggesting that discretion, to the extent that it limits com-
petition, is associated with higher suspected corruption in procurement. We show that
these auctions are chosen more often by officials suspected of corruption, and less often
in public administrations in which at least one procurement official has been investigated
for corruption. The model that we present for organizing these results ­ a well-meaning
central monitor who curtails the use of discretion in areas more prone to corruption ­
also fits with patterns we document on turnover among procurement administrators, and
also rules on subcontracting.
     We see several main takeaways from our findings. First, given the central role played
by competition in the patterns we document, our results argue against certain classes of
models which emphasize bribery as a means of competing with other bidders, and those
which model corruption as the outcome of a competitive (and efficient) bidding process in
which the best firm is willing to bribe the most to secure a contract. Second, presuming
there is enough competition (i.e., sufficient bidders), rigid constraints on auction officials'
discretion (e.g., via minimum contract size thresholds) may be costly tools that, at least
based on our measure, have a modest impact on corruption. Indeed, our rough assessment
based on the costs and benefits of discretion suggest that it is likely under-utilized in our
setting. In our view, this result is unexpected, particularly for a country like Italy,
contractors increases, but only in the presence of a contract winner that is itself under investigation.
Figure A.3 displays a binned scatterplot of the average number of investigated subcontractors as a
function of the total number of subcontracts (weighted by the reserve price for the overall contract), for
InvestigatedW inner = 0 and InvestigatedW inner = 1 contracts separately. There is a positive, linear
relationship for both groups, which argues against investigations spreading outward from the winner.
  25
     One possibility is that a subcontractor may learn whether the principal contractor is engaged in
corruption. Hence, having a corrupt firm as a subcontractor minimizes the chances that such a firm will
leak this information to enforcement authorities. Alternatively, it might be that corruption and collusion
go hand in hand: members of bidding rings are more likely to be corrupt, and dynamic considerations
for maintaining the cartel also lead members to share revenues with cartel members via subcontracting.


                                                   30
which has been traditionally characterized by high levels of corruption, given its level of
development.
     We also see a number of avenues for future research. For example, we wish to better
understand the costs invoked by rules to limit corruption ­ i.e., constraints on discretion
and subcontracting, and higher bureaucratic turnover ­ as a step to further clarifying the
trade-offs that result from anti-corruption policies. Indeed, while turnover may be seen
as a tool that does not impede the use of discretion, it may invoke comparable trade-offs,
as high turnover potentially limits the accumulation of task-specific knowledge, learning
by doing, and trust that increase with experience. Furthermore, in this first assessment
of the link between discretion and corruption, we have taken a broad view of the data.
Future work may help to better understand the specific mechanisms that underlie the
correlations we document ­ for example why there is such strong "matching on probity,"
as suggested by our subcontracting results.
     Finally, our findings have a number of policy implications. In particular, the differ-
ence in outcomes of negotiated auctions with "many" versus "few" bidders is potentially
important for assessing the overall costs and benefits of discretion. Indeed, our findings
suggest that discretion itself is not necessarily problematic, but rather discretion com-
bined with foreclosure of competition: scoring rule auctions limit competition by tailoring
contract terms to a specific firm's capabilities, while negotiated contracts with few invited
bidders by construction limit the competitive bidding process. Hence, the use of more
discretionary auctions should go hand in hand with more stringent requirements about
fostering firm participation.
     More generally, in both developed and developing countries, the legal and regulatory
frameworks governing public procurement have a profound impact on the interactions
between governments and private sector firms, and ultimately on the effectiveness of
government service delivery. In 2013, the World Bank began publishing an annual study
­ Benchmarking Public Procurement ­ which analyzes the public procurement regulations
of about 180 economies; these reports real considerable heterogeneity across countries.
Our results help to explain why such a variety of systems exist, as we argue that trade-offs
in the choice of procurement rules (in particular the extent to which discretion is allowed)
depend critically on the local conditions (in particular the extent of corruption and also
the monitoring effectiveness). By the same reasoning, the same rules may have highly
heterogeneous effects, depending on the context where they are used. In this respect, one
noteworthy element of our analysis for policy design is the finding of higher corruption
risks associated with scoring rule auctions. In the European Union, after 10 years of
negotiations between member states, a new Procurement Directive was published in 2014.
At its core, it features a switch from the previous highly rigid system of price-only open


                                             31
auctions to a more discretionary system, in which scoring rule auctions are effectively the
default. The effects of this change have still to be studied, as its full implementation is
quite recent. Member states are permitted an adjustment period to adopt the Directive
in their legislation and Italy, for instance, implemented the new rules only in April 2016.
However, our results indicate that the goal of creating a common legislative framework in
the EU to foster economic integration and cross-border procurement may come at a cost of
requiring regulations that are not necessarily well-suited to all institutional environments
­ the new rules may result in regulations that for some areas lead to substantially higher
corruption risk, while for other areas, the one-size-fits-all regulations may not allow for
sufficient discretion. Our estimates are a first step in quantifying the elements of this
important trade-off.




                                            32
References
Emmanuelle Auriol, St´ ephane Straub, and Thomas Flochel. Public procurement and
 rent-seeking: the case of paraguay. World Development, 77:395­407, 2016.

Eric Avis, Claudio Ferraz, and Frederico Finan. Do government audits reduce corruption?
  estimating the impacts of exposing corrupt politicians. Journal of Political Economy,
  forthcoming, 2017.

Audinga Baltrunaite, Cristina Giorgiantonio, Sauro Mocetti, Tommaso Orlando, et al.
 Discretion and supplier selection in public procurement. Technical report, Bank of
 Italy, Economic Research and International Relations Area, 2018.

Oriana Bandiera, Andrea Prat, and Tommaso Valletti. Active and Passive Waste in
  Government Spending: Evidence from a Policy Experiment. The American Economic
  Review, 99:1278­1308, 2009.

Oriana Bandiera, Michael Best, Adnan Khan, and Andrea Prat. The allocation of au-
  thority in organizations: A field experiment with bureaucrats. mimeo, 2020.

Abhijit Banerjee, Esther Duflo, and Shawn Cole. Banking reform in india. mimeo, 2004.

Edward C. Banfield. Corruption as a feature of governmental organization. Journal of
  Law and Economics, 18(3):3, 1975.

Pranab Bardhan and Dilip Mookherjee. Decentralization, corruption and government
  accountability. International handbook on the economics of corruption, 6:161­188, 2006.

Jonathan Bendor, Amihai Glazer, and Thomas Hammond. Theories of delegation. Annual
  review of political science, 4(1):235­269, 2001.

Michael Carlos Best, Jonas Hjort, and David Szakonyi. Individuals and organizations
 as sources of state effectiveness. NBER Working Paper 23350, National Bureau of
 Economic Research, Cambridge, MA, 2019. URL http://bit.ly/2dlCTyo.

Nicola Branzoli and Francesco Decarolis. Entry and subcontracting in public procurement
  auctions. Management Science, 61(12):2945­2962, 2015.

Sarah Brierley. Unprincipled principals: Co-opted bureaucrats and corruption in ghana.
  American Journal of Political Science, 64(2):209­222, 2020.

Jonathan Brogaard, Matthew Denes, and Ran Duchin. Political influence and government
  investment: Evidence from contract-level data. mimeo, 2016.

                                           33
Alessandro Bucciol, Riccardo Camboni, and Paola Valbonesi. Purchasing medical de-
  vices: the role of buyers' competence and discretion. Journal of Health Economics,
  forthcoming, 2020.

Roberto Burguet, Juan-Jose Ganuza, and Jose G. Montalvo. The microeconomics of
  corruption . A review of thirty years of research . Barcelona GSE Working Paper
  Series, 908(May), 2016.

Matias D. Cattaneo, Michael Jansson, and Xinwei Ma. Simple local polynomial den-
 sity estimators. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 0(0):1­7, 2019. doi:
 10.1080/01621459.2019.1635480. URL https://doi.org/10.1080/01621459.2019.
 1635480.

Jay Choi and Marcel Thum. The dynamics of corruption with the ratchet effect. Journal
  of Public Economics, 87(3-4):427­443, 2003.

Emanuele Colonnelli and Mounu Prem. Corruption and firms: Evidence from randomized
 audits in brazil. Technical report, 2017.

Timothy G. Conley and Francesco Decarolis. Detecting bidders groups in collusive auc-
  tions. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 8(2):1­38, May 2016.

Raffaella Coppier, Mauro Costantini, and Gustavo Piga. The role of monitoring of cor-
  ruption in a simple endogenous growth model. Journal of Labor Economics, 51(4):
  1972­1985, 2013.

Decio Coviello, Andrea Guglielmo, and Giancarlo Spagnolo. The effect of discretion on
  procurement performance. Management Science, 64(2):715­738, 2017.

Lydia Cox, Gernot J. Mller, Ernesto Pasten, Raphael Schoenle, and Michael Weber. Big
  g. Chicago Booth Research Paper No. 20-04, Fama-Miller Working Paper, University
  of Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute for Economics Working Paper No. 2020-36,
  2020.

Ernesto Dal Bo and Frederico Finan. Progress and perspectives in the study of political
  selection. Annual Review of Economics, forthcoming, 2018.

Ernesto Dal Bo, Frederico Finan, and Martin A. Rossi. Strengthening State Capabilities:
  The Role of Financial Incentives in the Call to Public Service. The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 128(3):1169­1218, 2013.

Francesco Decarolis. Comparing procurement auctions. International Economic Review,
  59(2):391­419, 2018.

                                          34
Francesco Decarolis and Cristina Giorgiantonio. Local public procurement regulations:
  The case of italy. International Review of Law and Economics, 43:209­226, 2015.

Francesco Decarolis and Cristina Giorgiantonio. Corruption red flags in public procure-
  ment: Evidence from italian calls for tenders. 2019.

Francesco Decarolis and Giuliana Palumbo. Renegotiation of public contracts: An empir-
  ical analysis. Economics Letters, 132:77 ­ 81, 2015. ISSN 0165-1765. doi: https://doi.
  org/10.1016/j.econlet.2015.04.025. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
  article/pii/S0165176515001767.

Francesco Decarolis, Leonardo M Giuffrida, Elisabetta Iossa, Vincenzo Mollisi, and
  Giancarlo Spagnolo. Bureaucratic Competence and Procurement Outcomes. The
  Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 05 2020. ISSN 8756-6222. doi:
  10.1093/jleo/ewaa004. URL https://doi.org/10.1093/jleo/ewaa004. ewaa004.

Rafael Di Tella and Ernesto Schargrodsky. The role of wages and auditing during a
  crackdown on corruption in the city of buenos aires. The Journal of Law and Economics,
  46(1):269­292, 2003.

Simeon Djankov, Tania M. Ghossein, Asif Mohammed Islam, and Federica Saliola. Pub-
  lic procurement regulation and road quality. Technical report, National Bureau of
  Economic Research, 2017.

David Epstein and Sharyn O'halloran. Administrative procedures, information, and
  agency discretion. American Journal of Political Science, pages 697­722, 1994.

Claudio Ferraz and Frederico Finan. Electoral accountability and corruption: Evidence
  from the audits of local governments. American Economic Review, 101(4):1274­1311,
  June 2011.

Joras Ferwerda and Ioana Deleanu. Identifying and reducing corruption in public pro-
  curement in the eu, 2013.

Bengt Holmstrom et al. On the theory of delegation. Northwestern University, 1982.

John D Huber and Charles R Shipan. Politics, delegation, and bureaucracy. In The
  Oxford handbook of political science.

Sean Lewis-Faupel, Yusuf Neggers, Benjamin A. Olken, and Rohini Pande. Can electronic
  procurement improve infrastructure provision? evidence from public works in india and
  indonesia. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 8(3):258­83, August 2016.
  doi: 10.1257/pol.20140258.

                                          35
Maxim Mironov and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya. Corruption in procurement and the political
 cycle in tunneling: Evidence from financial transactions data. American Economic
 Journal: Economic Policy, 8(2):287­321, May 2016.

OECD. Government at a glance 2017. 2017.

Benjamin A. Olken. Monitoring Corruption: Evidence from a Field Experiment in In-
  donesia. Journal of Political Economy, 115:200­249, 2007.

Benjamin A. Olken and Rohini Pande. Corruption in developing countries. Annual
  Review of Economics, 4(1):479­509, 2012.

Juan Ortner and Sylvain Chassang. Making corruption harder: Asymmetric information,
  collusion, and crime. Journal of Political Economy, 126(5):2108­2133, 2018.

Paolo Pinotti. Clicking on heaven's door: The effect of immigrant legalization on crime.
  American Economic Review, 107(1):138­68, 2017.

Robert Wade. The system of administrative and political corruption: Canal irrigation in
  south india. The Journal of Development Studies, 18(3):287­328, 1982.

World Bank. Benchmarking Public Procurement. 2017.




                                          36
                                                              Figure 1: Procedures and criteria over time




Note: The graph shows the share of contracts awarded through, respectively, Discretionary Criterion, overall Discretionary
Procedures and Discretionary Procedures with few bidders, over time.



           Figure 2: Share of contracts won by investigated firms, by reserve price
                                     .3
                    Share Investigated Firms Winning
                        .15        .2.1      .25




                                                       2000                  2006    2008    2011           2015
                                                                                     year

                                                                            150-500k          500k-1mil
                                                                            above 1 mil




Note: The graph depicts the share of contracts awarded to investigated firms, separately by the reserve price: e150,000-
500,000; e500,000-1,000,000; and over e1,000,000.




                                                                                    37
        Figure 3: Share of contracts won by investigated firms, by type of procedure




                                                 .25
                  Share investigated firms Winning
                         .15        .1 .2




                                                       2000           2004            2008         2012          2016
                                                                                      year

                                                                               Type of Procedure
                                                                         DiscretProc, lowN         DiscretCrit
                                                                         DiscretProc, highN




Note: The graph shows the share of contracts awarded to investigated firms, by type of procedure. In particular, the red
(diamond) line indicate the share of contracts awarded using DiscretCrit as an awarding criterion won by investigated firms,
the blue line (circles) indicates the share of contracts awarded using DiscretproclowN as procedure won by investigates
firms, and finally the green (square) line indicates the share of contracts awarded using DiscretprochighN as procedure
won by investigates firms.

                                                              Figure 4: Discretionary procedures over time




Note: The graph shows the share of contracts awarded through, respectively, Discretionary Criterion, overall Discretionary
Procedures and Discretionary Procedures with few bidders, over time.


                                                                                     38
                           Figure 5: Subcontracting by investigated and clean (non-investigated) winners
                        .3




                                                                                                                           .3
                                                                                                  % of Subc. Amount to Investigated Subcontractor
                                        .25




                                                                                                                                          .25
   Contracts w. Investigated Subcontractor
                             .2




                                                                                                                                .2
                .15




                                                                                                                 .15
    .1




                                                                                                        .1
                        .05




                                                                                                                           .05




                                              2000    2004           2008   2012        2016                                                        2000    2004           2008   2012        2016
                                                                     year                                                                                                  year

                                                     Investigated winner      Clean winner                                                                 Investigated winner      Clean winner




Note: The graph shows the share of contracts (left) and the contract amount (right) subcontracted to investigated sub-
contractors by investigated and non-investigated firms, respectively.




                                                                                             39
                          Table 1: Summary statistics by geographical area

                                                            (1)                   (2)                   (3)
                                                           South                 Center                North
  Investigated RUP                                         0.164                  0.122                0.0697
                                                          (0.370)                (0.328)               (0.255)
  Investigated Winner                                      0.175                  0.161                 0.168
                                                          (0.380)                (0.367)               (0.374)
  Discr. Auction                                           0.149                  0.125                 0.298
                                                          (0.356)                (0.331)               (0.457)
  Discr. Auction, Investigated RUP                         0.178                  0.138                 0.323
                                                          (0.382)                (0.345)               (0.468)
  Discr. Auction, Clean RUP                                0.143                  0.124                 0.303
                                                          (0.350)                (0.329)               (0.460)


Note: The sample refers to the universe of contracts awarded by municipalities or other local authorities: 27 % of contracts
awarded in the South, 23 % in the Center and 50% in the North. InvestigatedRU P is an indicator equal to 1 if the public
official in charge of the auction has been investigated. InvestigatedW inner is an indicator equal to 1 if the firm winning
the auction has been investigated. Discr.Auction denotes auctions for which either a discretionary procedure with fewer
than the legally mandated number of bidders (DiscretP roclowN ) or a discretionary criterion (DiscretCrit) has been used
to award the auction.




                                                            40
                          Table 2: Summary statistics for the full data

                                                                     A. Auction Level
                                                   (1)

                                                  Mean           Median             S.D.               N
Discretion                                         0.22            0.00             0.42            211,507
DiscretCrit                                        0.17            0.00             0.38            211,507
DiscretP roclowN                                  0.06             0.00             0.24            211,507
DiscretP rochighN                                 0.31             0.00             0.46            211,507
DiscretProc                                        0.37            0.00             0.48            211,507
Price Only Auction                                0.83             1.00             0.38            211,507
investigated Firm                                 0.17             0.00             0.38            200,092
Investigated RUP                                  0.10             0.00             0.30            211,507
No. Bidders                                       26.93           10.00             41.64           210,405
No. Invited Bidders                                7.48            4.00             16.78           103,205
Reserve Price (mil)                               0.92             0.30            14.14            195,718
Winning Discount                                  18.22           16.88             11.58           192,362
Extra Cost (wrt Base)                              7.01            3.37            13.85             83,088
Contractual Duration                             239.91           180.00           224.98           144,942
Delay (days)                                     135.08           73.00            220.48           108,663
                                                                B. Administration Level
                                                   (1)
                                                  Mean           Median             S.D.               N
Investigated PA                                   0.16            0.00              0.37            14,024
Area==North                                       0.51             1.00             0.50             9,328
Area==Center                                      0.13             0.00             0.34             9,328
Area==South                                       0.35            0.00              0.48             9,328
Total N. Auctions, by PA                          15.06           4.00             68.25            14,024
Total Value (in bil), by PA                      148.00           17.89           2,061.68          14,024
PA type==Central Admin                             0.02            0.00             0.14            14,024
PA type==Other Local PA                            0.05            0.00             0.22            14,024
PA type==Cities                                    0.57            1.00             0.50            14,024
PA type==Transportations                           0.03            0.00             0.16            14,024
PA type==Hospitals & University                   0.17            0.00              0.38            14,024
PA type==Other                                     0.17            0.00             0.37            14,024
Population==Pop. up to 5k                         0.67            1.00              0.47             7,004
Population==5-10k                                 0.16            0.00              0.37             7,004
Population==10-20k                                0.09            0.00              0.29             7,004
Population==20-60k                                0.06            0.00              0.23             7,004
Population==60-250k                               0.01            0.00              0.11             7,004
Population==above 250k                             0.00            0.00             0.04             7,004


Note: DiscretP roc denotes all negotiated procedures. DiscretP rochighN denotes negotiated procedures with at least
the legally mandated number of bidders. DiscretP roclowN denotes negotiated procedures with fewer than the legally
mandated number of bidders. DiscretCrit denotes scoring rule auctions. Discretion denotes auctions for which either
DiscretP roclowN =1 or DiscretCrit=1. Winning Discount is measured as a percentage of discount relative to the initial
reserve price. ExtraCost is measured as a percentage of the initial reserve price. ContractualDuration and Delay are
both measured in days.




                                                       41
                                Table 3: Summary statistics for identification

                                                           All PAs                                    Cities
                                                                (1)               (2)                 (3)                 (4)
                                                                                 South               Center              North
  Total PAs                                                    14,384            2,374                 937               4,098
  Total PA, > 1 Auction                                        10,439            2,140                 863               3,573
  At least 1 Discret                                            6,845            1,372                 530               2,653
  At least 1 DiscretCrit                                        5,993            1,290                 473               2,226
  At least 1 DiscretP roclowN                                   3,214             341                  224               1,593
  PA w. Variance in Discret                                     6,387            1,323                 526               2,495
  PA w. Variance DiscretCrit                                    5,667            1,243                 470               2,125
  PA w. Variance in DiscretP roclowN                            3,156             341                  223               1,581


Note: DiscretP roc denotes negotiated procedures. DiscretP roclowN denotes negotiated procedures with fewer than the
legally mandated number of bidders. DiscretCrit denotes scoring rule auctions. Discretion denotes auctions for which
either DiscretP roclowN =1 or DiscretCrit=1.




                        Table 4: Auction-level regressions, investigated winner
                                all procurement authorities                                        all city councils
                       (1)         (2)       (3)         (4)           (5)       (6)         (7)         (8)           (9)        (10)
                                                                                                                             
DiscretCrit         0.0122                0.0132 0.0133                       0.0191                  0.0199 0.0197
                    [0.00325]             [0.00328] [0.00328]                 [0.00400]               [0.00401] [0.00403]
DiscretProclowN                 0.0215 0.0229 0.0222                                       0.0127 0.0152 0.0163
                                [0.00495] [0.00500] [0.00512]                             [0.00592] [0.00589] [0.00583]
DiscretProchighN                                       0.00183 0.00326                                            -0.00321 -0.00336
                                                      [0.00316] [0.00312]                                         [0.00425] [0.00423]
Discretion                                                        0.0147                                                        0.0199
                                                                  [0.00304]                                                     [0.00367]
Dep. Var. Mean 0.170              0.170     0.170      0.170        0.170       0.170      0.170        0.170      0.170          0.170
Observations   199089            199089    199089     199089       199089      107994     107994       107994     107994         107994
R-sq            0.118             0.118     0.118      0.118        0.118       0.130      0.129        0.130      0.130          0.130

Note: In all specifications, the dependent variable is an indicator equal to 1 if an investigated firm is awarded the contract.
DiscretP rochighN denotes negotiated procedures with at least the legally mandated number of bidders. DiscretP roclowN
denotes negotiated procedures with fewer than the legally mandated number of bidders. DiscretCrit denotes scoring rule
auctions. Discretion denotes auctions for which either DiscretP roclowN =1 or DiscretCrit=1. All regressions include PA
and Year fixed effects, a linear control for reserve price (in log) price and 5 dummies for different contract size thresholds
(up to 100k, 100-150k, 150-300k, 300-500k, 500k-1mil, 1-1.5mil, over 1.5mil) as well as controls for contract characteristics:
4 dummies for category type (Civil Building, Roadworks, Specialized Works or Others), 1 dummy for whether the contract
was awarded under urgency and 1 dummy for whether the object of the contract entailed maintenance. Robust standard
errors clustered at the PA level are in parentheses.  p < 0.1, p < 0.05, p < 0.01.




                                                                  42
                        Table 5: Auction-level regressions, choice of procedure
                       (1)           (2)           (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)           (7)           (8)
                    Discretion DiscretProclowN DiscretCrit Discretion Discretion Discretion DiscretProclowN DiscretCrit
 Investigated RUP 0.0298           0.00996        0.0210       0.0189                  0.0339         0.000439        0.0330
                  [0.00805]        [0.00402]      [0.00766]    [0.00650]               [0.00854]      [0.00419]       [0.00780]
 Investigated PA                                                            -0.0170 -0.0257            0.00372        -0.0291
                                                                             [0.00639] [0.00754]      [0.00461]        [0.00598]
 Dep. Var. Mean       0.222          0.222          0.222        0.222        0.222      0.222         0.0589           0.169
 Observations        206421         206421         206421       166768       166768     166768         166768          166768
 R-sq                 0.325          0.257          0.321        0.210        0.210      0.211          0.131           0.196
 Geog. FE              PA             PA             PA         Region       Region     Region         Region          Region

Note: The dependent variable is indicated on top of each column. DiscretP roc denotes all negotiated procedures.
DiscretP roclowN denotes negotiated procedures with fewer than the legally mandated number of bidders. DiscretCrit
denotes scoring rule auctions. Discretion denotes auctions for which either DiscretP roclowN =1 or DiscretCrit=1.
InvestigatedRU P is an indicator equal to 1 if the public official in charge of the auction has been investigated.
InvestigatedP A is an indicator equal to 1 if any of the public officials in the PA have been investigated. All regres-
sions include Year fixed effects, a linear control for reserve price (in log) Price and 5 dummies for different contract size
thresholds (up to 100k, 100-150k, 150-300k, 300-500k, 500k-1mil, 1-1.5mil, over 1.5mil) as well as controls for contract char-
acteristics: 4 dummies for category type (Civil Building, Roadworks, Specialized Works or Others), 1 dummy for whether
the contract was awarded under urgency and 1 dummy for whether the object of the contract entailed maintenance. Robust
standard errors clustered at the PA level are in parentheses.  p < 0.1, p < 0.05, p < 0.01.




                              Table 6: Auction-level regressions, outcomes
                                 Delay (Asinh)                      Winning Discount                      Extra Cost
                           (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)        (7)         (8)       (9)
 Discretion            -0.142                                 -4.031                               -0.312
                        [0.0469]                               [0.267]                             [0.282]
 DiscretProclowN                   -0.259 -0.129                           -3.965 -3.023                      0.396 0.492
                                    [0.0766] [0.0756]                       [0.422] [0.356]                  [0.509] [0.520]
 DiscretCrit                        -0.0778 -0.0837                        -3.971 -4.117                     -0.640 -0.656
                                    [0.0538] [0.0535]                       [0.241] [0.251]                   [0.268] [0.270]
 DiscretProchighN                              -0.340                                 -2.426                            -0.276
                                                [0.0635]                               [0.356]                          [0.215]
 Dep. Var. Mean 3.296                3.296       3.296         18.11        18.11      18.11 7.035 7.035                 7.035
 Observations   107067              107067      107067        191053       191053     191053 81439 81439                 81439
 R-sq            0.250               0.250       0.251         0.443        0.444      0.448 0.219 0.219                 0.219
Note: The dependent variable is indicated at the top of each column. Delay is the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation
of the number of days between the expected contractual duration and the effective total completion time. W inning
Discount is the final price of the winning bid expressed as a discount over the reserve price (Discount) and ExtraCost
represents excess completion costs, calculated as the difference between the final price and awarding price, over the initial
reserve price. DiscretP rochighN denotes negotiated procedures with at least the the legally mandated number of bidders.
DiscretP roclowN denotes negotiated procedures with fewer than the legally mandated number of bidders. DiscretCrit
denotes scoring rule auctions. Discretion denotes auctions for which either DiscretP roclowN =1 or DiscretCrit=1. All
regressions include PA and Year fixed effects, a linear control for reserve price (in log) Price and 5 dummies for different
contract size thresholds (up to 100k, 100-150k, 150-300k, 300-500k, 500k-1mil, 1-1.5mil, over 1.5mil) as well as controls
for contract characteristics: 4 dummies for category type (Civil Building, Roadworks, Specialized Works or Others), 1
dummy for whether the contract was awarded under urgency and 1 dummy for whether the object of the contract entailed
maintenance. Robust standard errors clustered at the PA level are in parentheses.  p < 0.1, p < 0.05, p < 0.01.




                                                               43
                               Table 7: municipal-level regressions, turnover
                                          N. of Contracts                                    Contract Value
                            (1)           (2)         (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)            (7)         (8)
 Investigated PA 0.0749 0.0781 0.0772 0.0719 7542.8 7681.3 7447.3 6882.1
                 [0.00782] [0.00796] [0.00808] [0.00802] [784.4] [805.0] [816.8] [809.0]
 % Discret                                                     -0.000131                                              -34.70
                                                               [0.000129]                                              [11.92]
 Dep. Var. Mean           0.316        0.316        0.316         0.316       -72241.7 -72241.7 -72241.7 -72241.7
 Observations             6712         6712         6712          6712          6712     6712     6712     6712
 R-sq                     0.208       0.248         0.265         0.285         0.226    0.252    0.271    0.295
 Geog. FE                             Region        Prov.         Prov.                 Region    Prov.    Prov.
Note: In columns 1-4, the dependent variable is the number of contracts awarded by a RUP relative to the overall number
of contract in the PA. In columns 5-8, the dependent variable is the share of contract value awarded by a RUP, i.e., the
total value of all contracts awarded by a RUP divided by the overall value of contracts awarded by the PA. InvestigatedP A
is an indicator equal to 1 if at least one RUP in the PA has been investigated for corruption. %Discret measures the
average share of auctions awarded by the PA for which either DiscretP roclowN =1 or DiscretCrit=1. All regressions
include 24 population bin fixed effects as well as geographic fixed effects either at the province- or region-level, as indicated.
Specifications 4 and 8 also include a third order polynomial in population as control. Robust standard errors clustered at
the PA-level are in parentheses.  p < 0.1, p < 0.05, p < 0.01.


                  Table 8: Auction-level regressions, investigated subcontractors
                                    (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)              (6)
                                                                                                           
 Investigated Winner            0.0510          0.0514          0.0494          0.0494          0.0342             0.0342
                                [0.00358]       [0.00361]       [0.00362]       [0.00362]       [0.00326]          [0.00326]
 Discretion                                      0.00486         0.00326                          0.00293
                                                [0.00462]       [0.00460]                        [0.00409]
 Investigated RUP                               -0.000862       -0.000438       -0.000518       -0.000402          -0.000350
                                                [0.00637]       [0.00621]       [0.00621]       [0.00644]          [0.00642]
 Investigated PA                                 0.00463         0.00379         0.00389
                                                [0.00500]       [0.00495]       [0.00496]
 DiscretProclowN                                                                -0.0176                            -0.0216
                                                                                [0.00847]                           [0.00806]
 DiscretCrit                                                                     0.00734                            0.00727
                                                                                [0.00502]                          [0.00445]
 Dep. Var. Mean                   0.0818         0.0818          0.0818          0.0818             0.0818          0.0955
 Observations                     80601          78462           78462           78462              96971           96971
 R-sq                             0.0567         0.0571          0.0608          0.0609              0.150           0.150
 Geog. FE                         Region         Region          Region          Region               PA              PA
Note: In all specifications, the dependent variable is an indicator equal to 1 if an investigated firm is awarded to
a subcontract. InvestigatedW inner is an indicator equal to 1 if an investigated firm is awarded the main contract.
InvestigatedRU P is an indicator equal to 1 if the public official in charge of the auction has been investigated for corrup-
tion. InvestigatedP A is an indicator equal to 1 if at least one RUP in the PA has been investigated. DiscretP roclowN
denotes negotiated procedures with fewer than the legally mandated number of bidders. DiscretCrit denotes scoring rule
auctions. Discretion denotes auctions for which either DiscretP roclowN =1 or DiscretCrit=1. All regressions include PA
and Year fixed effects, a linear control for reserve price (in log) Price and 5 dummies for different contract size thresholds
(up to 100k, 100-150k, 150-300k, 300-500k, 500k-1mil, 1-1.5mil, over 1.5mil) as well as controls for contract characteristics:
4 dummies for category type (Civil Building, Roadworks, Specialized Works or Others), 1 dummy for whether the contract
was awarded under urgency and 1 dummy for whether the object of the contract entailed Maintenance. Robust standard
errors clustered at the PA level are in parentheses.  p < 0.1, p < 0.05, p < 0.01.



                                                               44
                   Table 9: Auction-level regressions, other subcontracting outcomes
                              (1)                (2)                    (3)               (4)                  (5)
                         Subcontracting     % Amount Subc.        N. Subcontracts    % Investigated     % Subc. Amount
                                              (wrt base)                             among Subc.         to Investigated
 Investigated Winner       -0.000360           0.0132                0.108             0.0145               0.0305
                           [0.00287]           [0.00129]             [0.0357]          [0.00166]            [0.00406]
 Investigated RUP           -0.0145            -0.00201              -0.0207             0.00209             0.00252
                           [0.00846]           [0.00291]             [0.0726]           [0.00389]           [0.00846]
 DiscretProclowN           -0.0500             -0.00309               -0.0241           -0.0136            -0.0219
                            [0.00681]          [0.00450]              [0.190]           [0.00542]           [0.00821]
 DiscretCrit               -0.00999            0.0116                0.387              -0.00272            -0.00386
                           [0.00673]           [0.00267]             [0.0636]           [0.00233]           [0.00491]
 Dep. Var. Mean              0.493               0.109                2.565              0.0423              0.0949
 Observations               195158               96635                96971              96971               52370
 R-sq                        0.375               0.183                0.347               0.146              0.172

Note: The dependent variable is indicated on top of each column. Subcontracting is an indicator equal to 1 if there
is any subcontract. % Amount Subc.(wrt base) is the total subcontracting value as a fraction of total initial contract
value; N.Subcontracts is the number of subcontractors; % Investigated among Subc. indicates the number of investigated
subcontractors as a fraction of the overall number of subcontractors; % Subc. Amount to Investigated measures the share of
subcontract value going to investigated firms as a fraction of total subcontract value. Investigated W inner is an indicator
equal to 1 if an investigated firm is awarded the main contract. InvestigatedRU P is an indicator equal to 1 if the public
official in charge of the auction has been investigated for corruption. DiscretP roclowN denotes negotiated procedures with
fewer than the legally mandated number of bidders. DiscretCrit denotes scoring rule auctions. All regressions include PA
and Year fixed effects, a linear control for reserve price (in log) Price and 5 dummies for different contract size thresholds
(up to 100k, 100-150k, 150-300k, 300-500k, 500k-1mil, 1-1.5mil, over 1.5mil) as well as controls for contract characteristics:
4 dummies for category type (Civil Building, Roadworks, Specialized Works or Others), 1 dummy for whether the contract
was awarded under Urgency and 1 dummy for whether the object of the contract entailed maintenance. Robust standard
errors clustered at the PA level are in parentheses.  p < 0.1, p < 0.05, p < 0.01.




                                                             45
Appendix: For Online Publication Only

                    Figure A.1: Regulatory Constraints and Audit System


                                   European Procurement Directives
                                   Directives 2004/17/EC and 2004/18/EC
                                                                                               External Audit
                                        National Procurement Law                                  System
                                     Legislative Decree 12/4/2006, n. 163
   Internal Audit                                                                           - Anticorruption         Au-
       System                         Local Procurement Regulation                            thority

                                        Regional, Provincial, Municipal                     - Court of Auditors
- First Level Audit
                                                                                            - Third Level Audit
  Management        Audit          Contracting Authority Guidelines
                                                                                              (IGRUE) and EU-level
   (Adg)
                                                                                              audit, only for certain
                                    Contracting Officer Discretion on
  Control Audit (Adc)                                                                         EU funded projects
                                     Selection Procedure and Award
- Second   Level    Audit
                                                Criterion
  (Ada)



   Note: The figure illustrates the set of regulatory constraints and audit oversight, subject to which a contracting officer
   exercises discretion over the supplier selection procedure and contract awarding criterion. At any point in time, the
   exact set of regulations and audit processes applicable depend on the contract reserve price, job characteristics, source of
   project funding, and the identity of the contracting authority. The system has changed over time, but for most of the
   contracts in our sample, the relevant regulations are the European Procurement Directives 2004/17 and 2004/18 and Italian
   procurement law (L.D. 163/2006). For the typical contract, the audit process has two levels and is also subject to scrutiny
   by external auditors. When the project is at least in part funded by the EU, there is a third audit level conducted by the
   regional offices of the Ministry of the Treasury (IGRUE) and, possibly, further levels of European audits as well.




                                                        46
                                Figure A.2: The Investigation Process

                        One of the country's four police forces is notified of
                       potential crimes by private citizens or public officials




                          If the preliminary evidence is deemed sufficient,
                          the potential crime is registered in a centralized
                         database (SDI) and a police investigation begins
                         (under supervision of a public prosecutor (P.M.))




                                 If there are suitable elements to pro-
                                ceed, the P.M. requests the supervising
                                judge for Preliminary Inquiries (G.I.P.)
                                to refer the case to the court for a pre-
                               liminary hearing before a judge (G.U.P.)



                                    The defendant is notified of pre-
                                      liminary hearings and has the
                                    right to be defended by a lawyer


                                    The G.U.P. considers the argu-
                                    ments brought by the prosecutor
                                     and defendants lawyer and de-
                                      cides whether to dismiss or
                                      begin a formal criminal trial


                                        The case is brought before
                                         the First Instance Court

Note: The figure shows the various steps in the investigation process in Italy. Our data comes from the second step,
highlighted in red.




                                                        47
Figure A.3: Share of investigated subcontractors, by number of subcontracts and inves-
tigated winner
                                          6
                          N. Investigated Subcontractors
                                 2        0    4




                                                           0   5               10                  15    20
                                                                       N. of Subcontracts

                                                               Clean winner        Investigated Winner




Note: The figure is a binned scatterplot. Each dot represents the average share of investigated subcontractors for auctions
with a given number of subcontracts, separately for auctions in which the main contract was won by an investigated firm,
versus all other (non-investigated) firms.




                                                                              48
                                                 Figure A.4: Regression discontinuity plots
        4.0e-06




                                                                                                      4.0e-07
        3.0e-06




                                                                                                      3.0e-07
   2.0e-06
   Density




                                                                                                  Density
                                                                                                 2.0e-07
        1.0e-06




                                                                                                      1.0e-07
        0




                                                                                                      0




                  300000        400000          500000         600000         700000                            800000        900000          1000000       1100000        1200000
                                              Reserve Price                                                                                 Reserve Price


                                    Regression function fit                                                                       Regression function fit
   .4




                                                                                                 .5
                                                                                                 .4
   .3




                                                                                                 .3
   .2




                                                                                                 .2
   .1




                                                                                                 .1
   0




                                                                                                 0




     300000                400000               500000            600000                700000     600000                800000              1000000           1200000                1400000

                  Sample average within bin               2th order global polynomial                           Sample average within bin               2th order global polynomial




Note: These graphs depict the results of our analysis using a Regression Discontinuity Design. The top panels display the
density of contracts with reserve price around the e500,000 and e1,000,000 cutoffs, respectively. The green bands depict
confidence intervals for the of the estimated density function. The bottom panels display the average fraction of contracts
awarded to investigated firms across equally-sized bins of the reserve price, and fitted polynomials functions on each side
of the cutoff. All estimates are performed using optimal bandwidth selection procedure by Cattaneo et al. [2019].




                                                                                            49
     Table A.1: Auction-level regressions, investigated winner - Restrictive definition
                                              all                                                        cities
                       (1)          (2)       (3)         (4)           (5)        (6)          (7)        (8)          (9)        (10)
                                                                                                                              
 DiscretCrit        0.00983                0.0107    0.0109                     0.0143                  0.0149 0.0150
                     [0.00275]             [0.00281] [0.00281]                  [0.00324]               [0.00326] [0.00326]
 DiscretProclowN                 0.0181 0.0193 0.0163                                       0.00979 0.0117 0.0110
                                 [0.00408] [0.00418] [0.00426]                               [0.00345] [0.00352] [0.00364]
 DiscretProchighN                                      0.00773 0.00864                                                0.00209 0.00180
                                                        [0.00230] [0.00228]                                          [0.00287] [0.00277]
 Discretion                                                         0.0119                                                       0.0148
                                                                    [0.00253]                                                    [0.00281]
 Dep. Var. Mean 0.170              0.170     0.170       0.170        0.170       0.170        0.170      0.170       0.170        0.170
 Observations   199089            199089    199089      199089       199089      107994       107994     107994      107994       107994
 R-sq            0.103             0.103     0.103       0.104        0.103       0.112        0.112      0.112       0.112        0.112

Note: In all specifications, the dependent variable is an indicator equal to 1 if an investigated firm is awarded the contract.
In this table, we restrict the definition of investigated firms to those investigated for (i) corruption, malfeasance and
embezzlement or (ii) abuse of power and undue influence, (i.e., we do not include in our definition those investigated for
violations in public auctions. DiscretProc denotes negotiated procedures. DiscretProclowN denotes negotiated procedures
with fewer than the legally mandated number of bidders. DiscretCrit denotes scoring rule auctions. Discretion denotes
auctions for which either DiscretProclowN =1 or DiscretCrit=1. All regressions include PA and Year fixed effects, a linear
control for reserve price (in log) price and 5 dummies for different contract size thresholds (up to 100k, 100-150k, 150-300k,
300-500k, 500k-1mil, 1-1.5mil, over 1.5mil) as well as controls for contract characteristics: 4 dummies for category type
(Civil Building, Roadworks, Specialized Works or Others), 1 dummy for whether the contract was awarded under urgency
and 1 dummy for whether the object of the contract entailed maintenance. Robust standard errors clustered at the PA
level are in parentheses.  p < 0.1, p < 0.05, p < 0.01.



        Table A.2: Auction-level regressions, investigated winner - Broad definition
                                              all                                                        cities
                       (1)          (2)       (3)         (4)           (5)        (6)         (7)        (8)          (9)        (10)
 DiscretCrit        0.0170                 0.0181 0.0182                        0.0203                 0.0210 0.0212
                    [0.00369]              [0.00371] [0.00372]                  [0.00470]              [0.00470] [0.00470]
 DiscretProclowN                 0.0212 0.0231 0.0206                                        0.0125 0.0152 0.0143
                                 [0.00557] [0.00559] [0.00588]                              [0.00714] [0.00711] [0.00723]
 DiscretProchighN                                      0.00650 0.00719                                             0.00278 0.00224
                                                       [0.00378] [0.00362]                                        [0.00504] [0.00496]
 Discretion                                                        0.0180                                                     0.0201
                                                                   [0.00337]                                                  [0.00424]
 Dep. Var. Mean 0.170              0.170     0.170       0.170       0.170        0.170      0.170       0.170        0.170       0.170
 Observations   199089            199089    199089      199089      199089       107994     107994      107994       107994      107994
 R-sq            0.138             0.138     0.138       0.138       0.138        0.148      0.148       0.148        0.148       0.148

Note: In all specifications, the dependent variable is an indicator equal to 1 if an investigated firm is awarded the contract.
In this table, we extend the definition of investigated firms to include firms investigated for waste management crimes.
DiscretProc denotes negotiated procedures. DiscretProclowN denotes negotiated procedures with fewer than the legally
mandated number of bidders. DiscretCrit denotes scoring rule auctions. Discretion denotes auctions for which either
DiscretProclowN =1 or DiscretCrit=1. All regressions include PA and Year fixed effects, a linear control for reserve price
(in log) Price and 5 dummies for different contract size thresholds (up to 100k, 100-150k, 150-300k, 300-500k, 500k-1mil, 1-
1.5mil, over 1.5mil) as well as controls for contract characteristics: 4 dummies for category type (Civil Building, Roadworks,
Specialized Works or Others), 1 dummy for whether the contract was awarded under urgency and 1 dummy for whether
the object of the contract entailed maintenance. Robust standard errors clustered at the PA level are in parentheses.
 p < 0.1, p < 0.05, p < 0.01.




                                                                   50
                    Table A.3: Auction-level regressions, PA X Year fixed effects
                                               all                                                       cities
                        (1)         (2)        (3)          (4)           (5)       (6)         (7)       (8)        (9)         (10)
                                                                                                                            
 DiscretCrit        0.00752                 0.00791 0.00795                      0.0186               0.0188 0.0187
                    [0.00455]               [0.00456] [0.00456]                  [0.00647]            [0.00648] [0.00647]
 DiscretProclowN                 0.0236 0.0239 0.0224                                         0.0176 0.0180 0.0196
                                 [0.00572] [0.00575] [0.00602]                               [0.00760] [0.00760] [0.00758]
 DiscretProchighN                                         0.00375 0.00559                                          -0.00476 -0.00451
                                                         [0.00415] [0.00407]                                       [0.00636] [0.00633]
 Discretion                                                          0.0116                                                    0.0206
                                                                     [0.00410]                                                 [0.00538]
 Dep. Var. Mean 0.170              0.170      0.170        0.170       0.170      0.170       0.170     0.170       0.170       0.170
 Observations   170210            170210     170210       170210      170210      86195       86195     86195       86195       86195
 R-sq            0.241             0.241      0.241        0.241       0.241      0.289       0.289     0.289       0.289       0.289

Note: In all specifications, the dependent variable is an indicator equal to 1 if an investigated winner is awarded the
contract. DiscretProc denotes negotiated procedures. DiscretProclowN denotes negotiated procedures with fewer than
the legally mandated number of bidders. DiscretCrit denotes scoring rule auctions. Discretion denotes auctions for which
either DiscretProclowN =1 or DiscretCrit=1. All regressions include PA*Year fixed effects, a linear control for reserve price
(in log) price and 5 dummies for different contract size thresholds (up to 100k, 100-150k, 150-300k, 300-500k, 500k-1mil, 1-
1.5mil, over 1.5mil) as well as controls for contract characteristics: 4 dummies for category type (Civil Building, Roadworks,
Specialized Works or Others), 1 dummy for whether the contract was awarded under Urgency and 1 dummy for whether
the object of the contract entailed maintenance. Robust standard errors clustered at the PA level are in parentheses.
 p < 0.1, p < 0.05, p < 0.01.




                        Table A.4: Bidder-level regressions, participants' pool
                                           participant                                                  auction
                       (1)         (2)        (3)          (4)            (5)      (6)         (7)        (8)         (9)         (10)
                                                                                                                            
 DiscretCrit         0.00248                 0.00240 0.00232                      0.0199                0.0198    0.0197
                    [0.00292]               [0.00292] [0.00292]                  [0.00924]             [0.00923] [0.00930]
 DiscretProclowN                  0.0125 0.0125 0.0143                                        0.0221 0.0220 0.0221
                                 [0.00533] [0.00533] [0.00538]                               [0.00896] [0.00896] [0.00912]
 DiscretProchighN                                        -0.00364 -0.00282                                         -0.000338 0.000571
                                                         [0.00392] [0.00392]                                       [0.00801] [0.00774]
 Discretion                                                           0.00114                                                  0.0223
                                                                     [0.00228]                                                 [0.00738]

 Dep. Var. Mean       0.163       0.163      0.163        0.163        0.163      0.161       0.161     0.161       0.161        0.161
 Observations        462821      462821     462821       462821       462821      24197       24197     24197       24197        24197
 R-sq                0.0562      0.0563     0.0563       0.0563       0.0562      0.223       0.223     0.223       0.223        0.223

Note: In columns 1-5, the dependent variable is an indicator equal to 1 if an investigated firm participates in the auction.
The unit of observation is the auction participant, so we have multiple observation per auction. Columns 6-10 replicate
columns 6-10 of Table 4, but restricts the sample to auctions for which we have information on the participants. Across
all columns, we restrict attention to contracts awarded by municipal councils. DiscretProc denotes negotiated procedures.
DiscretProclowN denotes negotiated procedures with fewer than the legally mandated number of bidders. DiscretCrit
denotes scoring rule auctions. Discretion denotes auctions for which either DiscretProclowN =1 or DiscretCrit=1. All re-
gressions include controls for participant firms' characteristics, and in particular firm net worth, firm size, profits, operating
margin, negative operating margin dummy, change in operating margin. Regressions also include PA and Year fixed effects,
a linear control for reserve price (in log) price and 5 dummies for different contract size thresholds (up to 100k, 100-150k,
150-300k, 300-500k, 500k-1mil, 1-1.5mil, over 1.5mil) as well as controls for contract characteristics: 4 dummies for category
type (Civil Building, Roadworks, Specialized Works or Others), 1 dummy for whether the contract was awarded under
urgency and 1 dummy for whether the object of the contract entailed maintenance. Robust standard errors clustered at
the PA level are in parentheses.  p < 0.1, p < 0.05, p < 0.01.




                                                                     51
      Table A.5: Auction-level regressions, investigated winner on investigated RUP
                        (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)          (6)         (7)          (8)        (9)         (10)
                                                                                                        
Investigated RUP 0.0095   0.0095   0.0092   0.0092   0.0093 0.0098 0.0096       0.0095 0.0097 0.0093                            

                 [0.0052] [0.0052] [0.0052] [0.0052] [0.0052] [0.0052] [0.0052] [0.0052] [0.0052] [0.0052]
DiscretCrit         0.0130                  0.0140 0.0141                                      0.0130
                     [0.0033]                [0.0033] [0.0033]                                  [0.0033]
DiscretProclowN                  0.0215 0.0230 0.0224                                                       0.0215
                                  [0.0050] [0.0050] [0.0051]                                                 [0.0050]
DiscretProchighN                                         0.0015 0.0029                                                   0.0043 0.0029
                                                        [0.0032] [0.0032]                                               [0.0032] [0.0032]
Discretion                                                           0.0154                                                        0.0154
                                                                      [0.0031]                                                      [0.0031]
PA FE                   No         No          No          No            No           Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
Dep. Var. Mean        0.170       0.170       0.170       0.170        0.170         0.170       0.170        0.170      0.170       0.170
Observations         195158      195158      195158      195158       195158        195158      195158       195158     195158      195158
R-sq                  0.118       0.118       0.118       0.118        0.118         0.117       0.118        0.118      0.117       0.118

Note: This table is the counterpart of Table 5 but including Investigated RUP among the regressors.
 p < 0.1, p < 0.05, p < 0.01.




             Table A.6: Auction-level regressions, choice of procedure, province FE
                      (1)           (2)           (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)           (7)           (8)
                   Discretion DiscretProclowN DiscretCrit Discretion Discretion Discretion DiscretProclowN DiscretCrit
 Investigated RUP 0.0298           0.00996           0.0210         0.0207                      0.0391           0.00167           0.0381
                  [0.00805]        [0.00402]         [0.00766]      [0.00731]                    [0.0100]       [0.00443]          [0.00888]
 Investigated PA                                                                   -0.0170 -0.0297               0.00124           -0.0318
                                                                                    [0.00608] [0.00786]         [0.00420]           [0.00589]
 Dep. Var. Mean       0.222          0.222             0.222          0.222          0.222        0.222          0.0589              0.169
 Observations        206421         206421            206421         110618         110618       110618          110618             110618
 R-sq                 0.325          0.257             0.321          0.228          0.228        0.229           0.143              0.212
 Geog. FE              PA             PA                PA          Province       Province     Province        Province           Province

Note: This Table is the counterpart of table 5 but using a finer partition for the geographic fixed effects, one for each of
Italy's 110 provinces. DiscretProc denotes negotiated procedures. DiscretProclowN denotes negotiated procedures with
fewer than the legally mandated number of bidders. DiscretCrit denotes scoring rule auctions. Discretion denotes auctions
for which either DiscretProclowN =1 or DiscretCrit=1. Investigated RUP is an indicator equal to 1 if the public official
in charge of the auction has been investigated. Investigated PA is an indicator equal to 1 if any of the public officials
in the PA have been investigated. All regressions include Year fixed effects, a linear control for reserve price (in log)
price and 5 dummies for different contract size thresholds (up to 100k, 100-150k, 150-300k, 300-500k, 500k-1mil, 1-1.5mil,
over 1.5mil) as well as controls for contract characteristics: 4 dummies for category type (Civil Building, Roadworks,
Specialized Works or Others), 1 dummy for whether the contract was awarded under urgency and 1 dummy for whether
the object of the contract entailed maintenance. Robust standard errors clustered at the PA level are in parentheses.
 p < 0.1, p < 0.05, p < 0.01.




                                                                 52
              Table A.7: Auction-level regressions, choice of DiscretProc procedures
                                         (1)                        (2)                     (3)                    (4)
 Investigated RUP                   0.000852                      0.00873                                        0.000846
                                    [0.0101]                     [0.00738]                                       [0.00972]
 Investigated PA                                                                          0.0123                  0.0120
                                                                                         [0.0101]                [0.0121]
 Dep. Var. Mean                       0.222                       0.222                   0.222                   0.222
 Observations                        109511                      110269                  110269                  110269
 R-sq                                 0.574                       0.500                   0.500                   0.500
 Geog. FE                              PA                        Region                  Region                  Region
Note: The dependent variable across columns is DiscretProc, which denotes all negotiated procedures. Investigated RUP
is an indicator equal to 1 if the public official in charge of the auction has been investigated for corruption. Investigated
PA is an indicator equal to 1 if at least one RUP in the PA has been investigated. All regressions include Year fixed effects,
a linear control for reserve price (in log) price and 5 dummies for different contract size thresholds (up to 100k, 100-150k,
150-300k, 300-500k, 500k-1mil, 1-1.5mil, over 1.5mil) as well as controls for contract characteristics: 4 dummies for category
type (Civil Building, Roadworks, Specialized Works or Others), 1 dummy for whether the contract was awarded under
urgency and 1 dummy for whether the object of the contract entailed maintenance. Robust standard errors clustered at
the PA level are in parentheses.  p < 0.1, p < 0.05, p < 0.01.




    Table A.8: Auction-level regressions, subsample of auctions with outcomes' data
                                               all                                                      cities
                       (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)            (5)      (6)         (7)       (8)         (9)        (10)
                                                                                                                           
 DiscretCrit        0.0168                0.0179    0.0178                      0.0254               0.0266    0.0266
                    [0.00585]             [0.00585] [0.00586]                   [0.00733]            [0.00730] [0.00737]
 DiscretProclowN                0.0278 0.0291 0.0293                                        0.0279 0.0302 0.0302
                                [0.00774] [0.00777] [0.00803]                               [0.00887] [0.00890] [0.00898]
 DiscretProchighN                                       -0.000638 0.00111                                         -0.000131 0.000603
                                                        [0.00520] [0.00505]                                       [0.00693] [0.00675]
 Discretion                                                         0.0211                                                    0.0299
                                                                    [0.00491]                                                 [0.00599]
 Dep. Var. Mean      0.161       0.161     0.161         0.161       0.161       0.161       0.161     0.161        0.161      0.161
 Observations        66458       66458     66458         66458       66458       37311       37311     37311        37311      37311
 R-sq                0.145       0.145     0.145         0.145       0.145       0.165       0.165     0.165        0.165      0.165

Note: This table is analogous to Table 4, but restricting the sample to the subset of auctions for which we have information
on the outcomes used in Table 6. In all specifications, the dependent variable is an indicator equal to 1 if an investigated
firm is awarded the contract. DiscretProc denotes negotiated procedures. DiscretProclowN denotes negotiated procedures
with fewer than the legally mandated number of bidders. DiscretCrit denotes scoring rule auctions. Discretion denotes
auctions for which either DiscretProclowN =1 or DiscretCrit=1. All regressions include PA and Year fixed effects, a linear
control for reserve price (in log) price and 5 dummies for different contract size thresholds (up to 100k, 100-150k, 150-300k,
300-500k, 500k-1mil, 1-1.5mil, over 1.5mil) as well as controls for contract characteristics: 4 dummies for category type
(Civil Building, Roadworks, Specialized Works or Others), 1 dummy for whether the contract was awarded under urgency
and 1 dummy for whether the object of the contract entailed maintenance. Robust standard errors clustered at the PA
level are in parentheses.  p < 0.1, p < 0.05, p < 0.01.




                                                                   53
             Table A.9: Auction-level regressions, outcomes (municipalities only)
                                 Delay (Asinh)                     Winning Discount                     Extra Cost
                           (1)         (2)         (3)            (4)        (5)          (6)     (7)        (8)        (9)
                                                                                                        
 Discretion            -0.156                               -4.313                              -0.530
                        [0.0508]                             [0.388]                            [0.272]
 DiscretProclowN                    -0.462 -0.334                          -3.153 -2.418                    0.276 0.242
                                     [0.0825] [0.0862]                      [0.571] [0.401]                [0.438] [0.428]
 DiscretCrit                        -0.0417 -0.0586                        -4.667 -4.829                   -0.776 -0.768
                                    [0.0601] [0.0595]                       [0.316] [0.342]                 [0.301] [0.310]
 DiscretProchighN                               -0.358                               -2.105                           0.108
                                                 [0.0626]                             [0.601]                        [0.309]
 Dep. Var. Mean          3.296       3.296       3.296        18.11         18.11      18.11 7.035         7.035      7.035
 Observations            58071       58071       58071       104628        104628     104628 46276         46276      46276
 R-sq                    0.260       0.260       0.261        0.437         0.439      0.442 0.249         0.249      0.249
Note: The dependent variable is indicated on top of each column. Delay is the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation of
the number of days between the expected contractual duration and the effective total completion time. Winning Discount
is the final price of the winning bid expressed as a discount over the reserve price (Discount) and Extra Cost represents
excess completion costs, calculated as the difference between the final price and awarding price, over the initial reserve
price. DiscretProc denotes negotiated procedures. DiscretProclowN denotes negotiated procedures with fewer than the
legally mandated number of bidders. DiscretCrit denotes scoring rule auctions. Discretion denotes auctions for which
either DiscretProclowN =1 or DiscretCrit=1. All regressions include PA and Year fixed effects, a linear control for reserve
price (in log) price and 5 dummies for different contract size thresholds (up to 100k, 100-150k, 150-300k, 300-500k, 500k-
1mil, 1-1.5mil, over 1.5mil) as well as controls for contract characteristics: 4 dummies for category type (Civil Building,
Roadworks, Specialized Works or Others), 1 dummy for whether the contract was awarded under urgency and 1 dummy
for whether the object of the contract entailed maintenance. Robust standard errors clustered at the PA level are in
parentheses.  p < 0.1, p < 0.05, p < 0.01.




                 Table A.10: Municipal-level regressions, limits to subcontracting
                                     (1)                    (2)                     (3)                    (4)
 Investigated PA                    0.0581               -0.0257               -0.000326                -0.0178
                                   [0.0639]              [0.0565]               [0.0634]                [0.0572]
 % Discret                                                                                            -0.000471
                                                                                                      [0.00146]
 Dep. Var. Mean                     0.220                0.220                     0.220                0.220
 Observations                        223                  223                       215                  223
 R-sq                               0.0935               0.413                     0.516                0.420
 Geog. FE                                                Region                    Prov.                Region
Note: The dependent variable is an indicator equal to 1 if the call for tenders included limits to subcontracting. Investigated
PA is an indicator equal to 1 if at least one RUP in the PA has been investigated for corruption. % Discret measures the
average share of auctions awarded by the PA for which either DiscretProclowN =1 or DiscretCrit=1. All regressions include
24 fixed effects for population bins. Specifications 2 to 4 also include geographic fixed effects either at the province or
region level, as indicated. Specification 4 also includes a third order polynomial in population as control. Robust standard
rrrors clustered at the PA level are in parentheses.  p < 0.1, p < 0.05, p < 0.01.




                                                             54
