                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     CREDIT FRICTIONS IN THE GREAT RECESSION

                                      Patrick J. Kehoe
                                       Pierlauro Lopez
                                      Virgiliu Midrigan
                                       Elena Pastorino

                                     Working Paper 28201
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28201


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2020




The authors thank the NSF and SIEPR for supporting this research, and Ross Batzer for
invaluable research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Cleveland or the Federal Reserve System. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Patrick J. Kehoe, Pierlauro Lopez, Virgiliu Midrigan, and Elena Pastorino. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Credit Frictions in the Great Recession
Patrick J. Kehoe, Pierlauro Lopez, Virgiliu Midrigan, and Elena Pastorino
NBER Working Paper No. 28201
December 2020
JEL No. E24,E3,E32,E6,E62,G51,J2,J38,J6,J64

                                          ABSTRACT

Although a credit tightening is commonly recognized as a key determinant of the Great
Recession, to date, it is unclear whether a worsening of credit conditions faced by households or
by firms was most responsible for the downturn. Some studies have suggested that the household-
side credit channel is quantitatively the most important one. Many others contend that the firm-
side channel played a crucial role. We propose a model in which both channels are present and
explicitly formalized. Our analysis indicates that the household-side credit channel is
quantitatively more relevant than the firm-side credit channel. We then evaluate the relative
benefits of a fixed-sized transfer to households and to firms that improves each group's access to
credit. We find that the effects of such a transfer on employment are substantially larger when the
transfer targets households rather than firms. Hence, we provide theoretical and quantitative
support to the view that the employment decline during the Great Recession would have been less
severe if instead of focusing on easing firms' access to credit, the government had expended an
equal amount of resources to alleviate households' credit constraints.

Patrick J. Kehoe                                 Virgiliu Midrigan
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
Stanford University                              New York University
579 Jane Stanford Way                            19 W. 4th St.
Stanford, CA 94305                               New York, NY 10012
and NBER                                         and NBER
patrickjameskehoe@gmail.com                      virgiliu.midrigan@nyu.edu

Pierlauro Lopez                                  Elena Pastorino
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland                Hoover Institution
Research Department                              and Stanford University
1455 East Sixth St                               579 Jane Stanford Way
Cleveland, OH 44114                              Stanford, CA 94305
pierlaurolopez@gmail.com                         and the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
                                                 epastori@stanford.edu
1. Introduction
       A large body of research on the Great Recession in the United States supports the view that a
tightening of credit was a crucial factor behind the downturn. This research can be grouped into work
that emphasizes the household-side channel, which argues that a tightening of credit to households was
most responsible for the observed decline in output and employment, and work that emphasizes instead
the alternative ...rm-side channel, which argues that a tightening of credit to ...rms mostly accounted for the
fall in output and employment.
       In terms of evidence on the household-side channel, Mian and Su... (2011, 2014) have documented
that in the United States, regions that experienced the largest declines in household debt and housing
prices also experienced the largest contractions in consumption and employment. These authors have also
shown that when housing prices declined, households decreased their spending, in part because of their
reduced ability to borrow against home equity. Speci...cally, Mian and Su... (2014, 2015) estimated that the
household-side channel accounts for approximately 65 percent of the job losses between 2007 and 2009.
       As for evidence on the ...rm-side channel, various work has documented that a deterioration in ...rms'
balance sheets, often emanating from a decline in lending from local banks, was an important component
of the downturn. For example, Chodorow-Reich (2014), Giroud and Mueller (2017), and Huber (2018) have
found that employment fell the most in ...rms that faced the worst credit conditions, which is consistent
with the view that a tightening of credit to ...rms played a signi...cant role in the transmission of credit
shocks to the economy. Jermann and Quadrini (2012) have provided additional aggregate evidence that
links the downturn in output during the Great Recession to ...rms'worsening ability to borrow in 2008 and
2009. For an early important paper on the role of ...rm ...nancial frictions in amplifying the macroeconomic
e¤ects of aggregate shocks, see Cooley, Marimon, and Quadrini (2004). See also Gertler and Gilchrist (2018,
2019) and Aikman et al. (2019) for surveys of the evidence on the ...rm-side channel and models that have
addressed it.
       To date, however, the role and relative importance of these channels are debated. In this paper,
we propose a model in which the household-side and ...rm-side channels of credit frictions can be explicitly
analyzed and clearly isolated. We also investigate the impact of transfers targeted to households and to
...rms on the recovery of aggregate employment after a recession induced by a credit contraction that a¤ects
households, ...rms, or both groups. In so doing, we help remedy the relative scarcity of explicit quantitative
modelling of government transfers in business-cycle research on economies with heterogeneous agents, in
which even lump-sum transfers can have a large impact on output, consumption, and employment.
       Our ...rst main ...nding is that for the same-sized credit shock to households and ...rms, the household-
side credit channel is quantitatively much more important than the ...rm-side credit channel. Our second
main ...nding concerns the e¤ectiveness of some of the key policies that the U.S. government implemented
to counteract the deterioration of credit conditions during the Great Recession. Based on the view that
providing credit to ...rms would have been the most e¤ective way to boost investment, hiring, and production,
several policies, such as many of those promoted as part of the Troubled Asset Relief Program, were designed
to improve ...rms'...nancial conditions by directly providing them with credit. We ...nd that, on the contrary,
directing credit to easing households'debt constraints could have led to a faster recovery of employment.
       Several recent empirical studies motivate us to consider targeted government transfers in downturns.
Oh and Reis (2012), for example, have argued that although the vast majority of research on the ...scal
response to the Great Recession has focused on government purchases, the actual response consisted mostly
of targeted transfers. In particular, these authors document that from the end of 2007 to the end of
2009, only one-quarter of the increase in U.S. government expenditures was accounted for by government
purchases, whereas the remaining three-quarters were accounted for by transfers. Similarly, Cogan and
Taylor (2012) have provided a detailed analysis of the ...scal expenditure from the American Economic
Recovery Act and showed that only a small percentage was directed at government purchases, as the vast
majority took the form of transfers. Oh and Reis (2012) have shown that a similar pattern holds across
OECD countries between 2007 and 2009. As for transfers speci...cally targeted to ...rms, often referred to
as "bailouts," see Bianchi (2016) for a discussion of the evidence on them, the relevant literature on their
impact, and a quantitative evaluation of their e¤ects in ...nancial-type downturns like the Great Recession.
       To examine the impact of targeted government transfers in recessions, we propose a model that
builds on Kehoe, Midrigan, and Pastorino (2019), who have developed a version of the Diamond-Mortensen-
Pissarides (DMP, henceforth) model of labor market search in the presence of risk-averse consumers and
human capital accumulation. In their model, hiring workers is an investment activity that requires costs
to be paid up front and entails bene...ts that accrue gradually. Thus, when credit tightens, this investment
activity naturally falls and employment declines.
       Although this force is present in any dynamic model, the employment drop caused by tighter credit
is negligible in the textbook search model, which features no human capital accumulation. As Kehoe,
Midrigan, and Pastorino (2019) show, when workers instead acquire human capital during employment,
the duration of the ows of bene...ts from a match between a ...rm and a worker is much longer than in the
absence of human capital acquisition. Intuitively, by acquiring skills that are at least partially transferable
across matches, workers'bene...ts from matching with a ...rm are long lasting, as the new productive skills
accumulated over the course of a match have a persistent e¤ect on a worker'
                                                                          s output beyond the course
of the match. As a result, the value of a match is highly sensitive to credit conditions, and so the fall
in employment associated with a tightening of credit is greatly ampli...ed relative to that predicted by the


                                                      2
textbook search model.
       Formally, the magnitude of the employment decline in a recession implied by a typical search model
is closely related to the sensitivity of the present value of the returns from a ...rm'
                                                                                      s investment in hiring
to changes in discount rates. In particular, the longer the duration of surplus ows is, the higher the
sensitivity of the present value of ...rms'returns is to discount rate changes, and so the larger the drop in
employment is in response to any given increase in discount rates. Consequently, in a model with human
capital acquisition, a tightening of credit leads to a much larger decline in employment than in the textbook
search model.
       A limitation of Kehoe, Midrigan, and Pastorino (2019), however, is that credit frictions are modelled
as having symmetric e¤ects on workers and ...rms. Hence, their framework is not amenable to exploring the
separate channels through which credit market frictions a¤ect an economy during a downturn, which we
focus on here. We formalize these channels by considering an economy in which consumers belong to one
of two types of families: families of workers who search for jobs, receive wages from supplying labor, and
engage in home production, referred to as either workers or households ; and families of entrepreneurs who
hire workers and own ...rms, referred to as either entrepreneurs or ...rms. Since each type of family faces a
separate borrowing constraint, this framework allows us to investigate the potentially di¤erent implications
of a tightening of credit to workers and to entrepreneurs.
       To examine the relative importance of household-side and ...rm-side credit frictions in accounting
for the decline in consumption and employment after a credit tightening, we ...rst consider a selective
tightening of access to credit by workers and ...rms, and then a common tightening. Note that, because of
general equilibrium e¤ects, tighter credit for either group leads to lower consumption for both groups in
equilibrium. Hence, both groups place greater value on current consumption relative to future consumption.
Correspondingly, a tightening of either group'
                                             s credit constraints induces an increase in the cost of diverting
current resources from consumption to investment in hiring, relative to the future gains from increasing the
number of matches between ...rms and workers. As a result, vacancies and employment fall.
       The two types of tightening we consider, however, have di¤erent e¤ects precisely because a tightening
of household credit constraints mostly impacts workers 'value of current goods, whereas a tightening of ...rm
credit constraints mostly impacts entrepreneurs 'value of current goods. To see why this di¤erence matters,
note that for a ...rm, the value of a match with a worker accrues in the form of the pro...ts earned over the
course of the match. Therefore, once a match dissolves, a ...rm derives no more value from it. For a worker,
on the contrary, the value of a match with a ...rm consists not only of the value of the wages received over
its course but also of the incremental value of the wages received from all future matches, because of the
increase in the worker'
                      s human capital occurring during the match.


                                                      3
       Formally, we decompose the surplus from a match into two pieces: the current output gains that
accrue over the course of the match and the future output gains that arise as the human capital accumulated
during the match increases a worker'
                                   s output in all future periods. In terms of the current output gains,
workers'and ...rms'discount rates symmetrically a¤ect match surplus. In contrast, the future output gains
are discounted solely by workers' discount rates. Since the future output gains are large and persistent
and thus are sensitive to changes in discounting, match surplus is much more sensitive to uctuations in
workers' marginal valuations of future relative to present goods, and so workers' discount rates, than to
...rms'marginal valuations.
       In a decentralized equilibrium, these distinct forces behind the impact of the two types of tightening
manifest themselves in di¤erent responses of the present value of wages relative to the present value of
output. After a worker-side tightening, the present value of wages falls signi...cantly less than the present
value of output, whereas after a ...rm-side tightening, the present value of wages falls nearly as much as the
present value of output. In this sense, after a tightening of household credit constraints, the present value
of wages is relatively stickier than after a tightening of ...rm credit constraints. This di¤erential rigidity of
wages helps account for how the fall in employment after a household-side credit tightening is larger than
after a ...rm-side credit tightening leading to equal-sized drops in household and ...rm discount factors.
       We then turn to evaluate the relative bene...ts of easing credit frictions faced by households and
...rms. Our model implies that if the government intervenes by providing lump-sum transfers to households
in response to a credit tightening a¤ecting either households or ...rms, it stimulates employment substantially
more than by providing the same-sized transfers to ...rms. The key intuition behind this result is similar
to that for our ...rst main ...nding. A transfer to workers has a large direct e¤ect on workers' valuations
of the associated bene...ts, which, as argued, determine the key discount rate of the surplus from a match
between a ...rm and a worker. On the other hand, a transfer to ...rms has only a small and indirect general
equilibrium e¤ect on such valuations. Since workers'valuations of the bene...ts of a transfer have a larger
impact on the surplus from a match than do ...rms'valuations, a transfer to ...rms has a much smaller e¤ect
on aggregate employment than a transfer to workers.
       For clarity, we emphasize that throughout we consider intertemporal transfers from the future to
the present ...nanced by government debt and eventually repaid by higher future taxes, rather than by
within-period transfers to one group ...nanced by contemporaneous higher taxes on another group. We
interpret such intertemporal transfers, which are considered part of current government expenditure but
not government purchases, as capturing the essential component of government expenditures that the
empirical literature discussed earlier has measured.
       We remark also that our results are not due to di¤erent marginal propensities to spend by households


                                                       4
and ...rms. Indeed, in our model, both sets of families have a marginal propensity to spend of one.1 Rather,
our results depend on the relative importance of the two groups'discount factors in determining the value
of the surplus from a match between a ...rm and a worker.
       Next, we extend the model by considering an economy composed of many states, each modelled as a
small open economy with tradable and nontradable goods. In this economy, meant to represent the United
States, a state-speci...c credit tightening has two e¤ects. The ...rst is an investment e¤ect, in that to a ...rm
in a given state, the cost of posting a job vacancy to hire a worker increases in a downturn by more than the
corresponding bene...ts, which leads to a reduction in the number of vacancies posted and hence to a drop in
overall employment in that state. The second is a relative demand e¤ect and is due to the reduction in the
demand for the nontradable goods produced in the state. Such a drop in turn gives rise to a decline in the
demand for workers by the nontradable goods sector, which induces workers to reallocate to the tradable
goods sector. When the cost of worker reallocation is small, a substantial reallocation occurs between the
two sectors. As a result, states that experience larger credit tightenings also experience larger declines in
nontradable employment but not necessarily in tradable employment, as is consistent with the data.
       We then assess the relative desirability of transfers to workers and to ...rms in response to a credit
tightening that impacts both workers'and ...rms'credit constraints. Speci...cally, we investigate our model'
                                                                                                           s
predictions for U.S. states during the Great Recession for two policies: one that implements transfers only
to workers and one that implements equally sized transfers only to ...rms. As before, transfers are modelled
as partially relaxing the tightened credit constraint that limits the ability of either group to borrow.
       Our second main ...nding is that after a credit tightening, a transfer to workers has substantially
larger positive e¤ects on employment than does a transfer to ...rms. For example, for Nevada, a state
that experienced an especially large decline in consumption and employment during the Great Recession,
a lump-sum credit subsidy to ...rms that leads to a fall in employment between 2007 and 2009 that is 20
percent smaller than the observed one would lead instead to a 50 percent smaller fall if that same amount
were transferred to workers. In sum, our model provides quantitative support for the view that the Great
Recession would have been less severe if instead of focusing on easing credit to ...rms, the government had
rather focused on easing credit to households.
       We end with an important cautionary note. Throughout the paper, we studiously avoid formulating
any statements about the welfare consequences of the transfers we consider. The reason is that we have
endowed the government with policy instruments-- namely, targeted lump-sum transfers-- that can partially
or totally counter the tightening of credit constraints, which for simplicity we have assumed as exogenous

   1
    Speci...cally, in our setup, workers spend all additional income on consumption goods, whereas entrepreneurs spend all
additional income on a combination of consumption and investment (job vacancies) goods.



                                                            5
and invariant to such interventions. To be able to evaluate the welfare implications of these interventions,
we would need to formalize from deeper ...rst principles a government'
                                                                     s ability to easily o¤set constraints on
the private sector that arise presumably from underlying information frictions or contracting imperfections.
Therefore, we interpret our exercise as simply highlighting the importance of accounting for alternative
transmission channels of ...nancial shocks when evaluating government interventions during recessions.

2. Baseline Model
       We consider a one-good small open economy in which labor markets are subject to frictions to the
matching between ...rms and workers. The economy consists of a continuum of consumers who belong to
either a family of workers or a family of entrepreneurs; these are often referred to as simply households and
...rms, respectively. We think of entrepreneurs as combining the roles of ...rms and banks. To hire workers,
entrepreneurs post job vacancies in markets indexed by a worker'
                                                               s general human capital. When employed,
workers accumulate new general and ...rm-speci...c human capital.
       Consumers survive each period to the next with probability         and are otherwise replaced by an
identical measure of newborns, so that the measure of consumers of each family is constant over time
and equal to one. Both families of workers and entrepreneurs insure their respective members against
idiosyncratic risk, but no such insurance arrangement exists across the two types of families. Each family is
subject to time-varying debt constraints. As we show in the Appendix, this formulation of the economy with
debt constraints has implications for the consumption of the two groups of families, output, employment,
and wages that are identical to those of a richer formulation in which debt is collateralized by housing.
       In this setup, after a di¤erential tightening of the two families'debt constraints, workers and entre-
preneurs can di¤er in their intertemporal rates of substitution of consumption. We exploit this di¤erence to
isolate the distinct roles of debt constraints on households and ...rms in amplifying and propagating credit
shocks as well as to examine the e¤ect on labor market outcomes of credit assistance policies alternatively
directed to households and ...rms. In what follows, we ...rst consider the di¤erential implications of credit
shocks a¤ecting the two types of families, modelled as debt tightenings, on aggregate employment. We then
study the impact of a government subsidy that selectively relaxes the debt tightening faced by households
and ...rms.

A. Human Capital
       Workers are indexed by two state variables that summarize their ability to produce output. The
variable zt , referred to as general human capital, captures returns to labor market experience that accrue
even after a match between a ...rm and a worker ends. The variable ht , referred to as ...rm-speci...c human
capital, captures returns to tenure in a match that are lost after a match ends. A worker with state variables


                                                      6
(zt ; ht ) produces zt ht when employed and b(zt ) when nonemployed. When a worker is employed, general
human capital evolves according to


(1)   log(zt+1 ) = (1    ) log(ze ) + log(zt ) +   z "t+1 ;



whereas when a worker is not employed, it evolves according to


(2)   log(zt+1 ) = (1    ) log(zu ) + log(zt ) +   z "t+1 ;



where "t+1 is a standard Normal random variable. We assume that zu < ze . Newborn workers start as
                                                                                                       2       2
nonemployed with general human capital z with log(z ) drawn from the distribution N (log(zu );         z =(1       )).
This speci...cation of the human capital process is in the spirit of that in Ljungqvist and Sargent (1998) and
is the same speci...cation as in Kehoe, Midrigan, and Pastorino (2019). We denote the Markov processes in
(1) and (2) by Fe (zt+1 jzt ) and Fu (zt+1 jzt ) in what follows. A worker'
                                                                          s ...rm-speci...c human capital ht equals
1 whenever a match begins; evolves on the job according to


(3)   log(ht+1 ) = (1    ) log(h) + log ht


with h > 1; and resets to 1 when a match ends.
        The assumption that zu < ze implies that when a worker is employed, on average, general human
capital zt drifts up toward the level of productivity ze from the level of productivity zu of newborn workers,
which we normalize to 1. Similarly, when a worker is not employed, on average, general human capital zt
depreciates and hence drifts down toward the level of productivity zu . The assumption that h > 1 implies
that when a worker is employed, ...rm-speci...c human capital increases over time from h = 1 toward h.
The parameter      governs the rate at which general and ...rm-speci...c human capital converge toward their
means. The higher       is, the slower both types of human capital accumulate during employment, and the
slower general human capital depreciates during nonemployment. For simplicity, we assume that these rates
are the same for the three laws of motion described. Note that allowing for idiosyncratic shocks "t+1 to
general human capital allows the model to reproduce the dispersion in the growth rate of wages observed
in the data. For simplicity only, we assume that the process of ...rm-speci...c human capital accumulation is
deterministic.
        We use et (z; h) to denote the measure of employed workers with general human capital z and ...rm-
speci...c human capital h and ut (z ) to denote the measure of nonemployed workers with general human
capital z .


                                                              7
3. Insurance
       We represent the insurance arrangements in the economy by assuming that each consumer belongs
to either one of a large number of identical families of workers or one of a large number of identical families
of entrepreneurs, each of which consists of a continuum of members. By the law of large numbers, in each
period, each family of workers as a whole receives a deterministic amount of income generated by its working
and nonworking members. Likewise, in each period, each family of entrepreneurs receives a deterministic
claim to the pro...ts of all ...rms that it owns, net of vacancy posting costs, and a deterministic endowment.
This endowment allows the model to reproduce the observed labor and pro...t shares of income in the data,
as explained below.
       Risk sharing within each type of family implies that at any date t, each consumer in a worker
family consumes the same amount of goods cwt , regardless of the idiosyncratic shocks that such a consumer
experiences. Similarly, each consumer in an entrepreneur family consumes the same amount of goods cf t ,
regardless of the idiosyncratic shocks that the ...rms owned by the consumer'
                                                                            s family experience. Worker
families and entrepreneur families are subject to distinct debt constraints.
       Given this setup, we can separate the problem of a worker family into two parts. The ...rst part
determines the common consumption level of each member of the family, and the second part determines
the employment and nonemployment status of each member. We can also separate the problem of an
entrepreneur family into two parts. The ...rst part determines the common consumption level of each
member of the family, and the second part determines the vacancies created, the matches formed, and the
matches continued by each ...rm owned by the family.

A. A Family of Workers'Problem
       A family of workers has access to risk-free debt but faces constraints to borrowing. Any such family
chooses a sequence for consumption fcwt g and debt fdwt+1 g in order to maximize the present discounted
                     P
value of consumption 1  t=0
                            t
                              u(cwt ), subject to the budget constraint
                     Z                                    Z
(4)   cwt + dwt                wt (z; h)et (z; h)dzdh +       b(z )ut (z )dz + qdwt+1 + Twt ;
                         z;h                              z


where wt (z; h) is the wage at t of an employed worker with general human capital z and ...rm-speci...c human
capital h, and b(z ) is the amount of home-produced goods of a nonemployed worker with general human
capital z and subject to the borrowing constraint


(5)   dwt+1       wt :




                                                                    8
A family takes as given the total income from the wages of its employed members, which is the ...rst term
on the right side of (4); the total income from the home production of its nonemployed members, which is
the second term on the right side of (4); and government transfers, Twt . Let
                  Z                                 Z
(6)        ywt           wt (z; h)et (z; h)dzdh +       b(z )ut (z )dz + Twt
                   z;h                              z


denote the total income of a family of workers. A family saves and borrows at a constant world interest
rate or, equivalently, at a constant world bond price q > , subject to an exogenous deterministic sequence
f   wt g   of borrowing limits. Since workers discount the future at a higher rate than that implicit in the bond
price q , their borrowing limits will bind in equilibrium.
            The ...rst-order conditions for this problem imply that the intertemporal rate of substitution of
consumption for a family of workers is

            t 0
(7)          u (cwt )=u0 (cw0 ) = Qwt ;


the Euler equation for borrowing is


(8)        qQwt = Qwt+1 + Qwt           wt ;



and the complementary slackness condition is


(9)         wt (dwt+1       wt )   =0


at each t, where Qwt is the multiplier on a family'
                                                  s budget constraint, Qwt      wt   is the multiplier on a family'
                                                                                                                  s
borrowing constraint, and we have normalized Qw0 to one so that Qwt is workers'shadow value of date-t
goods in units of date-0 goods.
            A tightening of debt constraints implies that a family of workers must temporarily reduce its con-
sumption in order to repay some of its debt. Such a tightening leads to a larger drop in consumption at t
than at t + 1, which in turn induces a larger increase in the shadow price of goods at t, Qwt , than in the
shadow price of goods at t + 1, Qwt+1 . Hence, the value of future goods relative to present goods,

           Qwt+1   u0 (cwt+1 )
(10)             =             ;
            Qwt    u0 (cwt )

decreases. In this sense, a debt tightening leads workers to discount future consumption more, relative to
current consumption.


                                                                     9
B. A Family of Entrepreneurs'Problem
       The problem of a family of entrepreneurs is symmetric to that of a family of workers. A family
of entrepreneurs has access to risk-free debt, faces constraints to borrowing, and chooses a sequence for
consumption fcf t g and debt fdf t+1 g in order to maximize the present discounted value of consumption
P1 t
  t=0 u(cf t ), subject to the budget constraint
                              Z                                              Z
(11) cf t + df t         y+          [zh     wt (z; h)] et (z; h)dzdh            vt (z )dz + qdf t+1 + Tf t
                               z;h                                           z


and the borrowing constraint


(12) df t+1          f t:


                                                                                R
The period pro...ts of a family equal the total revenues of the ...rms it owns, z;h zhet (z; h)dzdh, minus the
                                                       R
total wage bill of workers employed by those ...rms, z;h wt (z; h)et (z; h)dzdh, and the costs of posting job
          R
vacancies, z vt (z )dz . Since we will maintain free entry in the labor market, the present value of posting a
vacancy is zero when evaluated at the shadow discount factor of entrepreneurs. Hence, in an Arrow-Debreu
sense, the value of the right to post vacancies is zero. Through the endowment y , then, we capture, in a
reduced-form way, all of the returns to being an entrepreneur in addition to the pro...ts from hiring workers
net of vacancy costs. For simplicity only, we assume that the endowment y is constant over time. Lastly,
Tf t is government transfers to entrepreneurs. We denote the total income of a family of entrepreneurs by
                     Z                                           Z
(13) yf t     y+             [zh     wt (z; h)] et (z; h)dzdh           vt (z )dz + Tf t :
                       z;h                                         z


A family saves and borrows at a constant world bond price q > , subject to an exogenous deterministic
sequence f    f tg   of borrowing limits.
       The ...rst-order conditions for this problem imply that the intertemporal rate of substitution of
consumption for a family of entrepreneurs is

        t 0
(14)    u (cf t )=u0 (cf 0 ) = Qf t ;


the Euler equation for borrowing is


(15) qQf t = Qf t+1 + Qf t            f t;




                                                                        10
and the complementary slackness condition is


(16)    f t (df t+1   f t)   =0


at each t, where Qf t is the multiplier on a family'
                                                   s budget constraint, Qf t             ft   is the multiplier on a family'
                                                                                                                           s
borrowing constraint, and we have normalized Qf 0 to one so that Qf t is entrepreneurs' shadow value of
date-t goods in units of date-0 goods.
        Similar to a tightening of the debt constraints of a family of workers, a tightening of the debt
constraints of a family of entrepreneurs implies that the family must temporarily lower its consumption.
Thus, such a tightening induces a larger drop in consumption at t than at t + 1, which in turn gives rise to
a larger increase in the shadow price of goods at t, Qf t , than in the shadow price of goods at t + 1, Qf t+1 .
Therefore, the value of future goods relative to present goods,

       Qf t+1   u0 (cf t+1 )
(17)          =              ;
        Qf t    u0 (cf t )

declines. In this sense, a debt tightening leads entrepreneurs to discount future consumption more, relative
to current consumption.

C. Government
        The sole role of the government is to issue debt to foreigners in order to ...nance transfers to workers
and entrepreneurs. In our baseline, we set Twt = Tf t = 0 at each t, so that the government is inactive. In
later sections, we will examine the impact of government transfers meant to partially o¤set a debt tightening
a¤ecting workers or entrepreneurs. When doing so, we will maintain that the government rolls forward the
debt incurred beyond the horizon we consider. This way, we can examine the impact of such transfers
without the need to address the ...scal considerations arising from the accumulated government debt.2

D. Individual Worker Values
        For a given wage wt (z; h), which we for now posit and later characterize as the outcome of Nash
bargaining between ...rms and workers, the present value of an employed worker'
                                                                              s income or labor earnings

   2
    In practice, we can think of the government as having in each period a ...xed endowment of another type of (tradable)
good that all consumers in the world value and that enters all consumers'utility in a separable way as government services.
Then, in the future, the government pays o¤ its foreign debt, accumulated to ...nance its transfers, by selling the appropriate
amount of its endowments to foreigners and correspondingly reducing the amount of its endowments it provides to its citizens.
Since the economies we analyze are small in the world economy, transfers will have no e¤ect on any prices or discount factors
under these assumptions.




                                                              11
expressed in date-t consumption units is
                                                     Z
                                             Qwt+1
     Wt (z; h) = wt (z; h) + (1            )      max [Wt+1 (z 0 ; h0 ); Ut+1 (z 0 )] dFe (z 0 jz )
                                              Qwt
                                               z0
                              Z
                        Qwt+1
(18)             +              Ut+1 (z 0 )dFe (z 0 jz );
                         Qwt z0

where Ut+1 (z ) denotes the present value at t + 1 of the income of a nonemployed worker with general human
capital z . Each employed worker discounts the value of future income by the relative shadow price of future
to present goods, Qwt+1 =Qwt , of the relevant family. General human capital evolves according to the law of
motion Fe (z 0 jz ) in (1), whereas ...rm-speci...c human capital evolves according to the law of motion in (3).
Note that the continuation value in (18) reects a worker'
                                                        s survival probability , the exogenous separation
probability , and the possibility that a worker leaves an undesirable match when Wt+1 (z 0 ; h0 ) < Ut+1 (z 0 ).
        The present value of a nonemployed worker'
                                                 s income is
                                          Z
                                    Qwt+1
       Ut (z ) = b(z ) +    wt (z )           max [Wt+1 (z 0 ; 1); Ut+1 (z 0 )] dFu (z 0 jz )
                                     Qwt z0
                                            Z
                                      Qwt+1
(19)             + [1        wt (z )]          Ut+1 (z 0 )dFu (z 0 jz );
                                       Qwt z0

where b(z ) is the amount of home-produced goods of a nonemployed worker with general human capital z
in a period, and (z 0 ; 1) is the worker'
                                        s human capital at t + 1 if the worker begins a new match, an event
that occurs with probability         wt (z ).   A nonemployed worker also discounts the value of future income by
the relative shadow price of future to present goods, Qwt+1 =Qwt , of the relevant family. The general human
capital of a nonemployed worker evolves according to the law of motion Fu (z 0 jz ) in (2). Observe that the
continuation value in (19) accounts for a worker'
                                                s survival probability , a worker'
                                                                                 s job-...nding rate         wt (z ),

and the possibility that a match is not formed if Wt+1 (z 0 ; 1) < Ut+1 (z 0 ).

E. Individual Entrepreneur Value
        For a given wage wt (z; h), the present value of pro...ts of a ...rm matched with a worker with general
human capital z and ...rm-speci...c human capital h expressed in date-t consumption units is
                                                            Z
                                                   Qf t+1
(20) Jt (z; h) = zh        wt (z; h) + (1        )               max [Jt+1 (z 0 ; h0 ) ; 0] dFe (z 0 jz ):
                                                    Qf t    z0


The ow pro...ts are given by the di¤erence between the amount produced, zh, and the wage paid, wt (z; h).
Observe that since a ...rm is owned by a family of entrepreneurs, it discounts the value of future pro...ts by
Qf t+1 =Qf t . Note also that the continuation value on the right side of (20) captures a ...rm'
                                                                                               s option to end
an unpro...table match when Jt+1 (z 0 ; h0 ) is negative.


                                                                   12
F. Nash Bargaining, Vacancy Creation, and Resource Constraint
       Entrepreneurs can direct their search for nonemployed workers with a speci...c level of general human
capital z by posting job vacancies in the corresponding market. Matches in market z are generated by
the matching function mt (z ) = ut (z )vt (z )=[ut (z ) + vt (z ) ]1= speci...ed to ensure that matching rates for
...rms and workers lie in the unit interval, where ut (z ) is the measure of nonemployed workers with general
human capital z and vt (z ) is the measure of vacancies directed at such workers. The tightness of market z
is given by       t (z )   = vt (z )=ut (z ). The job-...nding rate for a worker with general human capital z -- namely,
the probability that a nonemployed worker with general human capital z matches with a ...rm in market
z -- is given by

                      mt (z )        t (z )
(21)   wt (z )    =           =                 :
                      ut (z )   [1 + t (z ) ]1=

The job-...lling rate for a ...rm searching for a worker with general human capital z -- namely, the probability
that a ...rm matches with a nonemployed worker with general human capital z in market z -- is given by

                      mt (z )         1
(22)   f t (z )   =           =                 :
                      vt (z )   [1 + t (z ) ]1=

Notice that the job-...nding rate increases with market tightness, whereas the job-...lling rate decreases with
it.
       We now determine the wage paid by a ...rm to a worker with human capital (z; h) as the outcome
of Nash bargaining. Formally, the Nash bargaining problem that a ...rm and such a worker face consists of
maximizing the objective function [Wt (w; z; h)              Ut (z )] Jt (w; z; h)1 , where   and 1   are the bargaining
weights of families of workers and entrepreneurs, respectively, and Wt (w; z; h) and Jt (w; z; h) denote the
values of employment and pro...ts for a given w-- namely, (18) and (20) with w replacing wt (z; h). De...ne
the surplus from such a match as


(23) St (z; h)         Wt (z; h)      Ut (z ) + Jt (z; h):


The following result is immediate.

Lemma 1. Under Nash bargaining, ...rms and workers share match surplus according to


(24) Wt (z; h)             Ut (z ) = St (z; h) and Jt (z; h) = (1        )St (z; h):




                                                                    13
Proof : The ...rst-order condition for the problem maxw [Wt (w; z; h)                               Ut (z )] Jt (w; z; h)1      is

                                         1
       [Wt (w; z; h)      Ut (z )]           Jt (w; z; h)1     = (1       )[Wt (w; z; h)        Ut (z )] Jt (w; z; h)


or, equivalently, by using Wt (wt (z; h); z; h) = Wt (z; h) and Jt (wt (z; h); z; h) = Jt (z; h),


(25)   Jt (z; h) = (1           )[Wt (z; h)        Ut (z )]:


Then, (24) follows from the de...nition of the surplus from a match between a ...rm and a worker with human
capital (z; h) in (23).
       Interestingly, this result implies that although ...rms and workers have di¤erent discount factors, the
share of surplus accruing to each of them does not depend on their discount factors. In particular, such a
share is not higher for the more patient party.
       Next, consider entrepreneurs' hiring decisions. The free-entry condition in market z ensures that
vacancies are created until the cost of posting a vacancy equals the corresponding present value of pro...ts.
Speci...cally, the free-entry condition is given by
                                Z
                       Qf t+1
(26)          f t (z )                max [Jt+1 (z 0 ; 1) ; 0] dFu (z 0 jz );
                        Qf t     z0


where the cost of posting a vacancy in any market z is                              units of goods. This relationship holds with
equality in an active market z -- that is, a market with open vacancies in that vt (z ) > 0. Since the surplus
from a match increases with z under our parameterization, there exists a cuto¤ level of general human
capital zt such that ...rms post vacancies in all markets with z                           zt and none in any market with z < zt .
       Finally, the resource constraint for this small open economy is
                                        Z                             Z                    Z
   cwt + cf t + dwt + df t = y +               zhet (z; h)dzdh +          b(z )ut (z )dz          vt (z )dz + q (dwt+1 + df t+1 ) + Twt + Tf t :
                                         z;h                          z                     z



G. Steady-State Properties
       Equilibrium allocations solve the problem of workers'families, the problem of entrepreneurs'families,
...rms and workers' Nash bargaining problem, and clear markets. We solve for the steady-state measures
of employed workers, e(z; h), and nonemployed workers, u(z ), as a function of human capital. We solve
also for the associated aggregate levels of consumption and employment. Figure 1 shows the steady-state
measures of employed and nonemployed workers-- the former integrated over ...rm-speci...c human capital
h-- and the steady-state schedules of the job-...lling rate and the job-...nding rate as a function of z under our



                                                                          14
parameterization. The ...gure displays the cuto¤ level of z -- namely, zt -- such that ...rms post no vacancies
in markets with z < zt and workers have a corresponding matching probability of zero, and post a positive
number of vacancies in markets with z                           zt . Note that the job-...nding rate is strictly increasing with z
when z is larger than zt , as ...rms matched with workers with higher levels of z earn higher pro...ts and thus
have a greater incentive to post vacancies to attract such workers.
         In anticipation of the policy experiments in later sections, we now describe the deterministic dynamics
of equilibrium starting from a steady state in which both workers'and entrepreneurs'debt constraints bind,
once we subject the economy to a transitory shock to debt constraints. Speci...cally, we conjecture and verify
that these constraints bind throughout the horizon of the experiment, in that given the inherited debt levels
dw 1 =    w0   and df 1 =          f 0,   we posit that       wt    > 0 and         ft   > 0 at each t so that dwt+1 =      wt   and df t+1 =        f t.

Given this conjecture, the multipliers on debt constraints satisfy

                             u0 (cwt+1 )                           u0 (cf t+1 )
         wt   =q                         and    ft   =q                         ;
                             u0 (cwt )                             u0 (cf t )

where workers'and entrepreneurs'consumption satis...es the corresponding budget constraints at the binding
borrowing constraints; namely,
               Z                                          Z
(27) cwt =               wt (z; h)et (z; h)dzdh +             b(z )ut (z )dz + q          wt    wt 1   + Twt
                   z;h                                    z


and
                         Z                            Z                                         Z
(28) cf t = y +                 zhet (z; h)dzdh               wt (z; h)et (z; h)dzdh                 vt (z )dz + q   ft   ft 1   + Tf t
                          z;h                         z;h                                        z


at each t. Note that this conjecture is veri...ed if the relevant multipliers are indeed positive along the
consumption sequences constructed based on (27) and (28) for each type of family. We guarantee that
this is the case by appropriately choosing the exogenous borrowing limit sequences f                                         wt g   and f   f t g,   as
explained below.
         At an intuitive level, a tightening of workers'and entrepreneurs'debt constraints leads to a temporary
decrease in workers'and entrepreneurs'consumption as each group deleverages by repaying part of its debt.
This drop in period-t consumption in turn increases the shadow prices Qwt and Qf t of period-t goods in
units of period-0 goods above their steady-state levels. These shadow prices then gradually decrease and
revert back to these levels. The corresponding discount factors Qwt+1 =Qwt and Qf t+1 =Qf t thus decrease
below their steady-state levels and then gradually increase back to these levels.




                                                                                15
H. Parameterization
        Table 1 summarizes the parameterization of our model. A period in the model corresponds to one
month. We follow Kehoe, Midrigan, and Pastorino (2019) in the choice of all common parameters and refer
to their discussion for more details. In particular, the values of the endogenously chosen parameters are
selected to match the same targets as in Kehoe, Midrigan, and Pastorino (2019). We posit an identical
CRRA utility function for workers'and entrepreneurs'families, u(cwt ) = c1
                                                                         wt =(1                      ) and u(cf t ) = c1
                                                                                                                       f t =(1

 ), with relative risk aversion parameter                equal to 5, and specify the home production function as b(z ) =
b0 + b1 z , with parameter b1 equal to 0:25. We choose entrepreneurs'endowment y so as to reproduce the
labor share of U.S. output between 2007 and 2009, as measured by the Bureau of Economic Analysis. We set
the exogenous steady-state debt levels              w   and   f   to match the debt service ratios of the U.S. household and
non-...nancial corporate sectors between 2007 and 2009, as reported by the Bank of International Settlements
(BIS).3

4. Deleveraging Shocks
        We turn to analyzing the impact of credit market disruptions on aggregate consumption and em-
ployment by examining the implications of shocks to workers' and entrepreneurs' debt limits. We then
evaluate the impact of government interventions aimed at partially o¤setting the e¤ects of these shocks.
To simulate the e¤ects of a credit tightening, we assume that an unanticipated reduction in the debt limit
for worker families, entrepreneur families, or both types of families occurs. We refer to these tightenings
as deleveraging shocks, since when the relevant constraints tighten, families must reduce their debt by de-
creasing their consumption. In all of these experiments, we assume that the credit tightening is unexpected
when it ...rst occurs and that agents have perfect foresight afterward.
        We will present and discuss our results from two distinct points of view. Speci...cally, we ...rst examine
the impact of these shocks on match surplus, St (z; h), and then on ...rms'incentives to create job vacancies.
To examine the impact of these shocks on match surplus, we rewrite the free-entry condition for any active
market as
                                        Z
                               Qf t+1
(29)      =    f t (z )(1    )               max [St+1 (z 0 ; 1) ; 0] dFu (z 0 jz );
                                Qf t    z0


by using Lemma 1 to express a ...rm'
                                   s value Jt (z; h) as a ...xed share of match surplus-- namely, (1                    )St (z; h).

   3
      Speci...cally, for the labor share, we use the annual share of labor compensation to GDP at current national prices for
the United States (not seasonally adjusted; the variable LABSHPUSA156NRUG from Federal Reserve Economic Data).
For the debt service ratio, we rely on the BIS measure of the debt service ratio for the private non-...nancial sector at
any quarter t, DSRt , computed as the ratio of the debt service cost of an installment loan to income; namely, DSRt =
it =[1 (1 + it ) st ](Dt =Yt ), where Dt is the total stock of debt, Yt is quarterly income, it is the average interest rate on the
existing stock of debt per quarter, and st is the average remaining maturity in quarters.


                                                                     16
Using the expressions for the values of employed workers, nonemployed workers, and ...rms-- namely, (18),
(19), and (20)-- we can then rewrite match surplus St (z; h) as


       St (z; h) = zh        b(z )
                                                                                          Z
                              Qwt+1                  Qf t+1                    Qwt+1
        +      (1        )          + (1           )                   wt (z )                  max [St+1 (z 0 ; h0 ); 0] dFe (z 0 jz )
                               Qwt                    Qf t                      Qwt        z0
                     Z
          Qwt+1
        +                 Ut+1 (z 0 ) [dFe (z 0 jz ) dFu (z 0 jz )]
           Qwt         z0
                                 Z                                                 Z
                        Qwt+1
(30)    +       wt (z )                  max [St+1 (z 0 ; h0 ); 0] dFe (z 0 jz )        max [St+1 (z 0 ; 1); 0] dFu (z 0 jz ) :
                         Qwt         z 0                                           z0


As is apparent from (30), a key reason why worker- and ...rm-side shocks and later government interventions
directed at workers and ...rms have a di¤erent impact is that workers'and ...rms'discount factors asymmet-
rically a¤ect match surplus and thus ...rms'and workers'incentives to create a match. Focusing on match
surplus also allows us to transparently isolate the role of human capital and, correspondingly, provide an
intuition for our results that does not rely on speci...c features of the decentralized equilibrium such as ...rms'
pro...ts or workers'wages.
        Using the free-entry condition in (26), we complement this approach by evaluating the e¤ect of
deleveraging shocks on the decentralized equilibrium, so as to examine the impact of such shocks on ...rms'
choices to post vacancies, which is the key margin for employment. To this end, we decompose a ...rm'
                                                                                                    s
value as


(31) Jt (z; h) = Xt (z; h)           Wt (z; h);


namely, as the di¤erence between the present value of output from a match, Xt (z; h), and the present value
of wages paid over the course of a match, Wt (z; h), discounted by entrepreneurs'discount factor, Qf t+1 =Qf t .
These values are given by
                                       Z
                                Qf t+1
(32) Xt (z; h) = zh + (1      )                              Xt+1 (z 0 ; h0 )dFe (z 0 jz )
                                 Qf t fz0 :Jt+1 (z0 ;h0 ) 0g
                                             Z
                                      Qf t+1
(33) Wt (z; h) = wt (z; h) + (1     )                              Wt+1 (z 0 ; h0 )dFe (z 0 jz ):
                                       Qf t fz0 :Jt+1 (z0 ;h0 ) 0g

Note that Wt (z; h) denotes the present value of wages only from a current match; in contrast, Wt (z; h)
denotes the present value of an employed worker'
                                               s income from a current match as well as from all future
periods of employment and nonemployment. In the expression for Xt (z; h) in (32) and Wt (z; h) in (33), we
integrate future values only over the realizations of general human capital z 0 for which ...rm value Jt+1 (z 0 ; h0 )



                                                                       17
is nonnegative, since only pro...table matches survive to period t + 1. Expressions (32) and (33) make it
clear how a ...rm'
                 s incentive to post vacancies after a deleveraging shock depends on the magnitude of the
fall in the present value of output from a match relative to the fall in the present value of the wages to be
paid.
        In our analysis below, we examine the e¤ect of a deleveraging shock on both match surplus and the
present values of output and wages from a match, which by (31) are related as

                    Xt (z; h)    Wt (z; h)
(34) St (z; h) =                           ;
                     1            1

since Jt (z; h) = (1      )St (z; h), which implies that match surplus can be expressed as the di¤erence in the
present values of output and wages scaled by entrepreneurs'bargaining share.

A. Deleveraging Shocks to Workers, Firms, and Both Groups
        Here, we consider deleveraging shocks that tighten the debt constraints of families of workers alone,
families of entrepreneurs alone, or both types of families at once. We refer to them as shocks to workers,
shocks to ...rms, and shocks to both workers and ...rms.

Deleveraging Shocks to Workers
        Consider a deleveraging shock that tightens workers'debt constraints. After such a shock, workers
reduce their consumption in order to repay part of their outstanding debt and satisfy their new debt limits.
As the solid line in panel (a) of Figure 2 shows, we choose a sequence f           wt g   of workers'debt limits so that
after the shock occurs in period 0, workers'consumption decreases in period 1 from its steady-state level
of cw to cw1 = (1       )cw , with       equal to 5 percent, and from period 2 onward, consumption slowly adjusts
back to its steady-state level at a rate of 10 percent per quarter according to


(35) log(cwt ) = (1       c ) log(cw )   +   c   log(cwt 1 );


with    c   = 0:91=3 , as our model is monthly. We chose the value of       c   so as to match the speed of recovery
of consumption in post-war recessions. Throughout this experiment, ...rms' debt limits are kept at their
                             4
steady-state value of      f.    The solid line in panel (c) of Figure 2 shows that this shock to consumption
makes workers'one-period-ahead discount factor Qwt+1 =Qwt drop by almost 1 percentage point (100 basis
points) on impact and then slowly mean revert. The solid lines in panels (b) and (d) show how the resulting
general equilibrium e¤ects of a worker deleveraging shock impact entrepreneurs'consumption and discount

  4
    In practice, we posit a path for workers'consumption and solve for equilibrium including the endogenously determined
path of workers'debt constraints that justi...es the assumed consumption path.


                                                                18
factor.
          As is apparent from the solid line in panel (a) of Figure 3, after a deleveraging shock to workers,
match surplus sharply drops by more than 10 percent and then slowly mean reverts. In panel (b) of Figure
3, we plot the present values of output and wages from a match, both scaled by the steady-state level of
output from a match, X . That is, we plot Xt =X and Wt =X , which by (34) are related to match surplus
scaled by its steady-state value St =S as

       St     1     X     Xt       Wt           Xt       Wt
(36)      =                             = 10                  ;
       S    1       S          X                     X

where the approximation uses that in our quantitative model                       = 1=2 and X=S = 5.5 From panel (b) of
Figure 3, it is apparent that the present value of output falls by more than the present value of wages from
a match so that both match surplus St (z; h) and ...rm value Jt (z; h) fall. Panel (d) of Figure 3 shows the
resulting decline in employment.
          From a ...rm'
                      s perspective, the mechanism behind the responses to a worker deleveraging shock is
as follows. The tightening of workers'debt constraints directly reduces workers'consumption, and hence
their discount factor falls, as depicted in panel (c) of Figure 2 (solid line). Two forces are at play. One
force is that when workers'consumption contracts, so does their demand for goods produced by ...rms. By
itself, such a fall in demand reduces ...rms'incentives to hire workers, and thus output declines. A second
force is that in the bargaining between ...rms and workers, the sharp fall in workers'discount factor tends to
make the resulting wages relatively sticky. This rigidity leads the present value of wages to fall less sharply
than the present value of output from a match, which gives rise to a sizable decline in the present value
of pro...ts from hiring a worker. By the free-entry condition, this second force induces ...rms to reduce even
further the number of vacancies they post. Overall, these two forces imply a large fall of nearly 3 percent
in employment, as shown in panel (d) of Figure 3.

Deleveraging Shocks to Firms
          Consider next a deleveraging shock that a¤ects families of entrepreneurs by generating the same
percentage fall in entrepreneurs'consumption as in workers'consumption after a worker deleveraging shock.
Namely, we simulate an initial 5 percent drop in entrepreneurs' consumption from its steady-state level,
followed by a recovery to its steady-state level at rate               c   = 0:91=3 per quarter, governed by the analogue of
                                                                                                                         6
(35). Throughout this experiment, we maintain workers'debt limits at their steady-state value of                       w.


   5
                      R
      Note that St = z;h St (z; h)et (z; h)dzdh and that Xt and Wt are similarly de...ned.
    6
      In the simulation, as in the case of a worker deleveraging shock, we posit a path for entrepreneurs'consumption and solve
for equilibrium including the endogenously determined path of ...rms'debt constraints that justi...es the assumed consumption
path.


                                                                  19
       The dashed line in panel (b) of Figure 2 shows the e¤ect of this shock on entrepreneurs'consumption,
and the dashed line in panel (a) of this ...gure shows the resulting general equilibrium e¤ect on workers'
consumption. The dashed line in panel (d) of the ...gure shows how on impact, this shock leads entrepreneurs'
one-period-ahead discount factor Qf t+1 =Qf t to drop by almost 1 percentage point (100 basis points) and
then slowly mean revert. The dashed line in panel (c) of the ...gure shows the corresponding general
equilibrium e¤ect on workers'discount factor, which is much smaller.
       As the dashed line in panel (a) of Figure 3 shows, after a deleveraging shock to ...rms, match surplus
drops by roughly half as much as it does after a deleveraging shock to workers, then slowly mean reverts.
Interestingly, a comparison of panels (b) and (c) of Figure 3 shows that although both the present value of
output and wages from a match decrease much more sharply after a shock to ...rms than after a shock to
workers, the di¤erence between these present values declines much less after a shock to ...rms. In panel (a)
of Figure 3, we see how this smaller drop in the di¤erence between the present values of output and wages
after a ...rm deleveraging shock in turn implies a smaller drop in match surplus, as is consistent with the
decomposition in (36). As panel (d) of Figure 3 further shows, this smaller decline in match surplus leads
to a fall in employment that is only about a third as large as the one that occurs after a worker deleveraging
shock of the same magnitude.
       From the perspective of the decentralized equilibrium, an intuition behind these results is that in
the bargaining between ...rms and workers, the sharp fall in entrepreneurs' discount factor gives rise to
relatively exible wages. Hence, although a shock to entrepreneurs' credit leads to a fall in the present
value of output that is nearly ...ve times larger than the one induced by a shock to workers' credit, the
relative exibility of wages after a shock to entrepreneurs'credit implies a large fall in wages by nearly as
much. Thus, by (34), match surplus and employment fall much less after a ...rm deleveraging shock than
after a worker deleveraging shock.

Deleveraging Shocks to Both Workers and Firms
       Now we consider a deleveraging shock that a¤ects both workers and ...rms. In our previous exper-
iments, we have directly simulated a decline in either workers' or entrepreneurs' consumption and then
solved for the other group'
                          s induced decline in consumption for ...xed debt constraints. Here, we instead let
worker debt constraints be those associated with the sequence of debt limits f   wt g   used in the worker-only
deleveraging case and ...rm debt constraints be those associated with the sequence of debt limits     ft   used
in the ...rm-only deleveraging case. We then solve for the resulting paths for both workers'and entrepreneurs'
consumption.
       Notice that because of the general equilibrium e¤ects across the two groups, both workers' con-
sumption and entrepreneurs'consumption fall by more than they do when just their own debt constraint

                                                     20
is tightened. Indeed, as the solid lines in panels (a) and (b) of Figure 4 show, after a deleveraging shock to
both workers and ...rms, workers'and entrepreneurs'total consumption drops by an amount roughly equal
to the sum of the consumption drops in the worker-only and ...rm-only deleveraging cases. The solid lines
in panels (c) and (d) show how these drops manifest themselves as declines in workers'and entrepreneurs'
discount factors.
          Panels (a), (b), and (c) of Figure 5 show that the drops in match surplus, the present values of
output and wages, and employment when both shocks occur are all approximately equal to the sum of the
corresponding drops for each shock alone. Note that the percentage drops in the present values of output
and wages in panel (b) of Figure 5 are only slightly larger in absolute value than the corresponding ones
in the ...rm-only shock case in panel (c) of Figure 3. Thus, it would not seem a straightforward exercise to
construct an empirical measure of the di¤erence in the present value of output and wages, say, during the
Great Recession, and infer from it the relative magnitudes of the deleveraging shocks faced by workers and
...rms.

B. Role of Human Capital
          Here, we discuss the role of human capital in amplifying the e¤ects of deleveraging shocks. To do
so, we show how the impact of these shocks di¤ers in the absence of human capital in the three scenarios
just considered.

Deleveraging Shocks to Workers without Human Capital
          In Figure 6, we contrast the impulse responses to a deleveraging shock to workers in our baseline
economy with those in an economy without human capital, in which we mute both general and ...rm-speci...c
human capital by setting zt = z and ht = 1 for all t. In this economy, as is apparent from panel (a), a
deleveraging shock of the same size as the shock considered earlier leads workers'consumption to drop by
5 percent on impact and then slowly mean revert, as in our baseline economy. The dashed line in panel
(b) shows that in contrast to our baseline economy, without human capital, the general equilibrium e¤ect
on entrepreneurs'consumption e¤ectively disappears. The dashed lines in panels (e) and (f) show further
that without human capital, match surplus and employment barely decline.
          To understand these results, consider the expression for match surplus in the economy without
human capital; namely,

                                          Qwt+1                 Qf t+1             Qwt+1
(37) St (z; 1) = z    b(z ) +   (1    )         + (1        )            wt (z )           St+1 (z; 1);
                                           Qwt                   Qf t               Qwt

which implies that match surplus is determined by a ...rst-order di¤erence equation. The term multiplying
St+1 (z; 1) on the right side of (37) governs the magnitude and persistence of changes in match surplus in

                                                       21
response to changes in workers'debt limits and so in discount factors. Up to a log-linear approximation,
this term corresponds to the standard surplus root in the DMP model, in which surplus is also determined
by a ...rst-order di¤erence equation. For standard parameterizations, this term is much smaller than one,
which implies that a temporary decrease in Qwt+1 =Qwt leads to only a modest decrease in the second term
on the right-side of (37)-- that is, the continuation surplus. Hence, a deleveraging shock generates only a
very small and transitory decline in match surplus and thus in employment, as is apparent from the dashed
lines in panels (e) and (f) of Figure 6.
        Now consider our baseline economy with human capital and compare (30) with (37). The expression
in (30) consists of two additional terms. The ...rst one, in the third line of (30), is due to general human
capital accumulation. As the third and fourth lines of (30) show, the expression for match surplus includes
values weighted by the laws of motion of general human capital for employed and nonemployed workers,
dFe (z 0 jz ) and dFu (z 0 jz ). Since general human capital grows faster when a worker is employed, this ...rst
additional term is clearly positive. The second additional term, in the fourth line of (30), is due to both
general and ...rm-speci...c human capital accumulation. Speci...cally, even if dFe (z 0 jz ) = dFu (z 0 jz ), the term
in brackets in this fourth line would not be zero-- owing to the di¤erence in the level of ...rm-speci...c human
capital between workers in continuing matches, h0 , and in new matches, h = 1-- and is otherwise strictly
positive.
        Intuitively, since the general human capital acquired over the course of a match is transferable to
other matches, the component of match surplus due to general human capital acquisition slowly decays
over time. As shown in Kehoe, Midrigan, and Pastorino (2019), the slower the decay in match surplus
ows is, the more sensitive match surplus is to changes in discount factors. Indeed, general, rather than
...rm-speci...c, human capital accounts mostly for the increased duration of surplus ows arising from human
capital acquisition. In fact, when we mute general human capital so that Fe (z 0 jz ) = Fu (z 0 jz ), the (Macaulay)
duration of surplus ows decreases approximately from 61 months in our baseline economy to 2 months.7
In contrast, when we mute ...rm-speci...c human capital so that h = 1, the (Macaulay) duration of surplus
ows decreases only modestly, approximately from 61 months in our baseline economy to 59 months.
        The reason for the greater response to a debt tightening that a¤ects workers in the economy with
human capital compared with that in the economy without human capital is that human capital accumu-
lation introduces a key component to match surplus, as reected in the terms on the third and fourth lines
of the expression in (30), that is sensitive to discounting.8 To see the close connection between changes in

   7
      The Macaulay duration is a standard measure of the change in the present value of an intertemporal stream of pay-
ments in response to permanent changes in one-period discount rates. We compute this duration as 1            k=1 k! k , where
! k = k sk = 1k=1
                  k
                    sk is the share of surplus received in the k -th period of a match.
    8
      Without accumulation of new capital, the dispersion in general human capital at entry in the market is unimportant for



                                                             22
surplus and in employment, note from panel (e) of Figure 6 that in the presence of human capital, match
surplus falls sharply and then mean reverts. Correspondingly, employment falls sharply, as shown in panel
(f). In contrast, without human capital, match surplus barely moves and so does employment.
        In panels (c) and (d) of Figure 6, by using (36), we decompose changes in surplus into changes in
the present values of output and wages. As panel (c) shows, the presence of human capital implies that the
present value of output falls by more than the present value of wages. Instead, panel (d) shows that absent
human capital, the present values of output and wages fall by nearly the same amount. In panel (e), we
scale these di¤erences by 10, as (36) requires, to show the resulting changes in surplus. From this panel, it
is apparent that with human capital, the di¤erence in the present value of output and wages falls enough to
generate a sizable decline in match surplus and thus, by the free-entry condition, a large fall in employment,
as reported in panel (f). In contrast, absent human capital, the di¤erence in the present value of output
and wages barely falls, so that the resulting surplus in panel (e) is almost unchanged. Accordingly, the
drop in employment in panel (f) is negligible.

Deleveraging Shock to Firms without Human Capital
        In Figure 7, we compare the impulse responses to a deleveraging shock to ...rms in our baseline
economy to those in an economy without human capital. Figure 7 shows that when human capital is muted,
a deleveraging shock generates only a negligible fall in both match surplus and employment. Interestingly,
as panels (c) and (d) show, both with and without human capital, a deleveraging shock to ...rms causes a
sizable fall in the present value of both output and wages. The key di¤erence is that with human capital,
the drop in the present value of wages is slightly smaller than the drop in the present value of output. When
scaled by 10 as (36) requires, this di¤erence leads to about a 7 percent fall in match surplus (see panel [e])
and hence a nontrivial fall in employment (see panel [f]). In contrast, without human capital, the present
values of output and wages decline by almost the same amount. Thus, the resulting change in surplus is
negligible and so is the change in employment.
        One way to understand these results is to contrast the impact of a deleveraging shock on match
surplus in the presence of human capital in (30) and in its absence in (37). Intuitively, the crucial terms
that lead to long-duration match surplus ows are those that arise from human capital accumulation. In
(30), a worker'
              s discount factor multiplies the human capital terms in the third and fourth lines of this
expression. By contrast, a ...rm'
                                s discount factor appears only in the second line of this expression containing
the standard terms of the match surplus equation in a DMP model, in which, as argued, surplus ows have
short durations and so are relatively insensitive to changes in discounting. Because of this feature, match

these results.



                                                      23
surplus is much more sensitive to a worker'
                                          s discount factor (and deleveraging shock) than to a ...rm'
                                                                                                    s
discount factor (and deleveraging shock).

Deleveraging Shocks to Both Workers and Firms without Human Capital
       We now suppose that deleveraging shocks a¤ecting workers and ...rms occur at the same time in
the economy without human capital. In this case, impulse responses for the present values of output and
wages display patterns similar to those arising when deleveraging shocks a¤ect only ...rms. In particular, by
comparing panels (c) and (d) of Figure 8, we see that both with and without human capital, the present
values of output and wages fall sharply. In the presence of human capital, the fall in the two present values
is su¢ ciently asymmetric that when scaled by 10, as (36) requires, it gives rise to a correspondingly large
decrease in match surplus and hence in employment. In contrast, in the absence of human capital, these
present values fall by almost exactly the same amount. As a result, the change in surplus, and thus in
employment, is negligible. In particular, even when both deleveraging shocks occur, the presence of human
capital makes wages slightly more rigid than in its absence.

5. Policy Interventions
       We turn to examine policy experiments in which the government implements lump-sum transfers
to workers or entrepreneurs to partially o¤set the tightening of their debt constraints. These interventions
are assumed to be ...nanced by the government with foreign debt that is rolled forward, including any debt
service payments, beyond the end of these experiments-- and so is not repaid over their horizons. We
formulate this assumption for simplicity, so as to focus solely on the impact of simple credit assistance
policies that do not entail addressing any of the associated ...scal considerations.
       We ...rst examine the same deleveraging shock to workers as before-- namely, a tightening of debt
constraints that gives rise to an initial 5 percent drop in consumption, which then mean reverts, at the rate
of 10 percent per quarter, to its steady-state level. We suppose that the government performs a sequence
of lump-sum transfers fTwt g such that workers' consumption in equilibrium falls by only 2:5 percent on
impact and then transfers revert to zero at the rate of 10 percent per quarter.
       We then consider a deleveraging shock to entrepreneurs and assume that the government transfers
to entrepreneurs the same amount of resources transferred to workers in the previous experiment in that
Tf t = Twt at each t. Note that since workers earn 60 percent of the income in the economy and entrepreneurs
earn only 40 percent, entrepreneurs receive larger transfers per family than workers. Indeed, in the presence
of these transfers, entrepreneurs'consumption falls by only 1:8 percent after the intervention factoring in
general equilibrium e¤ects (see panel [b] of Figure 10). Instead, when the government performs the same
lump-sum transfers to workers in response to a worker deleveraging shock, workers'consumption falls by


                                                      24
more than 2 percent (see panel [a] of Figure 9). Hence, a transfer of the same size to each group spurs
entrepreneurs' consumption more than workers' consumption. We nonetheless think that considering an
equal sequence of transfers to both groups is the most relevant experiment if the goal is to contrast the
implications of a transfer of any given size directed to households and directed to ...rms, since by de...nition,
such an exercise measures the bang for the buck of each policy.
       The solid lines in the panels of Figure 9 graph the responses to a negative deleveraging shock to
workers that temporarily reduces their consumption cwt by 5 percent, with ...xed entrepreneurs'exogenous
debt limits f   f t g--   they repeat the corresponding ones from Figures 2 and 3. We then plot the responses
to the same shock when workers' credit is supported by the intervention described. As the e¤ect on
employment of the deleveraging shock to workers was sizable in the absence of the intervention, the impact
of this intervention on employment is substantial. The largest decline in employment with the intervention
is less than half as large as the corresponding decline without the intervention, as is apparent from panel
(d) of Figure 9.
       Similarly, the solid lines in the panels of Figure 10 report the responses to a negative deleveraging
shock to entrepreneurs that temporarily reduces their consumption cf t by 5 percent, with ...xed workers'
exogenous debt limits f        wt g--   they repeat the corresponding ones from Figures 2 and 3. In each panel, we
overlay the responses to the same shock when entrepreneurs'credit is bolstered through the same sequence
of lump-sum transfers directed to workers underlying Figure 9. Note that the bene...ts of this intervention
for employment are only half as large (in levels) as those of the intervention aimed at workers, despite the
two interventions being of the same size.
       The reason for the intervention directed at supporting worker credit'
                                                                           s greater impact on employment
is similar to that for the larger aggregate employment drop after a tightening of worker credit, compared
with a tightening of ...rm credit. Simply, an increase in workers'consumption, through its impact on workers'
discount factor, has a larger e¤ect on match surplus than the same increase in entrepreneurs'consumption.
       A similar result emerges also in a scenario in which a credit tightening a¤ects both workers and
entrepreneurs by the same measure. Figure 11 plots solid lines for a negative deleveraging shock to both
workers and entrepreneurs that temporarily reduces their respective consumption by 5 percent. It thus
repeats the consumption responses in panels (a) and (b) of Figure 4 (solid lines). In panel (d) of Figure 11,
we further compare the e¤ects on employment of an intervention that transfers the same lump-sum amount
of resources solely to workers (dashed-dotted line) and solely to ...rms (dashed line). As before, in the ...rst
type of intervention, the sequence of lump-sum transfers is designed to o¤set half of the decline in workers'
consumption. In the second type of intervention, the same amount of resources is directed alternatively
to entrepreneurs. The di¤erence between the dashed-dotted and dashed lines in the panels of Figure 11 is


                                                             25
therefore due entirely to the group of families that receives transfers. As the ...gure shows, the employment
recovery is faster when the intervention is directed to workers rather than ...rms.
        So far we have considered a model in which uctuations in workers' and entrepreneurs' ability to
borrow originate directly from a change in the exogenous debt limits of the two groups. In the Appendix,
we show that our simple model with debt constraints is equivalent to a model with collateralized borrowing
against the value of the housing that each group owns. In particular, we show that our model is equivalent
to one in which uctuations in each group'
                                        s ability to borrow are induced by uctuations in housing prices
for ...xed parameters of the borrowing constraints of the two groups. At a more general level, our economy is
equivalent to a much larger class of economies, as the labor market outcomes-- including employment, non-
employment, vacancies, and wages-- implied by our simple model are uniquely determined by the sequences
of shadow prices of goods, fQwt ; Qf t g. Because of this feature, alternative setups for the families'problems
that yield the same sequences of shadow prices of goods also imply equivalent labor market outcomes.

6. An Economy with Tradable and Nontradable Goods
        We extend the model analyzed so far by considering an economy composed of many regions, meant to
represent U.S. states, with tradable and nontradable goods produced and consumed in each region (state).
We begin by reviewing the regional patterns of the Great Recession across U.S. states between 2007 and
2009 in terms of consumption, employment, employment in the nontradable goods sector, and employment
in the tradable goods sector. We then augment the model of Kehoe, Midrigan, and Pastorino (2019), who
showed that a version of this model with only one group of consumers accounts well for the cross-state
comovement between consumption, nontradable employment, and tradable employment during the Great
Recession. We use the resulting model to investigate the implications of a government intervention aimed
at subsidizing households'and ...rms'credit in response to credit shocks of magnitude comparable to those
experienced by U.S. states during the Great Recession.

A. Regional Patterns
        In the three panels of Figure 12, we reproduce the corresponding results in Kehoe, Midrigan, and
Pastorino (2019) on the relationship between changes in state-level consumption and employment between
2007 and 2009, with consumption changes instrumented by changes in state-level house prices.9 Intuitively,
we correlate cross-state employment changes with cross-state consumption changes that are associated
with changes in local credit conditions as accounted for by changes in local house prices. We ...nd that

   9
    This ...gure repeats panels (a) to (c) of Figure 14 in Kehoe, Midrigan, and Pastorino (2019); we refer the interested reader
to this paper for all omitted details. Like those authors, we restrict attention to the sample of U.S. (continental contiguous)
states for which information about house prices is consistently available over the years of interest. State-level consumption
changes are measured by projecting state-level consumption changes on the corresponding changes in state-level (Zillow) house
prices. See Charles, Hurst, and Notowidigdo (2018) for a similar approach.

                                                              26
the elasticity of changes in employment relative to changes in consumption is 0:38 across states; that is,
a 10 percent decline in consumption across states is associated with a 3:8 percent decline in employment.
From the ...gure, it is apparent that declines in consumption across states are strongly related to declines
in nontradable employment across states. Declines in consumption across states, though, are essentially
unrelated to declines in tradable employment across states; for the size of these tradable employment
declines, see the large negative intercept in the bottom panel of the ...gure. In particular, a 10 percent
decline in consumption across states is associated with a 5:5 percent decline in nontradable employment
and a negligible (and statistically insigni...cant) 0:3 percent increase in tradable employment across states.

B. Model with Tradable and Nontradable Goods
       We consider a world economy that consists of a continuum of islands indexed by s 2 S . The islands
borrow and lend from one another in units of a composite tradable good. We focus on a ...nite subset SU S
of these islands and interpret any s 2 SU S as a state of the United States. Since we focus on island-speci...c
shocks to a ...nite number of islands, we interpret the set of islands SU S as small in the world economy--
that is, as a small subset of the set of all islands S = SU S [ SR , where SR are the islands in the rest of
the world. Hence, the total world output of tradable goods is assumed ...xed, and borrowing and lending
occur at a constant interest rate r with associated bond price q = 1=(1 + r). Each island is populated
by a unit measure of worker families and a unit measure of entrepreneur families. Each island produces
a di¤erentiated variety of a tradable good that is consumed everywhere and a nontradable good that is
consumed only on that island. Both of these goods are produced using intermediate goods. Workers can
switch between the nontradable and tradable goods sectors but are immobile across islands. Each worker
is endowed with one of two types of skills that are used with di¤erent intensities in the nontradable and
tradable goods sectors. Such a di¤erential intensity in the use of skills across sectors generates a cost of
worker reallocation between them, which will prove central to each sector'
                                                                         s distinct employment response
to credit shocks across states.

Preferences and Demand
       On each island s, there is a measure one of identical families of workers and a measure one of identical
families of entrepreneurs that consume a composite consumption good,


     cwt (s) + cf t (s) = xt (s);


where cwt (s) and cf t (s) denote the consumption of market-produced goods of each group and xt (s) is the
total consumption of all families. This composite consumption good is a bundle of the nontradable good



                                                      27
produced and consumed domestically, xN t (s), and the composite tradable good, xT t (s),

                 h     1                      1                          1                       1
                                                                                                     i   1
      xt (s) =             xN t (s)               + (1                  ) xT t (s)                           ;


where    is the elasticity of substitution between nontradable and tradable goods. The price of the composite
consumption good on island s is

                                                                                         1
      pt (s) =         pN t (s)1          + (1                     )p1
                                                                     Tt
                                                                                     1
                                                                                             ;


where pN t (s) is the price of the nontradable good produced on island s and pT t is the price of the composite
tradable good common across islands.
        Given the demand for the composite consumption good on island s, xt (s), the demand for its
nontradable and tradable goods components are given by

                            pN t (s)                                                                                  pT t
(38) xN t (s) =                                    xt (s) and xT t (s) = (1                                      )            xt (s):
                             pt (s)                                                                                  pt (s)

The tradable good consumed on island s is a composite of varieties of di¤erentiated tradable goods produced
on all islands,

                       Z                                   1
                                                                             T
                                                                                 1
                                                   T                     T
                                              0                     0
      xT t (s) =               xT t (s; s )            T       ds                    ;
                           S


where    T   is the elasticity of substitution between tradable good varieties, and xT t (s; s0 ) is the amount of
the variety of the tradable good produced on island s0 and consumed on island s. The world price of the
composite tradable good is

                 Z                                     1
                                                           1
                                                               T
                                  1
      pT t =           pT t (s)           T   ds                    ;
                   S


where pT t (s) is the price of the tradable good variety produced on island s. The demand on island s0 for
the tradable good variety produced on island s is

                               pT t (s)            T

      xT t (s0 ; s) =                                  xT t (s0 );
                                pT t

where xT t (s0 ) is the demand for the composite tradable good on island s0 . Let yT t = yT be the constant world
demand for the composite tradable good. The world demand for the composite tradable good produced on




                                                                                                             28
island s is given by

                      pT t (s)    T

(39) yT t (s) =                       yT :
                       pT t

We normalize the world price of the composite tradable good, pT t , to one, so that the composite tradable
good is the numeraire.

Technology
        We follow closely the setup in Kehoe, Midrigan, and Pastorino (2019), in which nontradable and
tradable goods on each island s are produced only with locally produced intermediate goods. These inter-
mediate goods are used in di¤erent proportions by the nontradable and tradable goods sectors. This setup
implies a curved production possibility frontier between nontradable and tradable goods sectors and hence
e¤ectively introduces endogenous costs of sectoral reallocation of workers.
        Formally, each island s produces two types of intermediate goods, type N and type T goods. The
technology for producing nontradable goods disproportionately uses type N goods, whereas the technology
for producing tradable goods disproportionately uses type T goods, according to the production technologies

                   N                   T         1                                   N          1    T
(40) yN t (s) = A yN t (s)            yN t (s)           and           yT t (s) = A yT t (s)        yT t (s)    ;

                         N            N
with         1=2. Here, yN t (s) and yT t (s) denote the use of intermediate goods of type N as inputs in the
                                                                                  T            T
production of nontradable and tradable goods, respectively, on island s, whereas yN t (s) and yT t (s) denote

the use of intermediate goods of type T as inputs in the production of nontradable and tradable goods,
respectively, on island s. Both nontradable and tradable goods producers are competitive and take as given
the price of their goods, pN t (s) and pT t (s). The demands for intermediate goods in the nontradable goods
sector are given by

                                  1
        N                pT
                          t (s)                                 T                          pN
                                                                                            t (s)
(41)   yN t (s)   =       N
                                       yN t (s) and            yN t (s) = (1           )            yN t (s);
                         pt (s)                                                            pT
                                                                                            t (s)


where pN          T
       t (s) and pt (s) are the prices of the intermediate goods of type N and T , and we have used
                                                                       (1   )
the convenient normalization A =                        (1         )            . Likewise, the demands for intermediate goods in the
tradable goods sector are given by

                                                                                                1
        N                     pT
                               t (s)                                    T              pN
                                                                                        t (s)
       yT t (s)   = (1      ) N              yT t (s)        and       yT t (s)   =                 yT t (s):
                              pt (s)                                                   pT
                                                                                        t (s)


Adding up the demands for each type of intermediate good by the two sectors gives the total demand on


                                                                                29
island s for intermediate goods of type i; that is,

      i        i          i
(42) yt (s) = yN t (s) + yT t (s) for i 2 fN ; T g :



Production of these intermediate goods is given by
                    Z
        i
(43)   yt (s)   =         zhei
                             t (z; h; s)dzdh;
                    z;h


where ei
       t (z; h; s) is the measure of employed workers with human capital (z; h) producing intermediate goods

of type i on island s. The zero-pro...t condition in the nontradable and tradable goods sectors implies that

                                           1                                1
       pN t (s) = pN
                   t (s)          pT
                                   t (s)        and    pT t (s) = pN
                                                                   t (s)            pT
                                                                                     t (s)   :

                                                        N          T            N
        We assume that there exist measures                 and        =1           of workers who supply labor to produce
the two types of intermediate goods N and T , respectively. We refer to these workers as in occupations N
and T . Workers in occupation i 2 fN ; T g are hired by the ...rms that produce intermediate goods of type i.
These goods are then sold at competitive prices pN          T
                                                 t (s) and pt (s) to ...rms in the nontradable and tradable

goods sectors. Of course, it is equivalent to interpret workers in each occupation as working in the ...nal
goods sector that purchases the intermediate goods they produce. According to this interpretation, workers
are hired by employment agencies for workers in either occupation N or T , which rent labor services to ...nal
goods producers in sectors N and T . Thus, we can think of workers in occupation N as being employed in
sectors N and T and workers in occupation T as also being employed in sectors N and T but in di¤erent
proportions. In particular, sector N employs workers in occupation N relatively more intensively, whereas
sector T employs workers in occupation T relatively more intensively.
        This setup captures, in a simple way, the idea that switching sectors is relatively easy, whereas
switching occupations is di¢ cult. In particular, any individual worker faces no cost of switching sectors,
but if a positive measure of workers reallocates from one sector to the other, then the marginal revenue
product of workers in the latter sector falls and so do wages. Hence, this reduction in marginal revenue
product acts like a switching cost in the aggregate.

Families' Problems
       Each family of workers on island s chooses sequences for consumption fcwt (s)g and debt fdwt+1 (s)g
                                                                   P
in order to maximize the present discounted value of consumption 1   t=0
                                                                         t
                                                                           u(cwt (s) + bt (s)), where bt (s) is
the total amount of home-produced goods of the family'
                                                     s nonemployed members, subject to the budget



                                                              30
constraint


      pt (s)cwt (s) + dwt (s)          ywt (s) + qdwt+1 (s)


and the borrowing constraint


      dwt+1 (s)         wt (s):



In so doing, a family of workers takes as given market prices and its income

                     X Z
                                      i
      ywt (s)                        wt (z; h; s)ei
                                                  t (z; h; s)dzdh + Twt (s);
                   i2fN ;T g   z;h


       i
where wt (z; h; s) and ei
                        t (z; h; s) are the wages and the measure of employed workers in occupation i 2 fN ; T g

with general human capital z and ...rm-speci...c human capital h on island s.
      Similarly, each family of entrepreneurs on island s chooses sequences for consumption fcf t (s)g and
                                                                                 P
debt fdf t+1 (s)g so as to maximize the present discounted value of consumption 1  t=0
                                                                                       t
                                                                                         u(cf t (s)), subject
to the budget constraint


      pt (s)cf t (s) + df t (s)        yf t (s) + qdf t+1 (s)


and the borrowing constraint


      df t+1 (s)        f t (s):



A family of entrepreneurs takes as given market prices and its income

                           X Z                                                      X Z
                                                   i
      yf t (s)     y+                       [zh   wt (z; h; s)]ei
                                                                t (z; h; s)dzdh
                                                                                                   i
                                                                                                  vt (z; s)dz + Tf t (s);
                        i2fN ;T g     z;h                                         i2fN ;T g   z



which consists of the endowment y as well as the pro...ts from the ...rms that the family owns in both
the nontradable and tradable goods sectors. As in the one-good economy considered earlier, through the
endowment y we capture, in a reduced-form way, all the returns to being an entrepreneur in addition to the
pro...ts from hiring workers net of vacancy posting costs. From the ...rst-order conditions for the families'
problems, we can derive the shadow prices of the composite consumption good at date t in units of the




                                                                     31
composite consumption good at date 0 for the two types of families on island s as

                          t 0                                t 0
                  u (cwt (s) + bt (s))=pt (s)                 u (cf t (s))=pt (s)
       Qwt (s) = 0                            and Qf t (s) = 0                    :
                 u (cw0 (s) + b0 (s))=p0 (s)                 u (cf 0 (s))=p0 (s)

         We will consider experiments in which we tighten debt constraints on one island at a time. For
simplicity, we focus on the case in which these constraints always bind, both in the steady state before the
debt tightening and in the transition to the new steady state after the debt tightening. For this assumption
to hold, the islands of interest need to be impatient relative to the rest of the world in that their discount
factor       satis...es     < q . To ensure that the world bond price is q , we assume that in the rest of the world,
there exists a su¢ cient number of islands in which families have discount factor                                         = q and are willing to
lend at price q so that the bond market clears at this price.

Labor Market
         Workers on each island s work for ...rms that produce intermediate goods and sell them to ...rms that
produce either nontradable or tradable goods on that island. Firms that produce intermediate good i 2
fN ; T g post vacancies for workers in occupation i with general human capital z , who produce intermediate
good i when employed. Since we assume that workers cannot switch occupations, the measure of workers
in each occupation is ...xed. After suppressing any explicit dependence on s for notational simplicity, the
values of workers in occupation i on a given island are similar to those in our one-good model and are given
by
                                                                       Z
                                                         Qwt+1
       Wti   (z; h) =       i
                           wt (z; h)  + (1             )          max Wti+1 (z 0 ; h0 ) ; Uti+1 (z 0 ) dFe (z 0 jz )
                                                          Qwt z 0
                                      Z
                                Qwt+1
(44)                 +                  U i (z 0 )dFe (z 0 jz )
                                 Qwt z0 t+1

for employed workers with general human capital z and ...rm-speci...c human capital h, and
                                                       Z
                                       i       Qwt+1
       Uti   (z ) = pt b(z ) +         wt (z )                   max Wti+1 (z 0 ; 1); Uti+1 (z 0 ) dFu (z 0 jz )
                                                Qwt          0
                                                       Zz
                                     i        Qwt+1
(45)                 + [1            wt (z )]                    Uti+1 (z 0 ) dFu (z 0 jz )
                                               Qwt      z0


                                                              i
for nonemployed workers with general human capital z , where wt (z; h) is the wage received by a worker
                                                                                              i
in occupation i as a function of human capital (z; h) and                                     wt (z )   is the job-...nding rate of a worker with
general human capital z in occupation i.
         The value of a ...rm producing intermediate good i matched with a worker with human capital (z; h)



                                                                                  32
in occupation i is
                                                                       Z
                                                              Qf t+1
(46)   Jti   (z; h) =   pi
                         t zh
                                    i
                                   wt (z; h)   + (1         )                 max Jti+1 (z 0 ; h0 ) ; 0 dFe (z 0 jz ):
                                                               Qf t      z0


That is, a worker with human capital (z; h) in occupation i matched at date t with a ...rm in intermediate
good sector i produces zh units of good i, which sell for pi                            i
                                                           t zh, and receives the wage wt (z; h). The cost of

posting a vacancy in either sector is                   units of the composite tradable good.
        The matches of ...rms that produce intermediate good i with workers with general human capital z
                                                                                                                         1
are created according to the matching function mi         i      i        i         i                 i
                                                t (z ) = ut (z )vt (z )=[ut (z ) + vt (z ) ] , where ut (z ) is the
                                                                                  i
measure of nonemployed workers with general human capital z in occupation i, and vt (z ) is the measure
                                                                                                      i                                 i
of vacancies directed at such workers. The associated job-...nding rate                               wt (z )   and job-...lling rate   f t (z )   are
de...ned as before. The determination of wages by Nash bargaining is analogous to that in the one-good
model. Finally, free entry for intermediate goods producers in the labor market for workers in occupation
i 2 fN ; T g with general human capital z implies
                                   Z
                 i        Qf t+1
                 f t (z )                max Jti+1 (z 0 ; 1) ; 0 dFu (z 0 jz );
                           Qf t     z0


with equality for any market z with open vacancies.

Equilibrium
        Consider now the market-clearing conditions. Market clearing for the two types of intermediate
goods requires that
       Z
(47)          zhei                  i          i
                 t (z; h; s)dzdh = yN t (s) + yT t (s) for i 2 fN ; T g
        z;h


by (42) and (43). The left side of this equation is the total amount of intermediate goods of type i produced
by employed workers with human capital (z; h) in occupation i on island s, ei
                                                                            t (z; h; s), whereas the right

side is the total amount of these intermediate goods used by ...rms in the nontradable and tradable goods
sectors on that island. According to the interpretation of the economy discussed earlier, whereby workers
in each occupation work in the ...nal goods sector that purchases the intermediate goods they produce, we
measure employment in the nontradable goods sector on island s as
                 Z                                          Z
     y Nt (s)                                   y T t (s)
(48) N N
                        eN
                         t (z; h; s)dzdh       + NT
                                                                   eT
                                                                    t (z; h; s)dzdh
     yt  (s)      z;h                            yt  (s)     z;h




                                                                           33
and employment in the tradable goods sector on island s as

      N       Z                          T              Z
     yT (s)                             yT  (s)
(49) Nt             eN
                     t (z; h; s)dzdh   + Tt                   eT
                                                               t (z; h; s)dzdh;
     yt (s)   z;h                       yt (s)          z;h


       N          T
where yt (s) and yt (s) are de...ned in (42). In our later discussion, to explain some of our results, we will
                                                                                                i        i
rely on the idea of relative demand e¤ect on employment in the two sectors. Intuitively, since yN t (s)=yt (s)+
 i        i
yT t (s)=yt (s) = 1 for i 2 fN ; T g by (42), any shift in demand from the nontradable goods sector to the

tradable goods sector on an island, holding ...xed total employment on the island, decreases employment in
the nontradable goods sector and increases it in the tradable goods sector on the island.
       Market clearing for nontradable goods requires that the demand for nontradable goods on island s
from (38) equal the amount of nontradable goods produced on island s from (40) so that

                   N              T         1
     xN t (s) = A yN t (s)       yN t (s)           :


Similarly, market clearing for tradable goods requires that the world demand for tradable goods produced
on island s from (39) equal the amount of tradable goods produced on island s from (40) so that

                   N         1     T
     yT t (s) = A yT t (s)        yT t (s)      .

C. Deleveraging Shocks and Policy Experiments
       Here, we ...rst describe the impact of a credit tightening a¤ecting families of workers and entrepre-
neurs. Then, we discuss the e¤ects of policy interventions that partly o¤set such a tightening.

Deleveraging Shocks
       We adopt the parameterization in Kehoe, Midrigan, and Pastorino (2019), which matches the elas-
ticities documented in Figure 12 and hence generates cross-state patterns for consumption and employment
that are consistent with those observed in the United States during the Great Recession. In this model
economy, like in the one-good model economy, a state-speci...c credit tightening a¤ecting either type of
family has an investment e¤ect, which implies that the cost to a ...rm of hiring a worker by posting a job
vacancy increases by more than the corresponding bene...t. A novel e¤ect that arises in this economy is
that a state-speci...c credit tightening has also a relative demand e¤ect, which reduces the demand for the
nontradable goods produced in the state and hence the demand for workers by that sector. The resulting
reallocation of workers from the nontradable to the tradable goods sector then reinforces the drop in non-
tradable employment due to the investment e¤ect and could even lead to a relative increase in tradable
employment in some states, as is consistent with the data.


                                                                     34
Policy Experiments
       We consider a class of state-level government interventions aimed at workers in the form of a sequence
of transfers fTwt g, measured in units of the composite consumption good, that would reduce by 50 percent
the consumption decline experienced by U.S. states between 2007 and 2009. Such transfers are constructed
so as to o¤set, by a certain percentage, the drop on impact in state-level consumption due to a state-
speci...c credit tightening and then mean revert to zero at a rate of 10 percent per quarter. For a concrete
example, consider Nevada. As depicted in Figure 13, consumption in Nevada between 2007 and 2009 fell by
around 7:8 percent. For Nevada, we construct a sequence of transfers to workers fTwt g so that state-level
consumption falls by only about 3:9 percent between 2007 and 2009. To make the intervention on ...rms
parallel, we then consider the case in which the government implements the same sequence of transfers to
...rms fTf t g in that Tf t = Twt at each t. These same transfers directed to ...rms, rather than to workers, lead
state-level consumption in Nevada to fall a bit less-- namely, by 3:4 percent rather than by 3:9 percent.
In Figure 13, we graph the analogous changes in consumption for each U.S. state.10 For Nevada, the blue
bar (left) shows the original consumption drop of 7:8 percent, the green bar (middle) shows a drop of 3:9
percent when transfers support workers'credit, and the orange bar (right) shows a drop of 3:4 percent when
transfers support ...rms'credit.
       In Figure 14, we graph the corresponding changes in employment for each state. For Nevada, the
blue bar shows the original drop in employment of 8:6 percent, the green bar shows that this drop would
be much smaller-- only 4:5 percent-- if transfers supported workers'credit, and the orange bar shows that
this drop would be 6:9 percent if transfers supported ...rms'credit. Perusing the ...gure makes it clear that
for every state, a given sequence of transfers directed to workers has a larger positive e¤ect on employment
than an identical sequence of transfers directed to ...rms.
       In Figures 15 and 16, we decompose the e¤ect on total employment in each state into the e¤ects on
nontradable and tradable employment. Supporting workers has a larger stimulative e¤ect on employment in
both sectors. In the case of Nevada, for instance, a transfer to workers would lead to a drop in nontradable
employment of only 2:7 percent, rather than the observed 8:2 percent. A transfer to ...rms would have a
smaller impact, in that nontradable employment would fall by 5 percent rather than by 8:2 percent. To
use the example of Nevada again, supporting workers would spur tradable employment by 2:6 percent, so
that instead of dropping by 17:6 percent, tradable employment would drop only by 15 percent, whereas
supporting ...rms would lead to almost no change in tradable employment. Inspecting these ...gures reveals
that this same pattern emerges in all states: a given transfer to workers has a larger positive e¤ect on

  10
    Note that Louisiana and Mississippi display a positive change in (instrumented) consumption between 2007 and 2009 and
so receive no transfer in our experiments.



                                                           35
employment in each sector than does the same-sized transfer to ...rms.
       Either intervention leads to a much greater response in nontradable employment than in tradable
employment because of the relative demand e¤ect. Recall that nontradable goods produced in state s
are consumed solely by residents of state s, whereas tradable goods produced in state s are consumed
throughout the world. Hence, when the government transfers resources to either type of family, it causes
a substantial increase in the demand for nontradable goods in a given state but essentially no increase in
the demand for tradable goods produced in the state. As a result, after such an intervention, the fractions
                                                                                        N        N
of both types of intermediate goods absorbed by the nontradable goods sector-- namely, yN t (s)=yt (s)
     T        T
and yN t (s)=yt (s)-- increase by (48), which in turn induces an increase in employment in the nontradable

goods sector. Thus, in the nontradable goods sector, this relative demand e¤ect reinforces the investment
e¤ect, and so employment in the nontradable goods sector rises sharply. As workers who reallocate to the
nontradable goods sector come from the tradable goods sector, this ow of workers to the nontradable goods
sector almost completely o¤sets the positive investment e¤ect of transfers on employment in the tradable
goods sector. Then, employment in the tradable goods sector overall barely changes.
       To make these e¤ects more transparent, consider the top left panel of Figure 17. Here, we graph the
consumption change between 2007 and 2009 in each state (horizontal axis) against the consumption change
that, according to our model, would have occurred in each state over the same period if the government had
implemented transfers solely to workers, marked by an " ;" or solely to ...rms, marked by a "+" (vertical
axis). In the top right panel of the ...gure, for each state, we plot the employment change observed over this
same period (horizontal axis) against the employment change that our model predicts would have occurred
under these two interventions (vertical axis). For each state, the two bottom panels of the ...gure graph
the observed changes in nontradable (bottom left panel) and tradable (bottom right panel) employment
between 2007 and 2009 (horizontal axis) against the changes that our model implies for these variables under
the two interventions (vertical axis). As is apparent from the ...gure, transfers to workers lead to a larger
increase in state-level employment, nontradable employment, and tradable employment than transfers to
...rms, as the points marked by " "are all above those marked by "+"in the corresponding panels.

7. Conclusion
       A major theme in Mian and Su... (2015) and Kehoe, Midrigan, and Pastorino (2019) is that the
household-side channel of the credit tightening that occurred during the Great Recession is central to un-
derstanding the consumption and employment declines experienced by the United States between 2007 and
2009. Here, we have developed a quantitative model that sheds light on the workings and relative impor-
tance of both the household-side and ...rm-side channels of a credit tightening and successfully accounts for
the cross-sectional patterns of consumption and employment across U.S. states during the Great Recession.

                                                     36
       We have consistently shown that a tightening of household debt constraints leads to a larger decline
in employment than an equal-sized tightening of ...rm debt constraints. The key feature of our model behind
this result is that an additional component of the surplus from a match between a ...rm and a worker arises
when workers accumulate human capital on the job that is even partially transferable to other matches.
Since this surplus component is long-lived, it gives rise to match surplus ows that have long durations and,
as such, are sensitive to changes in discounting. Because such a surplus component is discounted primarily
by workers'shadow value of future to present goods rather than ...rms'
                                                                     , the present value of match surplus
ows is highly sensitive to any tightening of credit to households. As a result, the household-side channel
of a deleveraging shock is quantitatively more important than the ...rm-side channel. Likewise, we have
also shown that after a credit tightening severe enough to trigger a downturn, a government intervention
that transfers income to households, and thus lessens the impact of the tightening on their consumption,
would have been more e¤ective than an equal-sized intervention to ...rms at stimulating the recovery of
employment in the cross-section of U.S. states.
       One limitation of our analysis is that we consider unanticipated shocks to debt constraints. An
important extension would be to make debt constraints stochastic and examine the extent to which self-
insurance through precautionary savings by workers and ...rms can partially o¤set the impact of a credit
tightening. Doing so would make the model more amenable to addressing the full business-cycle implications
of uctuating debt constraints and their relationship to ...rm dynamics. In this vein, see the canonical paper
by Cooley and Quadrini (2001) on the dynamics of ...rms in the presence of ...nancial frictions. Another useful
extension would be to provide a foundation for the ...nancial frictions we examine, possibly along the lines
of limited commitment models as in Cooley, Marimon, and Quadrini (2004). Note that if debt constraints
endogenously arise from commitment issues, then government interventions, by a¤ecting workers'and ...rms'
behavior, would typically lead to an endogenous response of these constraints, which is beyond the scope
of our current exercise.

Appendix
       This appendix contains details and results omitted from the main text.

A Collateral Constraint Economy
       Here, we prove an equivalence result in terms of consumption and labor market outcomes between
our economy and an economy with household mortgage debt and ...rm corporate debt collateralized by
housing, interpreted as either private or commercial real estate. This equivalence result then allows us
to interpret the responses of consumption and labor market variables in our baseline economy following a
credit tightening generated by a fall in real estate prices that leads to a tightening of collateral constraints,


                                                       37
  as many have argued occurred during the Great Recession. This result also makes it clear that a robust
  nexus between consumption and labor market outcomes exists across these two economies.

A Family of Workers' Problem
         In this economy, a family of workers owns houses and its borrowing is subject to collateral constraints
  based on the value of its houses. The problem of any such family consists of choosing sequences for
  consumption fcwt g, debt fdwt+1 g, and housing stock fhwt+1 g so as to maximize the present discounted
                                                      P
  value of consumption of goods and housing services 1   t=0
                                                             t
                                                               [u(cwt ) + wt v (hwt )], subject to the budget
  constraint
                                      Z                                      Z
  (50) cwt + dwt + pwt hwt+1                     wt (z; h)et (z; h)dzdh +        b(z )ut (z )dz + qdwt+1 + pwt hwt + Twt
                                           z;h                               z


  and the collateral constraint


  (51) dwt+1        w pwt hwt+1 :



  The exogenous process f           wt g   captures uctuations in the desirability of housing relative to consumption
  goods, and    w   represents the maximum mortgage loan-to-value ratio.
         A family of workers that owns hwt housing units has housing wealth equal to pwt hwt , chooses its
  next-period stock of housing hwt+1 , and faces a collateral constraint that limits the amount it can borrow
  to a ...xed fraction   w   of the value of its housing units. Such a family'
                                                                             s budget constraint in period t reects
  the fact that a family enters period t with the housing stock hwt valued at pwt and chooses the new housing
  stock to purchase hwt+1 at price pwt . That is, a family pays pwt (hwt+1                    hwt ) to adjust its housing stock from
  size hwt to size hwt+1 at t. The supply of residential housing is ...xed at unity, so in equilibrium, hwt = 1.
  Note that uctuations in the taste for housing                   wt    in this economy are a simple device to make the price
  of housing uctuate. The collateral constraint parameter                          w,   though, is constant, so uctuations in the
  maximum value of borrowing are induced by uctuations in the price of housing pwt rather than by direct
  uctuations in the debt constraint parameter                   wt ,   as in our baseline model.
         For a family of workers, the ...rst-order condition for consumption is

          t 0
  (52)    u (cwt )=u0 (cw0 ) = Qwt ;


  the ...rst-order condition for debt is


  (53) qQwt = Qwt+1 + Qwt           wt ;



                                                                        38
  the ...rst-order condition for housing is

                        t+1             0
  (54) Qwt pwt =               wt+1 v       (hwt+1 ) + Qwt+1 pwt+1 + Qwt       wt w pwt ;



  and the complementary slackness condition is


  (55)    wt (dwt+1         w pwt hwt+1 )         =0


  at each t, where Qwt is the multiplier on the budget constraint, and Qwt                        wt   is the multiplier on the collateral
  constraint with the normalization Qw0 = 1.

A Family of Entrepreneurs' Problem
          In this economy, a family of entrepreneurs owns a type of housing, referred to as commercial real
  estate, di¤erent from that owned by a family of workers, and its borrowing is subject to collateral constraints
  based on the value of the real estate that it owns. The problem of any such family consists of choosing
  sequences for consumption fcf t g, debt fdf t+1 g, and commercial real estate fhf t+1 g in order to maximize
                                                                                 P
  the present discounted value of consumption of goods and housing services 1       t=0
                                                                                          t
                                                                                            u(cf t ) + f t v (hf t ) ,
  subject to the budget constraint
                                                  Z                                         Z
  (56) cf t + df t + pf t hf t+1            y+           [zh   wt (z; h)] et (z; h)dzdh         vt (z )dz + qdf t+1 + pf t hf t + Tf t
                                                   z;h                                      z


  and the collateral constraint


  (57) df t+1         f pf t hf t+1 ;



  where the exogenous process f                   f tg   captures uctuations in the desirability of commercial housing relative
  to consumption goods, and                   f   represents the associated maximum loan-to-value ratio. A family of entre-
  preneurs owns commercial real estate hf t with value pf t hf t , chooses its next-period stock of commercial
  real estate hf t+1 , and faces a collateral constraint that limits the amount it can borrow to a fraction                              f   of
  the value of its commercial real estate holding. The supply of commercial real estate is ...xed at unity so in
  equilibrium hf t = 1.
          For a family of entrepreneurs, the ...rst-order condition for consumption is

          t 0
  (58)     u (cf t )=u0 (cf 0 ) = Qf t ;




                                                                          39
the ...rst-order condition for debt is


(59) qQf t = Qf t+1 + Qf t                  f t;



the ...rst-order condition for housing is

                      t+1               0
(60) Qf t pf t =              f t+1 v       (hf t+1 ) + Qf t+1 pf t+1 + Qf t   f t f pf t ;



and the complementary slackness condition is


(61)   f t (df t+1         f pf t hf t+1 )         =0


at each t, where Qf t is the multiplier on the budget constraint, Qf t                        ft   is the multiplier on the collateral
constraint, and we have adopted the normalization Qf 0 = 1.

An Equivalence Result
       We now turn to establishing an equivalence result between the economy with debt constraints ex-
amined in the main text and the economy with collateral constraints described here. Consider the economy
with collateral constraints. Given the exogenous sequences of taste parameters                                     wt ;    ft   and the world
bond price q , let Qwt ; Qf t                      denote the resulting sequences of shadow prices of the two types of family.
Given these shadow prices, the labor market side of the collateral constraint economy is identical to the
labor market side of the debt constraint economy. Hence, in the two economies, workers'and ...rms'value
functions, matching and bargaining, and the free-entry conditions are identical. Intuitively, the only ingre-
dient needed from the family problems to solve the rest of the model are the sequences of shadow prices
 Qwt ; Qf t .
       We proceed by ...rst showing that given a debt constraint economy with sequences of borrowing
limits f   wt ;   f t g,   we can construct sequences of taste parameters                      wt ;   ft     for a collateral constraint
economy such that, except for the prices and quantities of housing, equilibrium allocations and prices in
the two economies coincide. We then show that given a collateral constraint economy with sequences of
taste parameters             wt ;   ft        , we can construct sequences of borrowing limits f           wt ;   f tg   for a debt constraint
economy such that, except for the prices and quantities of housing, equilibrium allocations and prices in
the two economies coincide. In this construction, we set the sequences of transfers to workers and ...rms
fTwt ; Tf t g to zero in the two economies for simplicity.
       To start, note that in the debt constraint economy, the solutions to the worker and entrepreneur
families'problems are completely characterized by the ...rst-order and complementary slackness conditions

                                                                           40
for workers in (7), (8), and (9); worker budget and debt constraints in (4) and (5); the ...rst-order and
complementary slackness conditions for ...rms in (14), (15), and (16); and ...rm budget and debt constraints
in (11) and (12). Similarly, in the collateral constraint economy, the solutions to the worker and entrepreneur
families'problems are completely characterized by the ...rst-order and complementary slackness conditions
for workers in (52), (53), (54), and (55); worker budget and collateral constraints in (50) and (51); the
...rst-order and complementary slackness conditions for ...rms in (58), (59), (60), and (61); and ...rm budget
and collateral constraints in (56) and (57).
           Let us provisionally assume that we can choose sequences of taste parameters so that the shadow
prices of goods in the two economies coincide; that is,


(62) Qwt = Qwt and Qf t = Qf t


at each t. We will later show that this is the case. Under this assumption, we claim that the budget
constraints in the debt constraint economy,


(63) cwt + dwt            ywt + qdwt+1


and


(64) cf t + df t          yf t + qdf t+1 ;


where ywt and yf t are de...ned in (6) and (13), are equal to the corresponding ones in the collateral constraint
economy. To see why, note that in the collateral constraint economy, the terms for housing on both sides
of worker and ...rm budget constraints cancel out, since hwt = 1 and hf t = 1 at each t. Hence, worker
and ...rm budget constraints in the collateral constraint economy have the exact form of (63) and (64)
as in the debt constraint economy with the same de...nitions for ywt and yf t . Next, observe that by our
earlier argument, the labor market side of the collateral constraint economy is identical to the labor market
side of the debt constraint economy under (62), and so are wages fwt (z; h)g and labor market allocations
fet (z; h); ut (z ); vt (z )g. Then, family incomes ywt and yf t are the same in both economies at each t. Thus,
families'budget constraints in the two economies coincide.
           Now, under our provisional assumption, the shadow prices of goods satisfy (62) given the multipliers
f   wt g   and f   f tg   from the debt constraint economy, which satisfy (8) and (15). Since the constructed
multipliers f      wt g   and f    f tg   for the collateral constraint economy satisfy (53) and (59), these multipliers
must be equal in the two economies. Next, note that for the debt constraints to be equivalent to the


                                                                 41
collateral constraints, we need                        w,   pwt ,     f t,   and pf t to satisfy


(65)    w pwt   =     wt   and       f pf t        =   f t;



which we ensure hold by setting house prices to satisfy pwt =                                         wt = w   and pf t =         f t= f ,     respectively. Given
these house prices, the intertemporal shadow prices fQwt ; Qf t g, and the multipliers f                                                      wt ; f t g,   we need the
sequences of taste parameters                           wt ;    ft     to satisfy the ...rst-order conditions for worker and ...rm housing
in the collateral constraint economy at the market-clearing values of hwt = 1 and hf t = 1; namely,

                       t+1                    0
       Qwt pwt =                wt+1 v            (1) + Qwt+1 pwt+1 + Qwt              wt w pwt ;



and

                       t+1                0
       Qf t pf t =              f t+1 v       (1) + Qf t+1 pf t+1 + Qf t           f t f pf t :



The key step to guarantee that these conditions hold consists of using these expressions and (65) to set the
sequences of taste parameters                           wt ;    ft     to satisfy

                     Qwt pwt        Qwt+1 pwt+1 Qwt                      wt w pwt                 1                 wt                 wt+1
        wt+1    =                        t+1 0                                         =    t+1 0        Qwt                Qwt+1                     Qwt    wt wt
                                            v (1)                                              v (1)                w                     w


and

                    Qf t pf t      Qf t+1 pf t+1               Qf t   f t f pf t            1                  ft                 f t+1
        f t+1   =                                  t+1 0                           =     t+1 0        Qf t               Qf t+1                Qf t   ft ft     :
                                                      v (1)                                 v (1)              f                   f


We thus set the consumption sequences fcwt ; cf t g and the initial debt levels dw0 and df 0 in the collateral
constraint economy equal to those in the debt constraint economy. Since worker and ...rm budget constraints
hold with equality in the debt constraint economy, and as argued, budget constraints and family incomes
fywt ; yf t g in the two economies are the same, worker and ...rm budget constraints also hold with equality
in the collateral constraint economy. But then the constructed debt sequences fdwt ; df t g in the collateral
constraint economy are equal to the corresponding ones in the debt constraint economy. Clearly, if the
original allocations and multipliers satisfy the complementary slackness conditions in the debt constraint
economy, then these constructed allocations and multipliers necessarily satisfy these conditions in the
collateral constraint economy.
        Finally, note that since the shadow prices fQwt ; Qf t g in the debt constraint economy satisfy (7) and
(14), then given that the consumption sequences in the two economies are equal and that (52) and (58)


                                                                                       42
hold at the shadow prices Qwt ; Qf t , we can conclude that our provisional assumption that Qwt = Qwt and
Qf t = Qf t at each t holds. As our constructed allocations and prices for the collateral constraint economy
satisfy all the equilibrium conditions, we have proven one direction of our equivalence result.
       To prove the other direction of our equivalence result, we begin with an equilibrium for the collateral
constraint economy and reverse these steps to construct an equilibrium for the debt constraint economy.
As before, the key step is to choose debt constraints so that


(66)   wt   =   w pwt   and   ft   =   f pf t :



The remaining steps consist just of matching up constraints and ...rst-order conditions in the two economies.
We summarize this discussion with a proposition.

Proposition 1. The economy with debt constraints is equivalent to the economy with collateral constraints
in terms of consumption, labor allocations, and wages.

References
Aikman, David, Jonathan Bridges, Anil Kashyap, and Caspar Siegert. 2019. Would macroprudential
regulation have prevented the last crisis? Journal of Economic Perspectives 33 (1), 107-130.
Beraja, Martin, Erik Hurst, and Juan Ospina. 2019. The aggregate implications of regional business cycles.
Econometrica 87 (6), 1789-1833.
Bianchi, Javier. 2016. E¢ cient bailouts? American Economic Review 106 (12), 3607-3659.
Charles, Kerwin Ko..., Erik Hurst, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2018. Housing booms and busts, labor
market opportunities, and college attendance. American Economic Review 108 (10), 2947-2994.
Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel. 2014. The employment e¤ects of credit market disruptions: Firm-level evidence
from the 2008­9 ...nancial crisis. Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (1), 1-59.
Cogan, John, and John Taylor. 2012. What the government purchases actually multiplied in the 2009
stimulus package. In Ohanian, Lee, John Taylor, and Ian Wright (Eds.), Government policies and the
delayed economic recovery, Hoover Institution Press, Stanford, CA.
Cooley, Thomas F., and Vincenzo Quadrini. 2001. Financial markets and ...rm dynamics. American
Economic Review 91 (5), 1286-1310.
Cooley, Thomas, Ramon Marimon, and Vincenzo Quadrini. 2004. Aggregate consequences of limited
contract enforceability. Journal of Political Economy 112 (4), 817-847.
Eisfeldt, Andrea L., and Adriano A. Rampini. 2007. New or used? Investment with credit constraints.
Journal of Monetary Economics 54 (8), 2656-2681.



                                                     43
Gertler, Mark, and Simon Gilchrist. 2018. What happened: Financial factors in the great recession.
Journal of Economic Perspectives 32 (3), 3-30.
Gertler, Mark, and Simon Gilchrist. 2019. The channels of ...nancial distress during the Great Recession:
Some evidence on the aggregate e¤ects. Mimeo, New York University.
Giroud, Xavier, and Holger M. Mueller. 2017. Firm leverage, consumer demand, and employment losses
during the Great Recession. Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (1), 271-316.
Huber, Kilian. 2018. Disentangling the e¤ects of a banking crisis: Evidence from German ...rms and
counties. American Economic Review 108 (3), 868-898.
Jermann, Urban, and Vincenzo Quadrini. 2012. Macroeconomic e¤ects of ...nancial shocks. American
Economic Review 102 (1), 238-271.
Kehoe, Patrick J., Virgiliu Midrigan, and Elena Pastorino. 2017. On the importance of easing consumer
credit frictions. Economic Policy Paper 17-5, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
Kehoe, Patrick J., Virgiliu Midrigan, and Elena Pastorino. 2019. Debt constraints and employment.
Journal of Political Economy 127 (4), 1926-1991.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore. 1997. Credit cycles. Journal of Political Economy 105 (2), 211-248.
Ljungqvist, Lars, and Thomas J. Sargent. 1998. The European unemployment dilemma. Journal of
Political Economy 106 (3), 514-550.
Mian, Atif, and Amir Su.... 2011. House prices, home equity-based borrowing, and the U.S. household
leverage crisis. American Economic Review 101 (5), 2132-2156.
Mian, Atif, and Amir Su.... 2014. What explains the 2007-2009 drop in employment? Econometrica 82 (6),
2197-2223.
Mian, Atif, and Amir Su.... 2015. House of debt: How they (and you) caused the Great Recession, and how
we can prevent it from happening again. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Oh, Hyunseung, and Ricardo Reis. 2012. Targeted transfers and the ...scal response to the great recession.
Journal of Monetary Economics 59, S50-S64.




                                                   44
                                                       Table 1: Parameterization
                          Panel A: Parameters                                                      Panel B: Moments
                         Endogenously Chosen                                            Targeted                      Data   Model

y , exogenous endowment received by entrepreneurs       7.25               Labor share of output                      0.60    0.60
b0 , home production relative to mean output            0.42               Employment rate                            0.63    0.63
 , matching function elasticity                         0.61               Unemployment rate                          0.06    0.06
, vacancy cost relative to mean output                  0.15               Job-finding rate                           0.45    0.45
z , std. dev. of general human capital shocks           0.06               Vacancy cost relative to mean output       0.15    0.15
, convergence rate of human capital                 0.951/12               Std. dev. of annual wage growth            0.21    0.21
log z¯e , general human capital drift                   2.44               Log wage difference 0-30 experience        1.21    1.19
log h¯ , firm-specific human capital drift              0.82

                                Assigned

 , discount factor                                  0.961/12
q , bond price                                      0.981/12
, survival probability                                0.9979
 , separation probability                              0.026
b1 , replacement rate                                   0.25
 , worker bargaining power                               0.5
, coefficient of relative risk aversion                    5
Debt service ratio (workers)                            0.11
Debt service ratio (entrepreneurs)                      0.43
    Figure 1: Steady-State Measures and Matching Rates

  (a) Employed                           (b) Nonemployed




(c) Job-filling rate                    (d) Job-finding rate
     Figure 2: Responses to Deleveraging Shock to Workers or Firms

    (a) Consumption cwt                       (b) Consumption cf t




(c) Discount factor Qwt+1 /Qwt           (d) Discount factor Qf t+1 /Qf t
        Figure 3: Responses to Deleveraging Shock to Workers or Firms

         (a) Match surplus              (b) PV output and wages: worker shock




(c) PV output and wages: firm shock                (d) Employment
 Figure 4: Responses to Deleveraging Shock to Both Workers and Firms

    (a) Consumption cwt                      (b) Consumption cf t




(c) Discount factor Qwt+1 /Qwt          (d) Discount factor Qf t+1 /Qf t
Figure 5: Responses to Deleveraging Shock to Both Workers and Firms

    (a) Match surplus                     (b) PV output and wages




                         (c) Employment
Figure 6: Responses to Deleveraging Shock to Workers with and without Human Capital

           (a) Consumption cwt                      (b) Consumption cf t




    (c) PV output and wages with HK        (d) PV output and wages without HK




            (e) Match surplus                         (f) Employment
Figure 7: Responses to Deleveraging Shock to Firms with and without Human Capital

          (a) Consumption cwt                      (b) Consumption cf t




   (c) PV output and wages with HK        (d) PV output and wages without HK




           (e) Match surplus                         (f) Employment
Figure 8: Responses to Deleveraging Shock to Both Workers and Firms with and without Human Capital

                  (a) Consumption cwt                      (b) Consumption cf t




            (c) PV output and wages with HK        (d) PV output and wages without HK




                    (e) Match surplus                        (f) Employment
Figure 9: Responses to Deleveraging Shock to Workers with Intervention

   (a) Consumption cwt                        (b) Consumption cf t




     (c) Match surplus                          (d) Employment
Figure 10: Responses to Deleveraging Shock to Firms with Intervention

   (a) Consumption cwt                       (b) Consumption cf t




    (c) Match surplus                          (d) Employment
Figure 11: Responses to Deleveraging Shock to Both Workers and Firms with Intervention

            (a) Consumption cwt                      (b) Consumption cf t




             (c) Match surplus                         (d) Employment
        Figure 12: Employment and Consumption Across States 2007-2009




From top to bottom: (a) Employment versus consumption. (b) Nontradable employ-
ment versus consumption. (c) Tradable employment versus consumption.
                              Figure 13: State-Level Consumption with Intervention 2007-2009




Data (blue), intervention on workers (green), and intervention on firms (orange). The intervention consists of lump-sum
transfers of equal amounts to workers and entrepreneurs starting in 2007 and reverting back to zero with a quarterly persistence
of 0.901/3 . The size of transfers is such that the resulting state-level consumption change between 2007 and 2009 is 50% of the
observed one when the observed one is negative and zero otherwise.
                              Figure 14: State-Level Employment with Intervention 2007-2009




Data (blue), intervention on workers (green), and intervention on firms (orange). The intervention consists of lump-sum
transfers of equal amounts to workers and entrepreneurs starting in 2007 and reverting back to zero with a quarterly persistence
of 0.901/3 . The size of transfers is such that the resulting state-level consumption change between 2007 and 2009 is 50% of the
observed one when the observed one is negative and zero otherwise.
                       Figure 15: State-Level Nontradable Employment with Intervention 2007-2009




Data (blue), intervention on workers (green), and intervention on firms (orange). The intervention consists of lump-sum
transfers of equal amounts to workers and entrepreneurs starting in 2007 and reverting back to zero with a quarterly persistence
of 0.901/3 . The size of transfers is such that the resulting state-level consumption change between 2007 and 2009 is 50% of the
observed one when the observed one is negative and zero otherwise.
                         Figure 16: State-Level Tradable Employment with Intervention 2007-2009




Data (blue), intervention on workers (green), and intervention on firms (orange). The intervention consists of lump-sum
transfers of equal amounts to workers and entrepreneurs starting in 2007 and reverting back to zero with a quarterly persistence
of 0.901/3 . The size of transfers is such that the resulting state-level consumption change between 2007 and 2009 is 50% of the
observed one when the observed one is negative and zero otherwise.
                         Figure 17: Employment and Consumption Across States with Intervention 2007-2009




From top to bottom: (a) Predicted consumption versus observed consumption. (b) Predicted employment versus observed employment.
(c) Predicted nontradable employment versus observed nontradable employment. (c) Predicted tradable employment versus observed
tradable employment. The intervention consists of lump-sum transfers of equal amounts to workers and entrepreneurs starting in 2007
and reverting back to zero with a quarterly persistence of 0.901/3 . The size of transfers is such that the resulting state-level consumption
change between 2007 and 2009 is 50% of the observed one when the observed one is negative and zero otherwise.
