                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE VALUE OF TIME IN THE UNITED STATES:
          ESTIMATES FROM NATIONWIDE NATURAL FIELD EXPERIMENTS

                                       Ariel Goldszmidt
                                         John A. List
                                      Robert D. Metcalfe
                                           Ian Muir
                                        V. Kerry Smith
                                         Jenny Wang

                                      Working Paper 28208
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28208


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020




We thank Vittorio Bassi, Antonio Bento, Alec Brandon, Jonathan D. Hall, Nathan Hendren,
Justin Holz, Matthew Kahn, Shanjun Li, Paulina Oliva, Joseph Shapiro, Ken Small, and Cliff
Winston for excellent comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Ariel Goldszmidt, John A. List, Robert D. Metcalfe, Ian Muir, V. Kerry Smith, and
Jenny Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
The Value of Time in the United States: Estimates from Nationwide Natural Field Experiments
Ariel Goldszmidt, John A. List, Robert D. Metcalfe, Ian Muir, V. Kerry Smith, and Jenny
Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 28208
December 2020
JEL No. D0,D1,R4

                                         ABSTRACT

The value of time determines relative prices of goods and services, investments, productivity,
economic growth, and measurements of income inequality. Economists in the 1960s began to
focus on the value of non-work time, pioneering a deep literature exploring the optimal allocation
and value of time. By leveraging key features of these classic time allocation theories, we use a
novel approach to estimate the value of time (VOT) via two large-scale natural field experiments
with the ridesharing company Lyft. We use random variation in both wait times and prices to
estimate a consumer's VOT with a data set of more than 14 million observations across
consumers in U.S. cities. We find that the VOT is roughly $19 per hour (or 75% (100%) of the
after-tax mean (median) wage rate) and varies predictably with choice circumstances correlated
with the opportunity cost of wait time. Our VOT estimate is larger than what is currently used by
the U.S. Government, suggesting that society is under-valuing time improvements and
subsequently under-investing public resources in time-saving infrastructure projects and
technologies.

Ariel Goldszmidt                                Ian Muir
Lyft                                            Lyft
agoldszmidt@lyft.com                            muir.ian.m@gmail.com

John A. List                                    V. Kerry Smith
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
University of Chicago                           W.P. Carey School of Business
1126 East 59th                                  P.O. Box 879801
Chicago, IL 60637                               Arizona State University
and NBER                                        Tempe, AZ 85287-9801
jlist@uchicago.edu                              and NBER
                                                kerry.smith@asu.edu
Robert D. Metcalfe Questrom
School of Business Boston                       Jenny Wang
University                                      Lyft
595 Commonwealth Avenue                         jwang5797@gmail.com
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
rdmet@bu.edu




An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28208
   "Remember that time is money. He that can earn ten shillings a day by his labour, and goes
abroad, or sits idle one half of that day, tho' he spends but sixpence during his diversion or idleness,
ought not to reckon that the only expence; he has really spent or rather thrown away five shillings
besides." Benjamin Franklin, 1748


1. Introduction
Perhaps taking the lead from Franklin's advice to a young tradesman, the concept of opportunity
cost was leveraged by early economists as far removed as Mill (1848) who laid the foundations for
the notion; Bastiat (1848) who cleverly elucidated the broken window fallacy; Austrian economists
like von Wieser (1876) who applied it to the phenomenon of cost; and all the way to Green (1894)
who made it a central feature of his economic decision makers. Today it would be difficult to
find an economist who would not place opportunity cost on a short list of key economic concepts
that every citizen should understand. The central actor in Franklin's opportunity cost advice, of
course, is the value of time (VOT).
   Since these early writers, economists for roughly the next century assumed that the VOT for
each person could be regarded as a constant, with their wage rate as a reasonable approximation.
For example, college students' investments in human capital should include not only the real
resource outlays for schooling but also the value of their forgone earnings from spending time in
school rather than working. Similarly, the full cost of on-the-job training includes not only the
cost of the training itself but also the value of forgone productivity associated with the employees'
time spent in that training. Crucially, this wage assumption makes labor market activity the
primary basis for how we should judge the contribution of time to economic welfare.
   While focusing on labor market activity yields rich insights that elucidate key economic trade-
offs, there was a movement in the 1960s to also explore the allocation, efficiency, and welfare con-
siderations of non-working time. One of the most influential of these contributions was Becker
(1965), who proposed a model in which the individual combines time with a market good to pro-
duce a flow of services that he labeled "basic commodities." In this manner, he described house-
holds as being small factories at their core. His framework unleashed the full economic toolkit
to allow analysis of a wide array of issues within the household. Stimulated by Becker, Mincer,
and their students, this new "home economics" began to apply economic concepts to a broad set of
issues that included selection of a partner, spacing of children, division of labor among household
members, divorce, and decision authority within the family (see Greenwood et al. (2017) for a
recent overview).
   The growth and maturity of this literature has served economics well, yet one important aspect
of the Becker model has received less attention: the key features of his approach can also be
leveraged to estimate the VOT. Indeed, as we describe more patiently below, there are two major

                                                   1
assumptions in the classic early time allocation studies (Becker, 1965; Johnson, 1966; DeSerpa,
1971) that have allowed the analyst to place a value on time: (1) the degree to which a consumer
has the ability to flexibly allocate time to different tasks and (2) the degree of complementarity
between time and purchased commodities as part of the consumption process.
   The extant body of research on time use falls into two primary categories. The first, associated
with microeconomic applications (especially in transportation and infrastructure), has largely
relied on observing a person's decisions in the face of time and money trade-offs - either actual
trip choices made to reduce travel time delays associated with congestion or hypothetical decisions
made in the context of stated choice surveys or small-scale experiments (see, e.g., Deacon and
Sonstelie (1985); Smith and Mansfield (1998); DellaVigna et al. (2012)). The second has instead
focused on tracking the trends in time use for different demographic groups (Aguiar and Hurst,
2007b; Ramey and Francis, 2009). In these latter studies, the VOT is a latent variable implied by
the observed differences in time allocations across these groups. Thus when a VOT is estimated,
there are specific assumptions made about how money is traded for time savings. For instance, in
Aguiar and Hurst (2007b), cohorts of people with low opportunity cost of time, such as retirees,
are found to spend more time searching for lower prices than consumers with more limited time
availability. By assuming search time can lead to monetary savings, it becomes possible to infer
the VOT (see also Ghez et al. (1975); Juster and Stafford (1991); Robinson and Godbey (1999)).
   We take this literature in a new direction by combining Becker's work with the early pioneering
work in non-market valuation that explored weak complementarity. Formally, weak complemen-
tarity relies on the assumption that a person would not value a quality change in something she
does not use (Mäler, 1971). This restriction implies that there is a price equivalent (in welfare
terms) for a quality change in that resource (Smith and Banzhaf, 2007). Importantly, the VOT lit-
erature has yet to appreciate this theoretical connection, even though the original models sought
to establish how the allocation of time contributes to the total value created through each use of
time. In a setting where an agent has the ability to make choices that reflect consideration of
both the time required and the price of a service, this relationship provides an estimate for the
opportunity cost of time. Deeper inspection of Becker's proposed empirical framework for house-
hold production highlights another feature of time use that can be leveraged: his "technological
coefficients" for the time required for each non-work activity provide the ability to consider how
the context of a time allocation affects its value. In particular, one interesting aspect of Becker's
model is the proposition that choice characteristics matter, or likewise the fundamental asser-
tion that the properties of the situation and the population might matter a great deal in both the
allocation and value of time.
   With these necessary theoretical conditions in hand, we sought an appropriate testing ground
to empirically study the VOT. Our search concluded with the realization that the assumption in
the classic studies applies to any situation where one must wait for a service or good. An activity

                                                 2
that nearly half of all American adults have used satisfies exactly that assumption: rideshare.
Waiting sessions on rideshare naturally provide the basis for estimating the trade-offs between
waiting time and price that underlie economic measures for the VOT. To our best knowledge, our
paper is the first to recognize the applicability of weak complementarity to situations where one
must wait for a good or service. Furthermore, the richness of the rideshare environment per-
mits a deeper exploration into measuring important context specificity (Becker's "technological
coefficients") across relevant situations and individuals.
       To request a ride via a rideshare service, a prospective passenger opens the app on their
phone, can input an intended destination to receive a price quote and estimated wait time, and
then decides whether to request (purchase) the ride. Such "take it or leave it" decisions exploit the
role of weak complementarity in extensive margin choices. More specifically, when an individual
opens the Lyft app we are able to observe how various combinations of wait times and prices affect
purchase decisions. In 2015/16 and 2017, Lyft ran two natural field experiments that randomly
varied these prices and wait times that were shown to customers in the app as they made their
purchase decision. The assumption of weak complementarity ensures that the observed trade-
offs then allow us to estimate price changes that are equivalent to a change in wait times. Thus,
with weak complementarity in place, the observed trade-off reveals the marginal VOT.
       The field experiments spanned 13 cities in the United States that had constituted most of
Lyft's largest markets at the time. In total, they cover 3.7 million customers and 14.8 million
customer sessions (defined as an interaction with the app in which the customer receives a price
and time quote). The exogenous prices and wait times in our field experiments are independent
of the passengers' outside options as well as potential unobserved shifters to aggregate demand
(i.e., passengers) and supply (i.e., drivers). The exogenous variation combined with passengers'
decisions and weak complementarity allow us to estimate the marginal VOT.1
       An important feature of our work is that Lyft retains the ability to control not only whether
people have to wait longer but also how much longer they have to wait. In the experiments,
customers are randomly assigned to wait at the market wait time or at least an additional 60, 150,
or 240 seconds over the market wait time (additional wait time irrespective of market conditions).
With this variation, we can causally estimate how the waiting time elasticity and the VOT vary
over the length of the wait time - with variation in length that is unrelated to other market factors
(e.g. when and where customers open their app). Our approach allows us to recover an estimate
of the VOT over wait time gradients, providing insight into the shape of the VOT function.
   1
    Our research is complemented by two contemporaneous studies that use very different identification strategies and
data sets (Castillo, 2019; Buchholz et al., 2020). Both studies observe market wait times and prices but use econometric
structure as opposed to experimental variation to solve the identification problem for Houston and Prague consumers.
Our experimental structure allows for exogenous variation in waiting time and prices, and provides greater resolution
in the nature and spatial variation in VOT estimates, and how market conditions experienced by rideshare users (e.g.,
weather conditions, location (airport, downtown, public transit distance), business trips etc.) affect VOT. In addition,
weak complementarity assures that we avoid sensitivity of the results to the specification decisions that generally are
associated with a structural approach.

                                                           3
       Several insights can be drawn from these two large-scale natural field experiments. We divide
them into three main areas. First, we find that consumers are responsive to both wait times and
prices. Across both field experiments, we find the time elasticity of demand to be approximately
-0.043 (standard error of 0.003) and the price elasticity of demand to be -0.59 (standard error
of 0.02). Price elasticities are significantly larger than time elasticities within every city. The
estimated price equivalent implied by these two elasticities yields an average VOT across the
U.S. of $19.38 per hour (standard error of 1.39; all prices are in 2015 dollars). To explore how our
results map across relevant populations, we re-weight our estimates for the elasticities matching
the rideshare population with the broader US population. We find no meaningful difference in
VOT estimates based on the weighted sample, tentatively supporting their external validity with
respect to the broader population of all travelers. We also find that our VOT estimate is stable
across the duration of our eight-week experiments.
       When evaluating projects, the US Government currently values people's time between 33%
and 50% of the wage rate for project appraisal, suggesting a value of at most $14.20 per hour.2
This one figure is meant to cover all types of travel (e.g., leisure, personal, and commuting to
work), except where driving is part of the job (e.g., freight travel where the wage rate is used
to impute the VOT) (USDOT, 2015). Our VOT estimate is approximately 35% higher than the
currently used rule of thumb by U.S. federal guidelines. More specifically, our estimates imply
that the VOTs for different metro areas are approximately 75% of the after-tax mean wage rate
and about 100% of the median after-tax wage rate. In every metro region, we find a VOT estimate
that is statistically larger than      1
                                       2   of the after-tax mean wage rate.
       A second set of results that emerges from our field experiments relates to waiting time elas-
ticities and the shape of VOT. We find that both are larger over longer periods of wait time,
independent of market conditions and the reasons for consumption. This finding implies that
the VOT is convex over time. Such convexity is important when considering the appropriateness
of transferring or generalizing VOT estimates across space, time, or situations, as we find that
the VOT depends critically on the baseline level of time use. Taken together, our first two re-
sults are directly relevant for the analysis of both private and public investments. They suggest
that society is under-valuing projects that involve time saving infrastructure or technologies and
furthermore, the degree of this under-investment increases in the amount of time saved.
       Our third set of results leverages non-experimental variation to explore how properties of the
situation affect the VOT estimate. Using a simple framework that directs our exploration of how
various choice characteristics affect the VOT, we find substantial heterogeneity across contexts.
   2
    The recreational demand model literature and environmental regulation use 1   3
                                                                                    (following Cesario (1976)), and the
transportation and infrastructure literature and regulation use 2
                                                                1
                                                                   (following Small et al. (2005); Small (2013)) of the
wage rate. There does not seem to be consistency within the government on the values used for different policies. At
best, one might argue that the U.S. Department of Transport is valuing time primarily as it relates to congestion­
infrastructure to address congestion related delays whereas recreation is considered leisure travel, therefore the op-
portunity cost may be argued to be lower since travel may be part of the trip experience.

                                                          4
For example, across regions we find a Spearman correlation of 0.73 (p = 0.025) between the mean
wage and the VOT estimate. Furthermore, we find that the VOT critically relates to the avail-
ability of substitutes for consumers, in that individuals considering a Lyft trip near alternative
modes of transportation are more time sensitive than those who do not have readily available
substitutes. In addition, signatures of the trip matter a great deal, as the VOT is strongly related
to purpose of trip: during the morning and afternoon peak commuting times, the VOT is 50%
higher than during off-peak times.3 Relatedly, weekdays have a 10% higher VOT than weekends,
and we find that the VOT is 20% higher in the central business districts of cities than in the sub-
urbs. Finally, we explore several other types of heterogeneity based on our economic framework to
find time elasticities consistent with predictions from economic theory and the broader literature
(Small, 2013).
    We view our research as contributing to several areas of import. For policymakers, our esti-
mates are a significant improvement over those in the existing literature with respect to both the
identification and the design of the wait and travel time changes. Our experiment varied the total
travel time of the journey, so we are assuming the increase in wait time for the ride is valued in
the same way as an increase in the in-car time.4 They also provide a granular view of how choices
vary with the context of time use, consistent with Becker's early insights. Our research also has
direct policy implications, as we recommend that policies: (i) account for the VOT heterogeneity
with respect to cities, locations within cities, day of week, and time of day when estimating the
benefit profile of public projects; and (ii) when this is not possible, adjust the rule-of-thumb VOT
estimates up to 75% of the after-tax mean wage rate otherwise.
    In this spirit, our estimated VOT varies predictably with economic aspects of the marketplace.
This finding has important implications for how we value time in various economic sub-fields. For
instance, in transportation, the VOT is usually the pivotal factor in benefit-cost decisions, as it
has been estimated that excess urban road congestion led U.S. consumers to spend 5.5 billion
hours sitting in traffic. Indeed, some studies (Schrank et al., 2012; Couture et al., 2018) estimate
the annual deadweight loss due to congestion in the United States alone at $30 billion. Under-
standing how best to apply our estimated elasticities to construct Pigouvian taxes designed to
reduce the deadweight loss of congestion is an important next step in such research (Arnott et al.,
1993; Duranton and Turner, 2011; Finkelstein, 2009; Small, 2013). Furthermore, the VOT in
    3
      We acknowledge that the context of the wait in our field experiments is heterogeneous. Some consumers will be
waiting for the car on a street corner, while others will be getting ready to leave their building, others working, etc.
Given that some consumers can do other things while they wait for the car (e.g., peruse their emails, texts, etc), the
wait might not be necessarily boring or painful, so our estimates might be viewed as a lower bound of the VOT that
may be measured in less comfortable or productive situations (i.e., caught in gridlock traffic).
    4
      Once you assume a linear time constraint (i.e., total hours = sum of allocations) in the model, we assume each part
being allocated is a perfect substitute for another. Because wait time exhibits weak complementarity with the Lyft
ride, we now have the VOT derived at the margin by the price equivalent change in the price of the ride. Linearity
of the time constraint allows us to use this margin and apply it to other types of time at the margin, so it becomes a
general estimate of the VOT. Empirically, to test this, we need experimental random variation in price and time for
people who are randomly allocated to either wait time or in-car time (where the base price and total time are the same
in the two scenarios). Such a study does not exist.
                                                           5
car transit is an important parameter when estimating the demand for public transit, evaluat-
ing any proposal for federal funding of infrastructure, and evaluating the impact of other more
climate-friendly (green) transit options, such as a carbon tax (Parry and Small, 2009; Chen and
Whalley, 2012; Anderson, 2014; Basso and Silva, 2014). More generally, given that the VOT usu-
ally constitutes the largest share of total benefits in infrastructure projects, our estimates open
up the possibility of more efficient allocation of resources in the economy.5
      In terms of linking to the broader literature on a host of policy decisions, many view time as
the ultimate scarce resource. These are many policy- and market-relevant activities that require
a period of waiting time before ascertaining utility from the commodity, such as time waiting for:
a table at a restaurant; a delivery of a good; a store or government office to open (e.g., renewing
a driving license or ID, or waiting to be seen at a Veterans Administration center); a dentist
or a doctor; a voting booth to open; accessibility to buildings (e.g., how much longer does the
handicapped-accessible ramp/elevator/parking/office take); or a car or public transit to get to a
destination. For the economy as a whole, the VOT depends on how different people respond to
the market and non-market signals in allocating their monetary resources and time (Juster and
Stafford, 1991). These allocation decisions of time impact where people live (Wheaton, 1977;
Van Ommeren and Fosgerau, 2009; Su, 2018; Kreindler and Miyauchi, 2019), how they supply
their labor (Aguiar and Hurst, 2007b; Aguiar et al., 2013, 2017; Benhabib et al., 1991; Gelber
and Mitchell, 2012; Goldin, 2014; Gronau, 1973; Mas and Pallais, 2017, 2019), how they commute
(Small et al., 2005; Bento et al., 2017; Hall, 2020), how they invest in their health (Besley et al.,
1999; Miller and Urdinola, 2010; Philipson et al., 2010), and what goods they buy (Nevo and
Wong, 2015). VOT estimates have also become increasingly important in international debates
about productivity and national accounting (Krueger et al., 2009; Nordhaus, 2009; Aguiar and
Hurst, 2016), for the welfare estimation of business cycles (Aguiar et al., 2013), and the VOT is a
central feature in governments and companies as a basis for investment decisions for the supply
of intangible and service goods within economies.
      The remainder of our study is structured as follows. Section 2 provides key theoretical un-
derpinnings of the classic literature and outlines how we leverage these features to estimate the
VOT using two field experiments. Sections 3 and 4 report empirical results from our two natural
field experiments and detail our framework for exploring heterogeneity. Section 5 addresses the
issues in identification and external validity of our estimates, and section 6 provides a discus-
sion linking our work to the current policy landscape. Section 7 concludes. The online appendix
includes additional empirical analysis.
  5
   Moreover, our VOT estimates relate to understanding the economics of online platforms (Goolsbee and Klenow,
2006; Chen et al., 2014; Allcott et al., 2019) and the amount of bureaucracy in government policymaking (Sunstein,
2018).




                                                        6
2. Theory and Market Context
In this section, we describe the theoretical landscape for valuing time and link it to our mod-
eling approach. What results is a set of necessary experimental conditions that must hold to
deliver theoretically-consistent estimates of the VOT. We then detail the market context for our
two natural field experiments.

2.1 Theoretical Framework

The current modelling of time use and value in the literature stems from Becker's (1965) in-
sight that time is required for all consumption activities. Most discussions of his contribution
equate it with the origin of home production, and focus on Becker's argument that an individual
"produces"--what Becker describes as "basic commodities"--which are then consumed.6 These
basic commodities are the services derived when market goods are combined with time, and these
services are what contribute to well-being and motivate choices for individuals. While the concept
of home production is certainly important, Becker's description of consumption also introduced
two other features that are important to our research design. The first feature highlights the role
of restrictions on how private goods and time enter preferences. This dimension of the classic
framework is best illustrated by first considering a simple form of Becker's model. Assume the
household consumes two basic commodities, Zi , i = 1, 2, which are service flows, and in our case,
Z1 is the service flow from rideshare travel, and Z2 is the service flow from all other goods. The
household production functions are Leontief as in equation (1):

      T1 = t1 .Z1             T2 = t2 .Z2            x1 = a1 .Z1             x2 = a2 .Z2                          (1)

    Our specification assumes one private good xi per basic commodity. In our case, x1 is the
rideshare trip, and x2 are all other goods. Time is allocated exclusively to each activity and there
is no multi-tasking. Both ai and ti are technological coefficients in Becker's model. ti is the time
in discrete units for each unit of Zi , and a1 is the amount of rideshare service that is needed to
produce Z1 .7
    Assume a time constraint with T the total time available and Tw the amount of work time
which is priced at w. The individual also faces a budget constraint with pi , where i = 1, 2, the
prices for private goods, the wage income, wTw , and non-wage exogenous income (R). Becker's
   6
     There are a number of contributions using the household production logic to model consumption expenditures
as well as in describing alternatives to the unitary model of individual behavior. A good access point is the review
in Browning et al. (2014), where the work using household production in alternative models of individual choice is
summarized.
   7
     a1 is important because it allows us to interpret a local marginal condition that links the Becker model and weak
complementarity (see below). Thus a1 is a function of the waiting time, which allows us to illustrate if consumers are
not producing" Z1 (i.e., services from travel with ride share), they do not care about waiting time.


                                                          7
household production for consumption activities is equivalent to a restriction on preferences that
treats time and private goods as perfect complements.
    The second feature highlighted by Becker's model arises from the fact that time use is de-
scribed to be specific to a particular consumption task. That is, the framework allows time to be
uniquely linked to each activity a person undertakes. As a result, a natural interpretation is that
the analysis can consider how the context for using one's time affects its value. For instance, time
spent commuting on a weekday morning can be different from commuting in the evening or over
weekends.
    The importance of restrictions on how time and goods enter preferences, and the assumption
an amount of time is uniquely linked to the use of each good (rather than allowing time to jointly
produce two or more basic commodities), arises when we consider the two possible values for time.
These different values are implied by the indirect utility function for Becker's model. Substituting
the time constraint and production functions into the budget constraint, we have the general form
given by equation (2) (see appendix A for all equation derivations).

      V = V (wt1 + p1 .a1 , wt2 + p2 .a2 , wT + R)                                                                    (2)

    The first possible value of time is defined when we consider increasing or decreasing the time
endowment T . Such a shift in the time endowment implies the marginal value of time is equal to
w. Such an approach is usually operationalized using stated preference surveys or by increasing
the amount of time available for people to make choices (e.g., sleeping less during each day which
is unlikely without a technology).8 The second possible value of time arises because we can define
what might be termed the "supply" price or time cost of each activity, which depends on both the
wage and the technology of home production (i.e. the ti 's). In this case, the supply price is equal
to wt1 for the first consumption activity and wt2 for the second.
    Since the developments in the literature in the 1960s, the contributions on the allocation and
value of time have, for the most part, missed these key features of Becker's model. They observed
that the model had the same implications for VOT because the marginal value of adding to the
time endowment remained the wage rate. This result is conditional on the optimal allocation of
   8
     Small et al. (2005) impose a linearity assumption on the indirect utility function assumed to underlie an individ-
ual's choice of whether or not to use an express lane for a trip. The express lane has a toll and an anticipated travel
time while the conventional lane has no toll but a longer anticipated travel time. Linearity assures the ratio of the
coefficients for the toll and the travel time in the choice model reveal a marginal value of time (see their equations (1)
and (2)).




                                                            8
time among activities with different costs.9 Our conclusion is readily illustrated if we consider
how the model describes adjustment in response to a change in the marginal value of time (w).
As equation (3) illustrates, the supply of labor takes into account the reallocation of time among
activities:

       Vw                    
          = T - t1 Z1 - t 2 Z2 ,                                                                                      (3)
       VR

Equation 3 is derived from the partial derivative of equation 2 using Roy's identity as amended
for this model, where Z1
                        and Z  are the utility maximizing choices for the two basic commodities
                             2
(rideshare and all other commodities). Changes in the wage rate change the "prices" of each of
the basic commodities as illustrated by the last two terms on the right side of equation (3). Ad-
justment in the amounts consumed determine the time requirements (with the assumed Leontief
technology) and labor supply is the residual component of the time endowment.
    To focus attention and simplify matters, Becker assumed the time requirements for each ac-
tivity were fixed. The joint roles for preference restrictions between goods and time and the ability
to take account of the context of when and how time is being used are the important elements in
his framework for our research. Of course, demonstrating this point requires an ability to control
both the time requirements for some set of activities and their prices. Such control allows the
analysis to test whether time allocation is largely a matter of labor­leisure decisions. In Becker's
model, an agent's choice of her allocation of non-work time matters according to equation (3).
When the assumption of a Leontief technology for household production is relaxed, however, con-
trol over the prices and time requirements alone will not ensure recovery of the value of time for
each use.10 Another preference restriction is needed.
    Fortunately, for some activities a different form of complementarity, weak complementarity,
provides sufficient information to value time. These are activities that require a period of waiting
time before ascertaining utility from the commodity, such as waiting for: a table at a restaurant;
a delivery of a good; a store to open; a dentist; a doctor; a voting booth to open; or a car or
public transit to get to a destination. As Mäler (1971, 1974) showed, weak complementarity
means that underlying changes in features of the good or service are only important to actual
consumers of the good or service. He recognized that even without the assumption of perfect
    9
      Aguiar and Hurst (2007a) develop their approach for estimating a value of time by assuming that optimizing
households exploit a shopping technology as another mechanism for substituting time for goods outside the labor
market. They maintain that the price paid for private goods is a function of the time allocated to shopping. Greater
search time yields lower prices. They also acknowledge that the price paid can depend on shopping needs or the number
of items that might be involved in a household's search activities. So the value of time is derived as the shadow price
of time allocated between the shopping and household production technologies (see their equations (1) and (2)). The
ability to freely substitute time between these two uses assures the marginal value of time is equalized between these
activities "outside" the labor market. As a result they use estimates of this price function to estimate the value of time
(see their figure 1).
   10
      When the household production technology is assumed to be more flexible, the VOT in each use depends on the
marginal technical rate of substitution between time and goods at the optimal consumption levels for the basic com-
modities. To estimate this requires detailed information on the technologies involved as well as all the goods' prices.
                                                            9
complementarity between a nonmarket good and a private good, weak complementarity makes it
possible to estimate the demand price for the nonmarket good from the information contained in
the demand function for the private good.11
    Our case provides a direct parallel to his example. If the demand for the rideshare service is
zero, then the demand for a shorter wait time to obtain that service is also zero. Mäler was careful
to spell out how the assumption of weak complementarity applies only at the individual level (or to
an aggregate over homogeneous groups of consumers). He also noted that to use it in measuring
the willingness to pay for a discrete change in a nonmarket good (like time), the specification of
the Marshallian demand for the private good needs to ensure that the corresponding Hicksian
demand function for that good has a finite choke price.
    For our purposes, however, we are not attempting to estimate the demand for rideshare trips;
we are simply interested in the marginal VOT. Our use of weak complementarity can be illustrated
with a simple amendment to the Becker model. We acknowledge at the outset that our example
abstracts from important details that could be used in a full structural model of these decisions.
    We remain with the assumption that the first basic commodity is the travel services "pro-
duced" by using a rideshare company. We distinguish two types of time involved in ride share
services. The first, designated T1 , is a summary measure for the travel time associated with
rideshare trips. The second type of time, T1
                                           a , is exogenous from the perspective of the individual.

It represents a second summary measure for the waiting time for the rideshare trips while the
individual waits for the drivers involved in these trips to arrive. The user knows these times on
each trip occasion when selecting her trips. We assume waiting time is an indicator of the quality
of the service. Longer waiting time implies a lower quality travel service can be produced. Weak
complementarity implies that the individual does not value waiting time if she does not produce
travel services. Thus, our modification to the Becker model must embed this assumption. For this
example assume the technical coefficient linking Z1 (our measure of the produced travel services)
to x1 (our measure of the rideshare services required) is a function of waiting time. So we replace
  11
     For certain environmental applications this condition can be controversial--a person may want to maintain high
levels of air quality (and visibility) at the Grand Canyon but never plan to visit the site, or want to protect the Arctic
Wildlife Preserve but not consider a wilderness adventure there. These omitted values are the existence values of
such goods. As he noted:

      It is, however, not necessary that the environmental service and the private good be perfect complements in
      order to carry out the steps involved in determining demand price. A much weaker condition of complemen-
      tarity is the following: if the demand for a private good is zero, then the demand for some environmental
      service will also be zero. If, for example, the private good is swimming in the lake and the environmental
      service is the quality of that lake, then it is very reasonable to assume that if a person does not use this lake
      for recreation, he is indifferent to the quality of the water. . . . It would therefore seem that this weak com-
      plementarity condition has very broad applications, although it cannot be applied in cases where option
      values are involved (Mäler 1974, 183).




                                                            10
this component of the Becker model with:

                a
      x1 = a1 (T1 )Z1                                                                                                 (4)

We assume a1 > 0, implying increased waiting times reduces the amount of "constant quality"
travel services produced by ride share (i.e., Z1 gets smaller) This specification assures that if
Z1 = 0, then changes in T1
                         a will not affect the individual's well-being, consistent with weak com-

plementarity between waiting time and the travel service basic commodity.12
    We can now return to equation (2) and adjust the indirect utility implied by Becker's model to
reflect the assumed role of T1
                             a in producing constant quality travel services. Equation (5) provides

the modified indirect utility:

      ¯ = V (wt1 + p1 a1 (T a ), wt2 + p2 a2 , w(T
      V                    1
                                                 ¯ - T a ) + R)
                                                      1                                                               (5)

When we make this change and use duality to consider the marginal value of reducing waiting
time, equation (6) results:

       VT1
         a   V1
           =    p1 a1 - w                                                                                             (6)
       VR    VR

The terms on the right-hand side of the equation corresponds to the marginal "cost" to the user of
increases in the waiting time. We can see this by noting that Roy's identity implies -V1 /VR = Z1 .
Our argument suggests that the price equivalent value of waiting time is (p1 Z1 a1 ), and that could
be equal to, less than, or greater than the wage rate. This is an empirical question. Shorter
(longer) waiting time reduces (increases) the incremental cost of producing travel services with
the ride share, Z1 . This intuition leads to Equation (7):

              VT1
                a
      =-          = p1 Z1 a1 + w                                                                                      (7)
              VR

    Of course, this case represents one simple example. Our general point is to show that the
example "works" because of weak complementarity. From equation (5), the specification of the
measure for ride share trips (x1 ) implies that there is an equivalent change in p1 that can be
represented by a change in T1
                            a.

    Our main theoretical contribution to the Becker model is that a weaker preference restriction
  12
     Several qualifications apply to this stylized example. If we were attempting to model both the decisions to use
rideshare and the number of trips to take, our specification would need to reflect that T1      a
                                                                                                  and a measure for the
count of trips are related. Depending on how we added these details, connecting the model to measures of rideshare
services, such as trips, the time used in traveling, and the time spent waiting, nonlinearity could be introduced into the
budget constraint. Such a detailed formulation would rely on the specific functional assumptions made in identifying
estimates for the value of time. Since our goal is simply to illustrate how weak complementarity allows us to measure
the marginal value of time by implying a welfare equivalent link between price changes and wait time changes, we
avoid spelling out these connections.

                                                           11
than was required in Becker's model is possible for valuing time. In the context of rideshare,
we have this form of weak complementarity as people wait for the ride. An additional important
feature of the model is the specificity of the value of time can be linked to its particular use. This
arises in rideshare because the timing and position of rideshare trips can be linked to a wide
range of purposes, tasks, and contexts, allowing for an assessment of how the properties of the
situation affect VOT measures. Taken together, we now have the theoretical machinery to value
time through changes in prices and wait times of the good.
   In this spirit, leveraging the Lyft rideshare platform, our model is specific to a trip session, in
which a passenger opens up the app and receives a price and waiting time quote for a potential
trip. Individual responses to the terms of a ride are indexed by passenger (i) and session (j ).
We assume that incomes and other prices faced by individuals opening the Lyft application are
fixed across the experimental groups due to randomization, and focus our attention on the utility
realized with and without requesting a ride. Equation (8) begins the process of formalizing the
decision associated with requesting a ride:

                      a
     Vij = v (Pij , Tij ) + ij                                                                       (8)

Let Vij be the utility associated with selecting a Lyft ride at a price of Pij for individual i and
session j . Let Tij be the wait time indicated to individual i in session j , and ij be a random error
capturing unobserved (to the analyst) features of the circumstances of choice.
   We assume that each individual compares the realized utility from a Lyft ride with that of
a default condition that we do not observe. We assume the default option is specific to each
individual and session and provides utility Wij . A Lyft is requested if and only if Vij > Wij . By
independently randomizing both P and T a , we can recover estimates for the parameters used to
describe the choice process in equation (8).
   The price of a Lyft ride is the product of a base price, Bij , that depends on the characteristics of
the request (timing, route, and vehicle type) and a price multiplier (called Prime Time) (1 + P Tij ).
This multiplier is set dynamically in response to local demand and supply conditions. Bij and
P Tij are indexed by i and j because the records of sessions allow the timing of the session and
the individual to be distinguished.
   In our case, we observe whether an individual selected a Lyft ride but cannot completely char-
acterize the features of the alternative set when the ride is not chosen. This is where our assump-
tion of weak complementarity provides the "traction" needed to recover a VOT. As noted earlier,
when waiting time is a weak complement to the rideshare service associated with each trip, a
change in wait time is equivalent, from a welfare perspective, to a change in the price of the trip
(Smith and Banzhaf, 2007). The important implication is that we do not need to know anything
about a passenger's labor supply decisions to recover an estimate for the opportunity cost for their
time; the price of the Lyft ride serves this role. Thus, with appropriate exogenous variation in
                                                 12
both trip prices and wait times, consumers' actual choices allow us to identify the key threshold
trade-offs between time and money that serve to recover the VOT.13
    The decision process in our model begins with the assumption that each individual is consid-
ering a "local" trip, that is within his or her metropolitan area. We observe everyone who opens
the Lyft application during our experimental period. Yet, we do not know their complete set of
outside options, and because of this limitation we consider a variety of approaches to organize
sessions to account for our hypothesized differences in how these outside alternatives influence
Wij for each individual. There are several implications of this constraint on what can be observed.
The first of these is the selection effect directly associated with knowing only those who open the
Lyft app; we discuss the implications of this external validity issue in Appendix Section H. More-
over, because we cannot characterize Wij , we do not have a reference or baseline condition that we
would expect in defining a reference utility level to measure a VOT. This limitation influences our
interpretation of the estimates. Without specifying the outside alternative, we estimate choice
probabilities relative to a normalizing alternative.14

2.2 Empirical Model

Our primary model specification for the choice process is contained in equation (8), which com-
pares Vij with Wij using the log transformation for the price and wait time as determinants of the
observed trip request, Rij (0, 1). We assume that passenger i in their j th session receives greater
utility from requesting a ride, Vij , than the alternative Wij , and thus the request, Rij , is made
according to:

                              a
      Rij = 1 ln Pij + 2 ln Tij                                             a
                                + ij = 0 ln Bij + 1 ln(1 + P Tij ) + 2 ln Tij + ij                                   (9)

    Here Pij is the offered price, Tij
                                     a the offered wait time for the ride, B is the base price, and
                                                                            ij
ij is the unobserved error term. The price of a ride is the product of a base price Bij and a price
multiplier, (1+PTij ), which is set dynamically in response to local supply and demand conditions.
By using the log transformation for the price and wait time in equation (9), the choices reveal the
preference parameters needed to recover our measure for the price equivalent of waiting time
without knowing the base price for each request.15 This formulation allows a separation of the
base price and the price multiplier as determinants of the request, and identification of the price
  13
     We do not need to specify a global model of time use with every commodity and price in it. Weak complementarity
with random prices and wait time at the point of purchase is enough.
  14
     In general, we do not know if a person actually considered the alternatives that were available, and only know
that they were feasible when a decision to select a mode was made. As McFadden (1974) demonstrated, given the
specification of the factors influencing an individual's choices and an assumed choice set, the inability to know a
specific default alternative or all the possibilities does not prevent one from assessing the relative importance of each
determinant using a random sample of the hypothesized alternatives, together with assumptions that characterize
the choice process. For many applications, this constraint on the information available is not important to the results.
  15
     We considered other functional forms as robustness checks; see Table C.23 in Appendix C. We also discuss this in
section 3.4.1.
                                                          13
effect through the experimental variation in the price multiplier. Since we observe the base price
only for a self-selected sub-sample of sessions (as described below in the first field experiment),
we include this effect as one of the components of the model's error.16
    Our price equivalent of a unit change in the wait time is defined by the marginal rate at which
the passenger is indifferent in trading off units of waiting time with units of monetary cost for the
trip. For our basic model with time and price in logs, as in (9), this rate is (minus) the marginal
rate of substitution of Tij
                          a and P :
                                 ij

                        a
                 Uij /Tij
          dPij              1 Pij
      -        =          =     a                                                                                    (10)
          dTij   Uij /Pij   2 Tij

The value for this price equivalent depends on the values of Pij and Tij
                                                                       a as well as the values of 
                                                                                                  1
and 2 .
    Given that ij in equation (9) includes the default alternative for each person opening the Lyft
app, as well as many unobserved factors that will simultaneously affect both the utility of rides
and that of the default alternatives, it is reasonable to expect that it will not be exogenous to wait
time and prices. We address this limitation in two ways. First, we use experimental variation
to construct instruments for the price multiplier and waiting time terms and use two-stage least
squares to estimate our model. As a result, consistent estimation of 1 , 2 can be realized with
instruments that provide exogenous variation in 1 + PTij and Tij
                                                               a that are independent of W , B ,
                                                                                          ij  ij
and ij . The power of using a field experiment with randomization of both prices and wait time is
that we do not need to make any further assumptions about customer behavior. Second, our large
sample allows the definition of a variety of sub-samples that identify different circumstances in
which the Lyft app is opened. Some of these outside factors can also be expected to affect the
(baseline) ride prices and waiting times.
    Our model is therefore estimated with two-stage least squares (2SLS), with the first-stage
equations as:

      ln(ETAij ) = 0 + 1 T1ij + 2 T2ij + 3 T3ij + 4 T4ij + 5 T5ij + (controls) + ij                                  (11)
   16
      In early discussions of the random utility model, the framework was used to describe a choice among a discrete set
of alternatives. As a rule, when there were more than two possibilities, a logit framework was often adopted. More re-
cently, these estimators have been generalized to allow for unobserved heterogeneity in preferences by specifying some
coefficients as random variables and relying on mixed logit estimators. Mixed logit avoids the restrictive assumption
of independence of irrelevant alternatives (IIA) with a simple logit approach. When used for measuring willingness to
pay the distributions for the coefficient for the price of alternatives need to be restricted to assure consistent welfare
measures. When the alternatives are limited to two possibilities (taking a Lyft trip or not), and one is not attempting
to account for a set of observed characteristics distinguishing the alternatives, then linear regression methods are
often used. Ordinary least squares (OLS) and two-stage least squares (2SLS) provide robust strategies for estimating
the parameters needed to recover the marginal VOT and evaluate the sensitivity of the results to the circumstances
characterizing the context of the choice. We report in Appendix C the sensitivity of our conclusions to alternative
estimators in Table C.24




                                                           14
         ln(1 + PTij ) = 0 + 1 T1it + 2 T2it + 3 T3ij + 4 T4ij + 5 T5ij + (controls) + ij                           (12)

and the second-stage equation is:

         Requestij = 0 + 1 ln(1 + PTij ) + 2 ln(ETAij ) + (controls) + ij .                                         (13)

Here T1 through T5 are dummy indicators of the experimental treatment assignments (described
below), and controls include a vector of fixed effects for passenger and session types (e.g., a user's
number of past rides with Lyft) as well as time and location, controlling for the unobserved vari-
ation in Wij and ln Bij .
       The estimated 1 and 2 , as well as assumed values for Pij and ET Aij , allow recovery of the
price equivalent of a unit of waiting time. We evaluate our price equivalent at the control average
waiting time and control average price on completed rides during our experimental period. The
incremental price equivalent is estimated by:

         ^1 P
             ¯
                ,
         ^2 T
             ¯a

where P
      ¯ and T¯a are the average price and waiting time for control units.17
       In Section 3 below, we fully describe our two field experiments to identify how agents trade off
units of waiting time with units of monetary cost. Our first field experiment randomly assigns Lyft
users to a control or one of five treatments (T1 through T5 in our 2SLS model) varying (increase,
decrease, or market) price and/or wait time (increase or market). Each individual remains with
the assignment they are given at the time of their first opening of the Lyft application during
our experimental time period (eight weeks). The realized values for both wait time and price
depend upon the circumstances of the session; the Prime Time multiplier and waiting time are
thus endogenous variables to the request decision. We use the features defining our treatments to
define instruments for both variables. We also add additional controls that identify the features
of the context in which a person opens the app. We use the 2SLS approach above to estimate our
choice equations, but also report alternative estimates in Appendix Section C.
       A second, complementary, field experiment--in which only ETA increases are randomized
(while prices remain at market values)--explores more fully the circumstances of choice and how
they allow us to measure heterogeneity. In particular, extra wait time is varied across location-
time blocks (as opposed to across users) which provides (i) a robustness check on the results from
our first field experiment and (ii) additional insights into how users' time elasticities may vary
  17
    The decision to evaluate the VOT at the control average price and waiting time is somewhat arbitrary, and due to
the nonlinearity of the expression for the VOT in price and waiting time, the VOT expression evaluated at the average
price and waiting time may differ from the average VOT. We address this concern in Appendix L by constructing a VOT
estimate for each observation using observation-specific price and waiting time predictions (and semi-elasticities); this
process produces a full distribution of VOTs across sessions rather than a single estimate.

                                                          15
over a different set of changes in wait time. Both field experiments are discussed more patiently
below. Overall, our approach of randomizing price and wait time across consumers, together with
knowing whether they decided to take the ride (based on both price and time), provides a set of
VOT estimates unique to the literature in terms of approach, diversity of situation, and scale.

2.3 Context: Background on Lyft and Data

Lyft is a ridesharing platform that matches consumers (passengers) searching for motor vehicle
transportation with independent contractors (drivers) providing the service.18 Passengers access
Lyft through a smartphone app (Figure 1 shows the passenger user interface at the time of the
experiment). The app shows the nearest driver's estimated time to arrival (ETA) and the Prime
Time (PT) price multiplier active for the potential passenger's current location. ETA is an es-
timate of the time, in minutes, that it would take the nearest driver to reach the passenger's
location from the moment their request is accepted by the driver. Prime Time (PT) is a dynamic
mechanism that increases prices from a base level to balance the local amount of Lyft ride re-
quests (demand) and the local available pool of Lyft drivers (supply). A PT multiplier of +25%
means that a ride will cost 25% more than the usual base fare (which is a deterministic function
of distance and time of travel for each metro area).
    In addition to showing an ETA estimate and the current PT level, the app also allows the
passenger to input a destination. At the time of the first field experiment, users could see the
ETA estimate and PT multiplier and request a ride without entering a destination. If a user did
enter a destination, they were shown an estimated range for the trip's cost, not including the
effects of the PT multiplier on the price. These estimated ranges were only seen by the passenger
in approximately one-third of sessions in our sample for the first experiment. Because the ranges
were expressed in terms of the base price, they were not affected by the experimental treatments.
Our primary model for describing the factors influencing Lyft requests estimates the price effect
using the experimental variation in the PT multiplier and does not require information about the
base price.19
    Each opening of the Lyft app by a passenger starts a session, which is the primary unit of
observation for our analysis. A session ends either when the passenger takes a trip or after 30
minutes of inactivity. So, for example, if a user closes the app without taking a ride and reopens
it within 30 minutes, both these interactions count as a single session. For each session, Lyft
records the following information: passenger's unique ID code, whether the rider is registered as
  18
     The following discussion of the Lyft ridesharing platform describes what existed in late 2015 through early 2016,
the time period during which the first experiment was conducted. Lyft also now provides options for bikes, scooters,
transit, and rental cars on its platform.
  19
     Because price ranges are given only when a potential rider enters a destination, this information could affect the
response to the experimental variation in the multiplier; we address this issue by considering the sample of respon-
dents who enter a destination separately from those who did not as part of our robustness analysis in Tables C.26,
C.27, and C.28 in Appendix Section C.

                                                          16
a business user, the local start time, the passenger's current location (latitude and longitude),
counts of how many requests the passenger makes and rides the passenger completes, as well as
the ETA and PT shown to the passenger in the session. ETA and PT may vary over the course of
one session due to real-time changes in local supply and demand. As such, our analysis focuses
on the last shown ETA and PT in the session, as these are the ones faced by the passenger at
their final decision node of whether to request a ride.20 Thus, all of our discussion of the ETA and
PT will refer to the last value presented in a session (unless otherwise specified).
    From these data, we can define a number of variables to characterize the circumstances facing
the potential passengers as they made their choices. For example, using a deidentified, unique ID
for a passenger, we can determine how many Lyft rides that passenger has taken. Using session
start times, we can categorize a session as taking place on a weekend evening, during the morning
commute, or in any other time category. And, using location data, we can determine if a passenger
is at an airport or at a downtown or suburban location for each metro area in our sample. Finally,
note that Lyft offers various ride modes, including Classic (the standard mode), Lyft Line, now
called Shared, (in which several passengers share a single car with multiple pickups and dropoffs),
and Lyft XL (which offers larger vehicles). At the time of the experiment, the majority of rides
(about three-quarters) were Classics. We include all ride types in our analysis, and consider
exclusion of non-Classic sessions as a robustness check (see Appendix Section K).


3. Design and Results For Field Experiment 1
To identify how agents trade off time and money, we begin with a first natural field experiment
(see Harrison and List (2004) for the various field experiment definitions) that randomly assigned
consumers to one of several treatments that differ in both the realized wait time and price (i.e.
Field Experiment 1). The second natural field experiment, which we denote as Field Experiment
2, is described in Section 4.

3.1 Design of Field Experiment 1

The process that determines both the price multiplier and the waiting time implies that both
variables are endogenous. The PT algorithm is designed to raise prices during periods of relative
high demand/low supply; similarly, the number of available drivers at the time each potential
rider opens the app in relation to the others who do so at the same time in a location will de-
termine the estimated wait time. Our first field experiment involved nine cities in the U.S. (San
Francisco, Austin, Atlanta, Miami, Los Angeles, San Diego, Boston, Seattle, and New York City)
  20
     ETAs vary over the course of a session in 51.3% of sessions, while PT varies in 11.9% of sessions. The intra-session
variation in ETAs is caused by drivers continuously moving during the course of a session, and is generally small. For
example, in 76.4% of sessions, the difference between the maximum and minimum ETAs shown is one minute or less.


                                                          17
for eight weeks between December 2015 and January 2016, which involved 720,059 customers
and 5,177,358 individual sessions.21
    At the start of the experiment, 37% of all users in each city were randomly assigned to a control
or one of five treatment groups. The experimental treatments ensure that there is exogenous
variation in the components of each algorithm determining the PT multiplier and the wait time.
The algorithm for wait time can increase the wait time above the normal arrival time, but cannot
reduce the wait time. As a result, the wait time variations are limited to a high and normal
(ETA). Each is matched with three possible treatments for the price algorithm: low, normal, and
high. The sub-sample assigned to the normal ETA and normal price combination is treated as
the control group. The remaining 63% of users associated with other sessions are excluded from
our main analysis.22
    The proportion of users randomly assigned to each group is shown in Table 1.23 Table C.1
compares the features of the control and the treatment groups in terms of the available variables
for describing each session. Based on these variables, the randomization achieved balance on the
observable covariates.
    Throughout the eight weeks of the experiment, each individual remained in the same treat-
ment. Thus, a user assigned to the low price, high ETA treatment group had all of his or her
sessions during the eight weeks subjected to the same algorithm, which would lead to potentially
lower price and higher waiting times than what would be the case if they were in the control
group. Of course, in practice, specific values for the wait time and price multiplier vary depend-
ing on how local conditions affected the outcomes produced by each algorithm. We understand
the potential selection effects that might occur from this long-term design (although we use a dif-
ferent design in the second field experiment), and we analyze such effects thoroughly in Appendix
Section I.
    Price variation was achieved by modifying each user's PT multiplier, increasing it (for high
price treatment groups) or decreasing it (for low price treatment groups) based on local market
imbalances. This modification has the effect of raising or lowering a user's effective price, but
not necessarily in every session.24 Waiting time variation was achieved by removing drivers from
the nearest driver queue of each affected passenger: the nearest driver, all drivers whose ETA
  21
     Sessions in one city, Nashville, were dropped due to implementation problems with the experimental treatments.
Including Nashville data in our full-sample regressions does not significantly change our point estimates. See Figure
B.3 for the number of sessions per day over the full duration of the experiment (eight weeks).
  22
     These sessions were not used as additional control observations because they may have been subject to other
experiments conducted at Lyft concurrently with our field experiment.
  23
     Treatment group assignments are determined by applying a hash function to each user's unique Lyft ID code.
Since the assignment of each user to a treatment was random, we can assume that users in each treatment group are
a representative sample of ride share users who open the Lyft app in the affected cities during the time of the first
experiment.
  24
     More concretely, because PT takes values in a fixed, discrete set (0%, 25%, 50%, etc.), the change in the algorithm's
sensitivity to market conditions may not always result in a different PT level. For example, if the market has much
more supply than demand, both the normal and the more sensitive, high price algorithm may find that the optimal
PT level in the allowed set is 0%.
                                                           18
was within 30 seconds of that of the nearest driver, and one additional driver were removed
from the queue. This removal has the effect of increasing ETA by at least 30 seconds for all
passengers subject to the high ETA treatment, but potentially by considerably more than 30
seconds, especially when there are few drivers near a passenger. Because each passenger's price
and ETA treatments are independent, we can identify the coefficients for both price and time
effects on the demand for Lyft rides.
       Table 2 displays average ETA, PT, and completed ride price by treatment group. The random-
ization was successful: our high ETA treatment increases the ETAs by an average of approxi-
mately 1.6 minutes, an increase of about 52%. The high price treatment increases average PT
levels from about 10.0% to 16.3%, while the low price treatment decreases the average PT levels
to about 3.6%. These PT differences result in completed ride prices that are about 2.5% higher
for passengers receiving high price treatments and 2.0% lower for passengers receiving low price
treatments.25
       Table C.5 and Figures 2 and 3 show the distributions of PT and ETAs for each of the six
treatment groups.26 Appendix B provides graphs of the distributions for each variable, indicating
that each of the treatments shifts the distributions in the intended directions. Tables C.3 and
C.4 in the Appendix report p-values from Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests of the hypotheses that the
distributions of average ETA and PT across users differs between treatment groups; the results
suggest that the ETA distributions are approximately identical across PT treatments and vice
versa, consistent with the independence of these components of the experimental treatments.27

3.2 Results of Field Experiment 1

3.2.1 Summary Statistics

Lyft customers in the experiment had, on average, about seven sessions and about four sessions
with a completed ride (see Table C.2). Customers in the high ETA and high price treatments had
fewer sessions, ride requests, and completed rides than control passengers, while passengers in
the normal ETA, low price treatment group had slightly more than the control. These differences
are consistent with a treatment effect on passenger behavior, which we explore further below.28
       Before moving to the formal analysis, we consider the effects of the various treatments on pas-
sengers' demand behavior. The lower panel in Table C.2 shows the average number of sessions
  25
      The effects of treatment on completed ride price are smaller than the effects on quoted PT because PT itself affects
the probability that a session will result in a completed ride.
   26
      Two sessions had recorded ETAs of 0 minutes. These were dropped from the data, so that the log transformation
could be applied to ETA.
   27
      Figures B.1 and B.2 in the Appendix indicate that these treatments are in effect consistently throughout the course
of the experiment.
   28
      Figures B.7, B.8, B.9, and B.10 highlight the heterogeneity in our sample. While the majority of our sessions
come from San Francisco and Los Angeles, we have a large number of observations from the other six cities in the
experiment. The distributions of sessions over days of the week and hours of the day are relatively balanced, though
weekend and late afternoon/early evening times are the best represented time periods in our sample.
                                                           19
which had ride requests for each treatment group. Figures 4 and B.11 display the demand rate,
defined in two ways. The first, Figure 4, uses the total requests for service compared to those
opening the Lyft app. The second definition uses completed rides in place of requests. Some
requests are not completed because a passenger is not matched to a driver, or the passenger or
driver cancels a ride before it is finalized. These situations amount to 0.6% and 10.0% of the total
requests during experiment 1, respectively.29 As expected, the high ETA and price treatments
decrease request rates relative to the control, while the low price treatment increases request
rates. The small confidence intervals around the means suggest that these differences are statis-
tically significant at the 95% level, and the magnitude of the differences of request rate between
treatment groups--which is as large as four percentage points between the normal ETA, low price
treatment and the high ETA, high price treatment suggest the outcomes reflect economically con-
sistent responses to the differences in the circumstances of choice. For example, the high ETA,
low price treatment had a slightly higher request rate than control, and the high ETA, normal
price treatment had a slightly higher request rate than the normal ETA, high price treatment.30

3.2.2 Empirical Estimation

Our dependent variable is a discrete indicator for a request for the service (1 for request, 0 oth-
erwise) with ln(ETA) and ln(1 + PT) as the independent variables of direct interest. We also
have a set of controls that include fixed effects for the location, local hour of week and week of
year, user experience with Lyft (decile of pre-experiment lifetime rides), and user type (whether
the use has a business profile). Since the data generating process implies ETA and PT will be
endogenous, 2SLS is our preferred estimator. As part of a robustness analysis, we estimated a
probit model (instrumenting ln(ETA) and ln(1 + PT)) of our main specification and report these
results in Table C.24 in Appendix C. Standard errors are estimated clustering within passengers
   29
      Figure B.4 in the Appendix considers how the average number of rides a passenger in each treatment group takes
evolves over the course of the experiment, relative to the average number of rides a control passenger takes. The five
series are approximately comparable at the outset of the experiment, appear to spread out with the duration of the
experiment, and then appear to stabilize about 10 days after a user's first session in the experiment.
   Figure B.5 in the Appendix is a similar plot comparing session rates (that is, percentage of passengers opening
the app) between the treatment groups over time. Expected effects of the treatments on rates of use of the platform
are observed: passengers facing the higher prices and waiting times become less likely to return to the platform over
time. Price and waiting time thus have both intensive- and extensive-margin effects on demand, impacting not only
the passenger's probability of requesting after opening the app, but also the probability that the passenger opens the
app again in the future. We explore how this extensive margin behavior impacts the VOT estimation in section 3.4.
   Finally, our observations are distributed evenly over passenger/experience levels. That is, we observe a near equal
number of sessions for passengers with 0 rides and over 50 rides before the start of the experiment. The presence of
this heterogeneity across regions, time, and passengers allows us to investigate how the value of time varies across
circumstances.
   30
      In addition to these during-experiment demand effects, we also find some evidence of treatment effects persisting
beyond the end of the experiment; see Appendix E.




                                                          20
and are assumed independent across passengers.31
    Our estimate for the VOT uses the average price and ETA for the control treatments associated
with each sample definition. For most of our models, this is defined as:

                 1 P rice
      V OT =                                                                                                       (14)
                 2 ET A

1 and 2 are semi-elasticities of demand (request rate) with respect to waiting time and price,
respectively. To recover estimates for the relevant elasticities, we divide these semi-elasticities by
the average request rate Request. As previously noted, both ln(ETAij ) and ln(1+PTij ) are endoge-
nous in (13), so we estimate the  s via two-stage least squares (2SLS), with first-stage equations
(11) and (12).   32, 33    The F statistics from the first stage regressions, both with and without other
controlling covariates, confirm the strength and relevance of the instruments. Standard errors
for our estimates for the VOT are derived using the delta method.34
    Our approach to exploring the sensitivity of our VOT estimates follows from the basic structure
  31
     This covariance structure would arise if, for example, the true data generating process had 1 and 2 as individual­
level random effects. Some studies, including Small et al. (2005), have estimated such random (or mixed) effects
models directly. Endogeneity of our explanatory variables and the individual­level randomization of our experimental
treatments render this approach difficult in our context. Instead, we simply cluster our standard errors to account
for the possibility that 1 and 2 vary between passengers. Note also that clustering at the individual user-level is
consistent with our experimental treatments, which are randomized at the individual.
  32
     First stage results by region can be found in the Appendix Section C in Table C.29 and C.30.
  33
     The necessary conditions for 2SLS to give consistent estimates of  s in (13) are that our instruments be orthogonal
to the error term ij and correlated with the endogenous variables ln(ETAij ) and ln(1+PTij ). Exogeneity follows from
the fact treatment randomization, but may fail if exposure to the treatment has a cumulative effect on passengers,
which affects their future behavior outside of the effect on their received ETA and Prime Time within each session.
Appendix Figure B.5 suggests that such cumulative effects on demand may be present. As part of our robustness
analysis, we estimate the model using only each passenger's first session in the experiment and also only observations
in the first week of the experiment. We find little variation in the estimates for the VOT over the number of sessions
or weeks of the experiment, suggesting no clear selection effect due to consumers who decide not to use the app. As
a result, the appearance of small cumulative effects do not appear to affect the time/price tradeoffs we estimate; see
Tables C.19, C.20, and C.21 in the Appendix.
  34
     See, e.g., Davidson et al. (2004). Treating price and ETA as fixed, define the nonlinear function g : R3  R by:

                         1 P rice
      g (0 , 1 , 2 ) =                                                                                              (15)
                         2 ET A

so that g (^) is our estimator of the VOT. The Jacobian of g is

                                 1 P rice   1 P rice
      Dg (0 , 1 , 2 ) =     0,            ,- 2                                                                      (16)
                                 2 ET A     2 ET A

which exists (provided 2 = 0) and is always nonzero. Assume that  is the asymptotic variance­covariance matrix of
^, that is, n(
               ^ - )  d
                        N (0, ). By the delta method,
                           d
         n(g ( ) - g ( ))  N (0, [Dg ( )][Dg ( )]T )                                                                (17)
                                                   p
Then if ^ /n is any estimator of Var[^] with ^  , a consistent estimator of Var[g (^)] is:

       1      ^)][     ^)]T
         [Dg (   ^ Dg (                                                                                             (18)
       n
                                                           21
of the Becker model. The first of these is the selection of functional form describing how wait time
and price influence requests. By transforming the price and time using logs we can estimate the
parameter describing how people respond to price knowing only the PT multiplier. Second, to
recover a measure of the VOT we need to select a point for evaluating the implied time/price trade-
off. As noted earlier, we use the average values for these variables from the control treatments
to estimate the semi-elasticities. Finally, to develop insights into how the circumstances of each
person's choice affect the VOT, we estimate the VOT using a set of sub-samples motivated by an
extension of the Becker theory, which is presented below.

3.2.3 VOT Estimates

Tables 3 and 4 provide the first- and second-stage results for the main model respectively, esti-
mated for the full experiment 1 sample.35 Table 3 demonstrates that our experiment worked as
expected in changing wait times and prices in the correct directions as specified by our experi-
mental groups. In addition, we have strong instruments in the first-stage regressions. In the
second-stage results in Table 4, coefficients on ln(ETA) and ln(1 + PT) are estimated to be -0.026
and -0.330 when controls are included; without controls, the coefficient on ln(ETA) is smaller in
absolute magnitude, and the coefficient on ln(1 + PT) slightly larger in absolute magnitude.
    Using the full sample where the overall average request rate is 64.2%, we find estimates imply-
ing that wait time and price elasticities of demand are -0.0427 and -0.5942, respectively.36 Our
results provide strong support for the conclusion that Lyft requests are influenced by differences
in both wait time and the price multiplier associated with the trip. Taken together, our estimated
coefficients on ln(ETA) and ln(1 + PT) imply a VOT of $19.38 per hour (s.e. = $1.39 per hour37 )
at baseline (i.e. control) waiting time of 3.08 minutes and price of $13.83 (the average actual fare
paid by control riders in the sample).

3.3 How do the Properties of the Situation Affect the VOT?

In this section we combine the logic of the Becker model with the temporal and spatial delineation
in our sample to consider how situational features affect our estimates of the elasticities and the
VOT. Recall from Section 2.1 that in Becker's model with Leontief household production, time and
In practice, we use the standard cluster-robust 2SLS variance-covariance estimator for    ^, with clustering at the pas-
senger level; see Baum et al. (2003).
   This standard error ignores the uncertainty introduced by estimating ET A and P rice from the data. We also es-
timated the standard error for our main specification using a pairs­cluster bootstrap (Cameron and Miller, 2015) on
our full estimation procedure, and the results were similar to those returned by the delta method.
   35
      Standard diagnostic tests of endogeneity and overidentifying restrictions are provided in Tables C.17 and C.18 in
the Appendix. The results of OLS estimation of equation (13) are in Table C.6.
   36
      Our price elasticity estimate is consistent with Cohen et al. (2016), whose mean point estimate for the price elas-
ticity of demand using Uber records for 2015 is -0.57.
   37
      A pairs­cluster bootstrap (Cameron and Miller, 2015) with B = 999 replications yielded a standard error of $1.40
per hour and a bootstrap-t confidence interval (Efron and Tibshirani, 1994) of ($16.71, $22.19).

                                                          22
private goods are perfect complements. When this restriction is relaxed, the wait time and price
of a rideshare trip enter the indirect utility function without restriction, and we may consider
how each of these influences our measure of the value of time.
   Consider the willingness to pay W T P for a price increase (1 + P T0 to 1 + P T1 ) and waiting
time decrease (ET A0 to ET A1 ). W is defined by equation (19).

     V (1 + P T1 , ET A1 , m - W T P ) = V (1 + P T0 , ET A0 , m)                                (19)

Denoting the marginal value of time (VET A /Vm ) by  and the demand for rideshare trips by T , we
have the following second-order expansion for W T P :

                                                  1
     W T P   (ET A1 - ET A0 ) - T (P T1 - P T0 ) + (ET A - m )(ET A1 - ET A0 )2
                                                  2                                              (20)
               1                            2
              - (TP T + T Tm )(P T1 - P T0 ) + (P T + T m )(ET A1 - ET A0 )(P T1 - P T0 ).
               2

When the changes in price and waiting time exactly offset each other, we have W T P = 0. If
we also assume that T = 1 and that the adjustment of trips to price (TP T ) and income (Tm ) are
neglible, we can solve for the ratio of the price change to the equivalent waiting time change:

       P T1 - P T0     1
                      + (ET A - m )(ET A1 - ET A0 ) + (P T + m )(P T1 - P T0 ).                  (21)
      ET A1 - ET A0    2

Equation (21) shows that, to first order, the ratio of the price change to the equivalent waiting time
change equals the value of time  . The equation further shows that this ratio is also influenced
by the size of the waiting time change (ET A1 - ET A0 ), the sensitivity of the VOT to the waiting
time (ET A ), and the sensitivity of the VOT to income (m ).
   This conventional model fails to capture another of Becker's insights: the context of choice.
The simple Leontief version of his model captured this effect by allowing time to be linked in
different ways to different private goods. We observe only one private service: rideshare trips.
Nonetheless, we can observe how the price equivalent changes in different situations, indexed
by location, time of day, and weather condition. This rich detail in the circumstances of people's
choices allows the data to add resolution to what a largely unrestricted model may imply for
the VOT. By selecting sub-samples distinguished by the location, timing, and other features of
passenger sessions, we can evaluate how each affects potential users' decisions with randomly
varied prices and wait times, yielding heterogeneity tests across three bins of the data:

  1. Individual trip features that are correlated with the opportunity cost of time, which in-
     clude purpose of trip, time and day of week of trip, and specific location of trip. Such mone-
     tary values are driven by what activities are crowded out by greater wait times.

  2. Other trip signatures such as weather conditions, the baseline ETA, and who bears the
                                          23
      marginal cost of the trip. In this case, when the cost burden is shared by an employer the
      rider should be more sensitive to temporal changes.

   3. Market variables that are correlated with the opportunity cost of time, which include local
      wages and the available substitutes, such as access to alternative public transportation.
      Such variables affect the nature and shape of the demand curve for time.

    Taken together, data generated across both natural field experiments combine to shed im-
portant insights on factors within each bin. In each bin, a mixture of experimental and non-
experimental variation is utilized, and we take caution in interpreting results based on the
naturally-occurring variation and selection below. The features which define each bin may be
correlated with other features affecting preferences and the circumstance of choice; in Appendix
J we attempt to address this concern in a secondary experiment by reweighting observations
within each bin to balance the distributions of other relevant observable covariates.38

3.3.1 Individual Trip Features

Table 5 summarizes our findings concerning trip and market features.39 Consider first the differ-
ent ways of describing the timing for choices: by day of the week and by an hour of the day. In the
latter case, we also distinguish weekends (Saturday and Sunday) from weekdays. Our reasoning
above yields predictions on how the various situations should affect VOT estimates. More specif-
ically, in the case of distinguishing days of the week we would expect that the opportunity cost of
time is higher during weekdays than on weekends. Our estimates in Table 5 support this conclu-
sion, as weekdays experience ETA elasticities larger than we observe on weekends. And, VOTs
average nearly $20 during the week versus around $18 on the weekend. While these differences
are meaningful, overall they are not consistently different at conventional significance levels.
    Yet, when we consider the time of the day, distinguishing weekdays from weekends, we find
pronounced and statistically significant differences in the VOT estimates at the p < 0.01 level.
These differences mainly arise in the morning and evening commuting rush hour periods for
weekdays (6 to 10 AM and 4 to 7 PM) where we observe larger ETA elasticities (especially in the
mornings) and higher VOTs--averaging above $24--compared to non-commuting time blocks.
For weekends, we observe less variation throughout the day, as we might expect.
    These estimates suggest that when the wait time crowds out work time the ETA elasticity
and the VOT estimates are higher than when it crowds out non-work time. In this manner, the
  38
     We also indirectly examine the impact of reliability by checking the robustness of our results when we include
controls for late arrivals in passengers' previous interactions with the Lyft app in Appendix Section D. Similarly, we
attempt to address the potential bias that may arise from not accounting for the effect of in-vehicle time on passenger
demand in Appendix Section F. Finally, we check the sensitivity of our results to the presence of always- or never-
requesters in our sample in Appendix Section G, and to user selection in Appendix Section I.
  39
     The corresponding full regression tables are C.7 and C.8 in the Appendix.


                                                          24
pattern of results observed in Table 5 are consonant with the notion that individual trip features
predictably affect the relevant primitives in the model.40

3.3.2 Other Trip Characteristics

Table 6 considers other features of the trip that potentially affect the marginal sensitivities to
price and waiting time.41 Our data from this first field experiment allows us to distinguish choices
along the dimension of wait time unpleasantries as well as who bears the burden of the trip. Field
experiment 2 provides the necessary variation to explore how baseline ETA variation impacts
VOT estimates and therefore provides a sense of the curvature of the VOT. We discuss those
results in Section 4.
    The top panel of Table 6 provides our full sample estimates, and as a comparison the middle
panel provides relevant estimates when there is rain, snow, and no precipitation.42 We find that
the trips with adverse weather conditions suggest a clear and discernible impact on the VOT
estimates, suggesting that precipitation makes longer waiting times considerably less desirable.
For instance, in the presence of snow, the ETA elasticity is more than two times higher than
when there is no precipitation. This enhanced time sensitivity leads the VOT estimate to be
nearly 40% higher than no precipitation trips ($26.56 versus $19.04). The effect of rain, while
muted compared to snow, is also significantly larger than when there is no precipitation.
    While both rain and snow cause the ETA elasticities to be higher, and in turn increasing
the VOT estimates, tempering these increases are the price elasticity increases that we observe.
While such increases are indeed small, we expected that as weather conditions worsen consumers
would become less sensitive to price changes. These estimates may reflect that baseline PT is
higher in such cases (15.2% in rain and 20.0% in snow).
    The bottom panel of Table 6 provides insights into how the burden of cost affects the relevant
elasticities. We use information on whether the trip was taken by a business or a non-business
user, and make the assumption that the cost burden is lower for the former either because their
firm pays the expense or if that is not the case at least the expense can be used a tax write-off. In
both cases, the consumer bears less than 100% of the cost of trip burden.
    We find that business users' ETA elasticities and VOTs are different from those of non-business
users in expected ways: non-business users have a price elasticity that is roughly 50% larger (-
0.605 versus -0.399), and a value of time about 25% higher. Inspecting the relevant elasticities,
we note that this difference is driven by business users showing much less sensitivity to price,
presumably reflecting the fact that business users may not themselves bear the full monetary
   40
      In Appendix I, we find that these heterogeneity results are robust to correcting for user selection into different
trip contexts.
   41
      The corresponding full regression tables are C.9 and C.10 in the Appendix.
   42
      We obtain historical realized weather data from Dark Sky at the geohash4-hour level, and match this information
to sessions based on the passenger's geohash4 and the starting hour of the session.

                                                          25
cost of a trip.43

3.3.3 Market Factors

Results on the effects of market factors on the VOT are summarized in Table 7.44 We distinguish
choices by location in three ways: by metro area; by prominent locations within each metro area
(airports and downtown locations); and by distance to the nearest public transport station/stop.45
Point estimates of the VOT vary between metro areas, but we fall short of rejecting the null of
homogeneity across regions (p = 0.154).46 While the estimates for Atlanta, Austin, and Seattle are
distinctive, with the VOT for the first two metro areas smaller than our overall sample estimate,
only the results for Atlanta would be judged as having a marginally significant difference from
the estimate for the rest of the sample. We discuss more of the city-level estimates with respect
to wages in Section 5.1.
    Distinguishing downtown locations, the estimates indicate a greater VOT for downtown lo-
cations compared to non-downtown.47 Trips initiating at airports have numerically larger VOT
estimates, but the small sample size for these cases prevent judgement of statistical significance.
The grouping of trips based on distance to nearest public transit stop yields VOT estimates that
decrease with distance, consistent with available substitute reasoning. However, this category
is also likely to serve as a proxy for non-downtown locations, which have lower VOT estimates.48
In the second experiment below (section 4.2.1), we have random variation in wait time that is
completely orthogonal to the base ETA.


4. Design and Results for Field Experiment 2

4.1 Design of Field Experiment 2

Our analysis of the second natural field experiment has three primary goals: (1) replicate the
main insights gained from the first field experiment on ETA elasticities and various heterogeneity
tests; (2) assess the robustness of the observed heterogeneity to sample reweighting adjustments;
and (3) explore how the base level of wait time affects ETA elasticities and how exogenous changes
  43
     We are unable to assess the robustness of precipitation and business/non-business results to user selection into
contexts because our weather data does not extend far past the beginning of the first experiment and business status
does not vary within user.
  44
     The corresponding full regression tables are C.11, C.12, C.13, and C.14 in the Appendix.
  45
     Public transit stop/station locations are taken from the National Transit Map, and distance is calculated as the
great circle distance between a passenger's location and a stop.
  46
     When considering the marginal demand effects of price and waiting time separately, we do reject the nulls that
time (p = 0.046) and price (p < 0.0001) semi-elasticies are homogeneous across regions.
  47
     Maps of the areas tagged as "downtown" can be found in Figure B.6.
  48
     Results in Appendix I suggest that the distance to transit results are not primarily driven by user selection, while
the downtown/non-downtown and airport/non-airport may be. We are unable to effectively control for selection into
regions due to limited within-user variation in region (only 19% of users have a pre-experiment session in more than
one region. Full tables of regression results are available in Appendix C.

                                                          26
in the length of wait time affect the VOT. That is, by precisely varying wait time at the pickup
location and hour (as opposed to across users in Field Experiment 1), we develop insights into how
the timing of different wait times along with their location affects time elasticities. To do these
chores, we randomized location-hour blocks into one of the following four groups: (1) Control (10%
of the city sample); (2) ETA plus at least 60 seconds (5%); (3) ETA plus at least 150 seconds (3%);
and (4) ETA plus at least 240 seconds (2%). To increase ETAs, we removed the closest drivers
from the dispatch queue until the ETA was increased by at least the treatment amount.
    The experiment took place for eight weeks from April 2017 to June 2017 in Los Angeles, San
Francisco, New York City, Chicago, New Jersey, Boston, Philadelphia, Washington, D.C., Miami,
and Atlanta, involving 3.3 million passengers and 9.7 million sessions (5.9 million of which had
requests for service). The randomization used in this second experiment differs from that of our
first experiment in that treatments were assigned at the pickup location-hour level across the
whole eight-week period. Twenty percent of all location-hour blocks in these cities in this eight
week period were in the experiment.49 Price multipliers were not randomized in this experiment;
consequently, our focus is on waiting time elasticities rather than VOT estimates. Figures 5
and 6 and Table C.32 show that the experimental conditions and the treatment groups have the
expected variation and overall effects on demand.50

4.2 Results of Field Experiment 2

To summarize the insights gained from our second field experiment, we split our results into
two groups. First, we summarize the overall time elasticity estimates from field experiment 2,
and explore how the properties of the situation affect the estimated ETA elasticity. In doing
so, we explore how well results from field experiment 2 map into those from field experiment 1.
Second, we delve into the shape of the estimated time elasticities. Section 5 focuses on the policy
implications of our results from the combination of both field experiments, digging deeper into
the relationship between VOT and local wages as well as exploring how our preferred estimates
relate to preferred VOT values used by policymakers.
  49
     The location unit used for this randomization is a geohash7, which has a width and height of at most 153 meters.
Counts of geohash7s per region can be found in Table C.31. In all the analysis of data from this experiment, standard
errors are clustered at the geohash7-hour level, to match the clustering of the randomization scheme.
  50
     Figures B.12 and B.13 show the timeline of the ETAs and PT respectively over the course of the experiment. It is
clear that both the ETAs and PT remain pretty stable over time apart from the holiday season, especially New Years
Eve where both prices and ETA increase dramatically.




                                                         27
4.2.1 Time elasticities and how they vary: a replication

The first column of Table 8 provides estimates of the time elasticity from field experiment 2. As
shown in the top row of Table 8, the estimated ETA elasticity for the full sample is -0.043.51 This
aggregate estimate is quite close to the ETA elasticity estimate from field experiment 1; indeed,
we fail to reject the homogeneity null at the p < 0.05 level for these two estimates. When we focus
on data drawn from the roughly 200,000 customers who are involved in both field experiments,
the estimates are also statistically indistinguishable: we fail to reject the homogeneity null at the
5% level.52
    The remaining estimates in column 1 of Table 8 explore heterogeneity in ETA elasticities along
days and various times of the week. Concerning such trip features that affect the opportunity
cost of time, we find qualitatively similar patterns in the ETA elasticities as we found in the first
experiment: weekdays have larger time elasticities than weekends, and weekday elasticities are
largest during peak commuting times. Similar to experiment 1, these results show the increased
importance of time when it relates to opportunity cost during commute hours versus other hours.
    Column 2 in Table 8 shows how the ETA elasticities vary with other trip characteristics such
as inclement weather and business users. In this case, we again find that time elasticities are
higher in rainy conditions: -0.047 versus -0.042 when there is no precipitation.53 In this case,
we find that business users exhibit a larger time elasticity than non-business users (-0.049 vs.
-0.043) at the p < 0.01 level, despite facing lower ETAs on average (see Table C.40).
    In column 3 of Table 8, we show how ETA elasticities vary spatially. Consistent with our find-
ings in experiment 1, we find differences across cities in our sample, with New York and Wash-
ington, D.C. having the largest elasticities (-0.086 and -0.054) and Miami and San Francisco
having the lowest elasticities (-0.021 and -0.031). Furthermore, non-downtown sessions have a
larger time elasticity than downtown sessions (-0.048 vs. -0.039) at the p < 0.01 level, though the
average ETA is higher in the non-downtown sessions than the downtown sessions (Table C.42).
    Finally, we again find that distance to public transit matters: the largest ETA elasticities are
observed for passengers more than 800 meters from their nearest public transit stop. This result
runs counter to economic intuition: passengers with better outside transportation options should
respond more elastically to higher waiting times. Distance to transit, however, is correlated with
other relevant characteristics of the trip, such as base ETA (Table C.43). In Appendix J, we
   51
      In these regressions, we include ln(1 + PT) as a control variable for consistency with the model used for the
first experiment, though it is endogenous to the decision to request. Our estimates of time semi-elasticities replace
ETA with an instrument constructed as predictions from a first stage regression including the treatment indicatros
and and fixed effect controls for region, geohash5, local hour of week, local week of year, business user, and decile of
user lifetime rides (see Table C.33). These controls are also included in the second stage equation for Lyft requests.
Consistency of the estimates for our time semi-elasticity relies on the exogenous treatment effects and the common
controls included in both the first and second stage equations. The endogenous price multiplier will not be correlated
with our experimental variation in the ETAs each user faces, and as a result will not affect the consistency of our ETA
semi-elasticity of demand estimate. The ETA treatments do not affect ln(1 + PT), as we show in Table C.34.
   52
      These results can be found in table C.35.
   53
      The second experiment had no sessions for which the reported precipitation type was snow.
                                                          28
adjust for these differences in the distribution of other covariates through sample weighting, and
find that the ETA elasticity is largest for passenger near public transit, as expected from the
theoretical model (Table J.6).54

4.2.2 The shape of time elasticities

An important feature of the second experiment is that we have the ability to observe multiple
levels of experimental ETA increases. As a result, we can estimate the elasticities and VOTs
implied by different increases in the wait times and can gauge the implied nonlinearity in the
relationship, independent of the base wait time.
       To operationalize our approach, we consider that our four levels of ETA in the field experiment
provide the ability to contrast three levels of wait time, each of which may serve as an instrument
to estimate the ETA elasticity of demand at different points of the demand curve. We consider
three sub-samples of our data: all Control and Plus 60 sessions, all Control and Plus 150 ses-
sions, and all Control and Plus 240 sessions. In each sub-sample, we estimate our main demand
equation, using the indicator of treatment (respectively Plus 60, Plus 150, and Plus 240) as a
single instrument for ln(ETA). The resulting coefficient estimate is a weighted average of the
expected derivative of demand with respect to ln(ETA) over the ETAs between the two treatment
levels in the sub-sample (Angrist et al., 2000). We divide this quantity by the average request
rate in the sub-sample to obtain an estimate of the ETA elasticity of demand over the ETAs in
each sub-sample. As ETAs increase from one sub-sample to the next, comparing these elasticities
gives insight into how the ETA elasticity of demand responds to increases in ETA.
       Table 9 and 10 provide empirical results of this analysis. Overall, across every base ETA level
we find that increasing the wait time reduces demand. This finding represents a good rationality
test. In addition, we find that time elasticities are increasing in base ETA: at a one minute base
ETA, the elasticity ranges between -0.005 and -0.018, whereas at a ten minute base ETA the
elasticity ranges between -0.230 and -0.289.
       The interpretation of the elasticity of -0.026 in the first row and third column of 9, for example,
is that toward the lower end of the demand curve with a 3 minute base ETA, a 1% waiting time
increase translates to a 0.026% decrease in the quantity demanded. As we can see in the second
row, a 1% increase in ETA up to the middle portion of the demand curve reduces demand by
0.044%, and the third row shows that a 1% increase in ETA up to the upper end of the demand
curve reduces demand by 0.066%. This pattern suggests that time elasticities increase as we
move further above the base waiting time.
       We find that this result is consistent at all but one base ETA between one and ten minutes;
time elasticities are larger for larger increases (see Table 9). In Table 11, we also find that this
  54
    In experiment 1, we find that correcting for user selection into different distance bins does not significantly affect
our ETA elasticity estimates; see Table I.5.

                                                           29
finding holds across all cities in our sample. We also find that ETA elasticities are increasing
in ETA: (i) in both downtown and non-downtown sessions (Table C.46); (ii) across all days of the
week (Table C.47); and (iii) across all hours of the day (Table C.48 for weekdays and Table C.49
for weekends).
    There could be many mechanisms underlying the observed shape of the estimated time elas-
ticities, but we are unaware of any previous causal evidence that shows the marginal value of time
varies dramatically over base wait time. Nevertheless, one concern in interpreting our analysis on
the shape of the time elasticity is that consumers' responses may reflect a belief that a longer ETA
implies greater congestion, and then erroneously expect that their travel time would be longer
than what was stated on the app. Under this interpretation consumers might be responding to
the changes in the expected ETD in addition to changes in ETA.
    We believe that this interpretation is not supported by the structure of the experiment. First, if
ETA increases by one minute on the app, then the ETD is also updated by one minute, to reflect
the increase in pickup time. Second, it seems unreasonable to expect that consumers believe
the quoted ETA but not the quoted ETD. Third, the consumer might believe that as time moves
further away from the present, predictions become less accurate, and as a result the variance in
ETD increases. We lack the necessary data to seriously investigate such an effect, but leave the
question open for future research.55

5 Issues in identification and external validity of our estimates

We next discuss potential threats to the internal and external validity of our natural field ex-
periments. We focus on functional form assumptions (section 5.1), app competition (section 5.2),
endogenous opening up of the app (section 5.3), experimental contamination (section 5.4), and
external validity of our experimental results (section 5.5).

5.1 Functional form and specification

Our main econometric specification has wait time entering the demand equation in logarithmic
form. This functional form assumption implies diminishing marginal cost of wait time. We assess
the robustness of this assumption in Tables C.23 and C.25 by running our main regressions with
ETA entering in levels, and find slightly larger VOTs (but not at conventional significance levels).
The first experiment involves only a binary ETA treatment which does not precisely pin down an
exact ETA increase (in sparse markets, for example, the treatment may induce larger absolute
ETA increases than in dense markets); as a result, the experimental data provide no empirical
basis for deciding between different functional forms. The second experiment randomizes sessions
  55
     Table F.1 suggests that, in the 2017 experiment, ETA elasticities do not vary with the estimated trip time (pickup
to dropoff), which suggests that the elasticites and VOTs we have estimated capture passengers' responsiveness to
pre-trip waiting time, and not some combination of pre-trip and in-vehicle time.

                                                          30
between multiple levels of ETA increases, which provides some rough insight into the local shape
of the demand curve, but is still insufficient for pinning down the exact functional form.
       Another decision we made is to use a simple linear probability model as opposed to a more so-
phisticated hierarchical model. A potential issue with LPM is that of aggregation. Suppose that
there are two types of consumers, one elastic to price and inelastic to wait time and the other
inelastic to price and elastic to wait time. The average VOT may be underestimated when taking
the ratio of average time and price responsiveness. In Appendix L, we instead use an interacted
model to estimate price and time coefficients for different combinations of session features, com-
pute VOTs within each combination, and then average across the population. The resulting mean
VOT is within two standard errors of our main estimate.56 A more complex random-coefficients
approach would require imposing further structural assumptions on the model that are difficult
to verify.57 One attractive feature of our approach is that we can recover the VOT with the Becker
model and weak complementarity without structural assumptions.

5.2 Competition

Another potential concern is that Lyft had competition in the market during the experiment, so
multi-homing behavior could potentially cause the outside option to be non-static. Importantly,
our randomization is orthogonal to the outside option at that time in which the customer uses
the app. It is unlikely that outside providers would have been able to track and respond to the
random variation induced at the session-level in real time.

5.3 Endogenous opening of the app

Our VOT is estimated only when riders are considering using the service. That is a key feature
of the weak complementarity assumption in the Becker model for estimating a VOT. However,
we do not observe behavior outside of opening and using the app. If users only open Lyft when
particularly in a hurry, then our VOT estimates may tend to overstate the overall average VOT.
       We explored this potential issue with two distinct approaches. First, as a proxy for urgency of
use, we compare VOTs across quartiles of user rides taken in the 28 days before the first experi-
ment in Table C.16. The thought is that those who use the app frequently are using it for reasons
beyond being in a hurry. We find a slight decreasing trend of VOT with respect to prior 28 day
rides. However, the VOT of the most regular users remains only about 20% lower than our main
estimate for the full sample; and this difference is not significant at the 5% level, suggesting that
selective opening of the app does not greatly bias our results. One shortcoming with this first
  56
    These results may be sensitive to the choice of features used to define groups of sessions.
  57
    For example, Buchholz et al. (2020) utilizes a hierarchical model with individual-specific coefficients to estimate
the entire distribution of VOT by assuming (i) a particular parametric form to the distribution of individual-specific
heterogeneity and (ii) that heterogeneity in time and price responses not captured by additive effects for a few locations
and time categories is individual-specific; the full model is then specified by a (relatively) small number of parameters,
which can be estimated by Bayesian or maximum likelihood methods.
                                                           31
approach is that usage could be endogenous to other things that are related to VOT, and so one
would need to randomize urgency, wait time, and price to provide exact insights.
   Our second approach to the endogenous opening of the app is to examine VOT across individ-
ual usage rates. The idea being that those customers who use the Lyft app regularly (e.g., for
daily commute) likely have a stronger preference for Lyft as a means of transport and so do not
simply use it when they are particularly in a rush. Alternatively, those consumers who use it
only a few times per month are primarily using it when they are in a rush. Importantly, we do
not find significant variation in the VOT by lifetime prior rides (see Table C.15 in the Appendix).

5.4 Contamination

When a user decides whether or not to request a ride, their decision affects total supply in the
market, which may in turn influence the request decisions of other users (this is analogous to the
displacement effect found in Crépon et al. (2013)). This channel introduces interaction effects in
the experiment: the outcome of one session can be dependent on the treatment assignments of
other sessions, since those treatment assignments affect the overall available supply pool. While
these interaction effects technically violate the SUTVA assumption, we argue that the violation is
minor and relatively unimportant, because (i) these interaction effects will on average uniformly
affect all sessions in the market, across all treatments and in and out the experiment; (ii) the
closest data available to shed light on the size of these interaction effects (described in Appendix
J) suggests that their magnitude is small (on the order of a few seconds); and (iii) as we argue
in Appendix M, despite this violation of SUTVA, we can still interpret our estimates as weighted
average causal derivatives of demand.

5.5 External validity

Many of the above considerations relate to generalizability, or external validity, of our VOT esti-
mates. As List (2020) notes, "all results are externally valid to some setting, and no result will
be externally valid to all settings." Given that we view our results as speaking to not only tests
of theory, but also to any application that involves time, the populations of people and situations
to which our estimates apply merits serious consideration. In terms of sampled population, one
key feature of our sample is that nearly 60% of individuals in the US have used rideshare, so con-
sumption of the good itself is quite common. And, importantly, as shown in Appendix H, when
we re-weight our user sample to more closely match the characteristics of the US population,
our VOT estimates are not significantly changed. This suggests that the VOT of those customers
who use ridesharing services is not significantly different from those individuals who do not use
ridesharing services.
   A next important consideration is whether there is sufficient similarity in relevant situational
conditions to generalize our results (List, 2020). A first key feature is whether the experiment
                                                32
places the agent on an artificial or natural margin when making key decisions. In this manner, it
would be difficult to find a better setting than the one studied in this paper to estimate the VOT
within the theoretical construct of the classic studies. Indeed, our field experiment leverages
key features of common purchase decisions in any familiar setting that involves price and quality
trade-offs: several alternative choice sets are provided naturally and purchase decisions are made
in a familiar form. In this spirit, such choices would be made whether or not our natural field
experiment was being conducted.58 We view this aspect of our approach as quite attractive.
    A next important consideration is whether our two field experiments present relevant condi-
tions to explore temporal trade-offs that are sufficiently similar to other settings. The richness
of our data provides several variants that speak to very different situations. We have estimated
wait time trade-offs at various opportunity cost levels: when wait times crowd out work time,
leisure time, airport time, and nearly any other moment. Likewise, we have considered how lib-
eral changes in the substitute set affect VOT estimates and how weather and aspects associated
with who pays for lower wait time affects VOT. Where our approach has less coverage revolves
around the circumstances of the wait (standing curbside rather than in gridlock traffic) and for
time-tradeoffs that involve considering the opportunity cost of hours, rather than minutes, of wait
time. We trust that future work in different settings and over different choices can complement
our VOT estimates.


6. Implications for public policy
In this section, we use our VOT estimates to consider their implications for public policy. First,
we offer some comparisons with the city's wage rate to examine whether local wage rates provide
an important correlate with our VOT estimates. Second, we provide examples of how our VOT
estimates impact certain public policy analyses that rely on estimates of the opportunity cost of
time to assess the associated public actions. Third, our estimated price and wait time elasticities
are nicely complemented by contemporaneous work that leverages structural models to estimate
  58
     Importantly, our study does not require selection into surveys or the experiment, unlike several others in the
empirical VOT literature. Our study also does not rely on strong structural assumptions (see above) for identification.




                                                          33
the VOT.59

6.1 The relationship between VOT and wages

Our region-level estimates of the VOT allow a test of how well conventional rules-of-thumb for
approximating VOT hold across different metropolitan areas in the United States. Many of these
rules-of-thumb for the VOT are formulated as percentages of the wage rate. For example, the
USDOT (2015) recommends that the VOT be approximated as 50% of hourly earnings for per-
sonal travel (the same as Small (2013); others, particularly in the recreation demand literature
stemming from early research by Cesario (1976), use 33% of hourly earnings as an approximation
(see Phaneuf and Smith (2005)).
       To assess the relevance of the various approximations, we use the estimates from our first field
experiment across regions in an array of 16 possible rule-of-thumb approximations. The 16 rule-
of-thumb approximations are given for all possible combinations of using the median or mean
wage; using pre- or post-tax earnings; and using 1/3 or less, less than 1/2, greater than 1/2, or
100% or more of the resulting hourly earnings. We use one-sided tests to explore whether the VOT
is below 1/3, below 1/2, above 1/2, and above 100% of earnings, for a total of 16 tests per region.
The tests are all one-sided asymptotic z -tests with level  = 0.05, based on the VOT estimates,
standard errors, and median and mean wages reported for each region in Table C.11.60 For a
robustness check, we explore all 16 approximations with both a log and a linear specification to
estimate the VOT.61 For simplicity, we assume a constant 25% tax rate across all regions for both
median and mean wages.
       Table 12 summarizes our empirical results for the log and linear specifications. Each cell
  59
      Buchholz et al. (2020) identifies 30 locations within Prague and considers ride choices for different days of the
week, time periods during the day, weather conditions, and the location (inside or outside of structure) where choices
are made. The location choice for consumers is based on a random utility specification that assumes price and time
effects have random coefficients with means varying based on the features used to distinguish trips. The random error
in both the price and time coefficients is assumed to reflect individual heterogeneity. A VOT in a location is established
in a second estimation step. The model maintains that the choice to move from one location to another identifies the
difference in the values of time for the origin of the trip compared to other locations. Their estimates for the VOT's
for each location exploit the panel nature of their sample and use the random coefficient component of their model to
construct the data for a linear program that is used to estimate the values of time for classes of individuals in each
location. They rely on a control function strategy to help take account of price endogeneity. Their VOT estimates
display sensitivity to the timing of the time that is similar to our findings, with higher values for peak commuting
times on weekdays. While the absolute magnitudes of their price and time elasticities are about 10 times larger than
our estimates, the relative size of the relevant elasticities are comparable. Moreover, during work times, the value of
time implied by their model is approximately equal to the average wage rate. The second study, due to Castillo (2019),
develops a structural model for the demand, supply, and market matching of Uber rideshare users and suppliers in
Houston. The demand component of the model is estimated with a linear choice model that relies on the location
specific price multipliers together with the rounding of surge adjustments to provide sufficient exogenous variation in
prices and avoid bias in estimating price effects on rideshare choices. This study finds a much greater value of time,
about two dollars a minute. Yet, the qualitative distinctions isolated for weekend and weekdays conform well to our
findings, and the absolute magnitude of the price elasticity is comparable to our estimates.
   60
      We take the median and mean wages as constants for the purposes of the hypothesis testing.
   61
      To recall, the linear specification differs from the log specification because we replace log(ETA) in the first and
second stages (equations (11) and (13)) with the level of ETA in hours. This specification keeps the price (multiplier)
in log, as base prices (which would be necessary for calculating the level of price) are generally unobserved in our data.

                                                           34
records the number of regions (of eight) for which the null hypothesis that the VOT in that region
equals the rule-of-thumb approximation of that cell is rejected at the 5% level. Overall, we find
evidence in favor of rejecting the 1/3 or less earnings rule for most regions, and have the least ev-
idence in favor of rejecting the 1/2 or more pre-tax mean wage and 100% or more post-tax median
wage earnings rules. We do not reject the hypothesis that the VOT is above 1/2 earnings for any
region, but do reject the hypothesis that the VOT is above 100% earnings for some regions when
using the linear specification. We repeat the same exercise using the city VOTs estimated using a
linear functional form for the demand equation, of the same form considered in Section 3.3.2 (see
Table C.25 for the city-level VOTs). The test results are broadly similar between specifications.
Table 13 shows a similar pattern for the pre-tax median and mean wage values, with slightly
more cities with a VOT over 100% of the pre-tax mean wage being rejected.
    We provide an ocular depiction of these results in Figure 7, which plots our point estimates
of the VOTs and their 95% confidence intervals alongside the post-tax mean and median wages
(and the policy-relevant 1/2 and 1/3 of these quantities) for each region. Our region-level esti-
mates also provide insights into the cross-sectional relationship of wages and the estimates for
the opportunity cost of time. Using our log-functional-form estimates, we compute a Spearman
(rank) correlation of 0.73 (p = 0.025) between the mean wage and the value of time estimate across
regions. In Table 14, we apply the log transformation to the mean wage and our VOT estimates
and run OLS and GLS regressions to estimate the cross-sectional elasticity of the VOT with re-
spect to the wage level.62 Our results imply wage elasticities of the VOT of 1.7 and 1.3 with the
OLS and GLS specifications, respectively.
    While these results are particularly striking for the first experiment, results from the second
experiment suggest that these comparisons might underestimate the estimated connection be-
cause there is convexity in the VOT. By combining the multiple levels of ETA increases in the
second experiment with the price variation of the first experiment, we can quantify how the VOT
varies by magnitude of the increase in the waiting time. Specifically, for the five regions which
overlap in the two experiments, we use the first experiment to estimate the average price and
price (semi-) elasticity of demand, and the second experiment to estimate the average ETAs and
ETA (semi-) elasticities of demand between each of the four treatment levels. We then combine
these results to estimate the VOT between each of the four experimental ETA levels of the second
experiment. To ensure that our price and time elasticity estimates are comparable yet inde-
pendent, we subset both experiments to observations from the five overlapping regions, remove
airport sessions from the first data, and remove from the first experiment observations from any
users who appear in the second experiment.
    Table C.50 provides the results of this analysis. Here, low, medium, and high refer to estimates
   62
      The GLS specification uses as the weighting matrix the inverse of the estimated covariance matrix of the vector
of log VOT estimates across regions, which is derived from the estimated covariance matrix of the vector of price and
time semi-elasticities across regions using the delta method.

                                                         35
derived from contrasting Control and Plus 60 treatments, Control and Plus 150 treatments, and
Control and Plus 240 treatments, respectively. We note that for the full sample and each indi-
vidual region, the estimated VOT is highest when using the largest ETA treatment level as an
instrument, supporting the conclusion that the value of a marginal minute is increasing as more
minutes are added to the base wait time. Figure 8 provides a visual for these results, and plots
them against the mean after-tax wages of the regions. The figure shows that the shape of the
VOT elasticity over the changes in wait time impact whether the VOT is less than or equal to the
after-tax wage rate in each city.

6.2 The impact of our VOT on public policies

As aforementioned, the VOT is an important input into many policy decisions. For example,
transportation projects often have benefits that largely derive from the time savings associated
with new or improved infrastructure, and similarly, the design of optimal road pricing depends
crucially on a measure of travelers' VOTs. Policymakers often use cost-benefit analyses (CBAs) as
a part of the information considered in prioritizing projects.63 Many such analyses have embedded
assumptions underlying the benefit (or the cost) estimates that rely on the types of proxy methods
we reviewed earlier
       Most cost-benefit analyses use the recommendations put forth by the Department of Trans-
portation (DoT) in 1997, which was later revised in 2014. Both DoT reports tether the VOT to
the median (or mean) wage in an area. While the recommendations allude to the complex set
of factors that likely affect values of travel time across various contexts (e.g., comfort of trans-
portation, reliability, magnitude of time change, etc.), there did not exist sufficient reliable data
to incorporate these considerations more concretely into the estimated VOT. The reports recom-
mend the VOT be set according to the trip purpose and typical wage rate: the median (or mean)
wage should be used for business travel (i.e., on the clock) and half the median (or mean) wage
should be used for personal travel.
       Some of our analysis is consistent with the rule-of-thumb approach in the DoT reports: we
find that the mean values of time are indeed correlated with the mean/median wage rates of
various geographical regions, with an elasticity near 1. We also find that values of time are
closer to the full mean/median wage rates during typical work commuting hours than at other
times, consistent with the idea that travel related to work should be valued at a rate closer to the
full hourly wage rate.
       Our results, however, have the distinct advantage of being estimated with data that are ex-
ceptionally rich in source time variation, granularity, and breadth. As such, we are able to more
directly address heterogeneity in VOT that has been posited but not empirically verified. In par-
  63
    Executive Orders beginning with EO12291 first issued in 1981 require cost-benefit analyses for major new rules.
In addition agencies now routinely use CBA as part of the resource allocation and decision-making process.

                                                        36
ticular, we find that the VOT is generally higher than 50% of the median/mean wage across most
cities, and there is strong evidence of substantial heterogeneity by context (e.g. time of day, day
of week, within-city downtown vs non-downtown areas). Our specific recommendations to policy-
makers are thus two-fold:

  1. When feasible, account for the great deal of VOT heterogeneity with respect to cities, days
     of week, and times of day.

  2. If data are unavailable or unreliable, adjust the mean VOT estimates up to 75% of the after-
     tax median/mean wage rate.

   To demonstrate the potential relevance of our suggestions, we revisited a set of cost-benefit
analyses from 1998­2017 that used a VOT for cities that were included in our experiment. We
calculated how total costs, total benefits, and cost-benefit ratios change as we use (1) our region-
specific empirical point estimates and (2) 75% of median/mean wage adjustment for value of time.
We report the differences in Table C.51.
   In each case, we find that the estimates used in the reports are lower than our region-specific
estimates, so the total benefit (and thus benefit-cost ratio) tends to increase, by values rang-
ing from 2% to 52%. While the qualitative result does not change for the cost-benefit analyses
we examined (benefit-cost ratios are above 1 for all cases, both pre- and post-adjustments), it is
still apparent from this exercise that a more directly measured, empirically-based VOT can sub-
stantially affect the relative benefits and costs of important projects compared to DOT's rule-of-
thumb estimate. Indeed, our estimates are large enough to suggest that there was an important
lot of projects that were not undertaken that would have provided substantial net benefits. Such
"missed" projects are those tilted towards ones that have significant time savings, suggesting that
current mis-measurement of temporal values yields under-investment in time-saving projects.
   We also compute benefit-cost ratios following the simpler rule using 75% of mean/median wage
(adjusted from the 50% of mean/median wage recommended by DOT). Among this set of cost-
benefit analyses, this adjustment tends to yield values of time and measures of benefit that are
usually close to but sometimes higher than the region-specific empirical point estimates. We view
our estimates--based on exogenous price and time variation and rich, granular observations--
have the potential to more efficiently allocate of resources and encourage technologies that induce
more time savings for individuals.


7. Conclusion
Having gotten this far in our study you have surely invested a fair amount of time. We hope that
such time was indeed an investment, and not ill-spent. This is because time is the ultimate scarce
resource, and its value has deep implications for a range of economic phenomena and investment
                                                37
decisions. Our starting point is a literature from the 1960s that had deep implications for our
understanding of the family, the household, and time allocation more generally. We leverage in-
sights from these classic time allocation theories to provide a theoretically-consistent but updated
approach to estimate the VOT. The theory carefully directs two large-scale natural field exper-
iments on the Lyft platform to estimate the causal effects of wait time and price on ride-share
demand.
   We report several interesting insights. First, we estimate a VOT that is roughly $19 per hour
(2015 prices). This estimate is 75-80% of the mean wage rate for the various regions in our
experiment, which is quantitatively different from the findings of previous empirical studies on
the VOT (Small et al., 2007) and is greater than the existing US policy guidelines on the VOT
(USDOT, 2015). Second, we document that, consistent with standard microeconomic models
(Becker, 1965; DeSerpa, 1971), the VOT is related to the opportunity cost of time, the available
substitute set, and other key features of the trip that impact marginal benefits and marginal
costs. Third, taken in aggregate, our research has key implications for policy. Specifically, we
recommend that policymakers: (i) account for the great deal of VOT heterogeneity with respect
to cities, locations within cities, day of week, and time of day; and (ii) adjust the rule-of-thumb
VOT estimates up to 75% of the after-tax mean wage rate otherwise.
   We view our VOT estimates as not only adding unique measures to a rich literature, but
also providing a key link to the classic time allocation literature. Important areas where this
research agenda goes from here can be found in caveats to our research. First, we do not examine
the value of reliability in passenger travel or through using ridesharing companies, such as Lyft.
We acknowledge that this value could be important and separate from the VOT, but is beyond the
scope of this paper. Future studies should consider the value of reliability--the extent to which
waiting times vary about their mean--simultaneously with the VOT. On a rideshare platform,
one possible approach would be to run a multi-modal waiting time and price experiment, and
to model the passenger's choice of not only whether to take a ride, but also of which ride mode
(e.g., Classic or Shared) to take. Shared ride modes typically have more variable waiting times
(today quoted as a range on the Lyft app), so such a cross-mode comparison might shed light on
the value of reliability. Second, we focus on passenger travel in our data and ignore the VOT for
rail, air, and freight travel. Combining the various travel modes and exploring their interplay is
an ambitious research agenda that promises to lend deep positive and normative insights.


References
Aguiar, M., M. Bils, K. K. Charles, and E. Hurst (2017). Leisure luxuries and the labor supply of
  young men. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.



                                                38
Aguiar, M. and E. Hurst (2007a). Life-cycle prices and production. American Economic Re-
  view 97 (5), 1533­1559.
Aguiar, M. and E. Hurst (2007b). Measuring trends in leisure: The allocation of time over five
  decades. Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(3), 969­1006.
Aguiar, M. and E. Hurst (2016). The macroeconomics of time allocation. In Handbook of Macroe-
  conomics, Volume 2, pp. 203­253. Elsevier.
Aguiar, M., E. Hurst, and L. Karabarbounis (2013). Time use during the great recession. Amer-
  ican Economic Review 103(5), 1664­96.
Allcott, H., L. Braghieri, S. Eichmeyer, and M. Gentzkow (2019). The welfare effects of social
  media. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Anderson, M. L. (2014). Subways, strikes, and slowdowns: The impacts of public transit on traffic
  congestion. American Economic Review 104(9), 2763­96.
Angrist, J. D., K. Graddy, and G. W. Imbens (2000). The interpretation of instrumental variables
  estimators in simultaneous equations models with an application to the demand for fish. The
  Review of Economic Studies 67 (3), 499­527.
Arnott, R., A. De Palma, and R. Lindsey (1993). A structural model of peak-period congestion: A
  traffic bottleneck with elastic demand. American Economic Review, 161­179.
Basso, L. J. and H. E. Silva (2014). Efficiency and substitutability of transit subsidies and other
  urban transport policies. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 6(4), 1­33.
Bastiat, F. (1848). Propriété et loi, Justice et fraternité. Paris.
Baum, C. F., M. E. Schaffer, and S. Stillman (2003). Instrumental variables and GMM: Estimation
  and testing. The Stata Journal 3(1), 1­31.
Becker, G. S. (1965). A theory of the allocation of time. Economic Journal, 493­517.
Benhabib, J., R. Rogerson, and R. Wright (1991). Homework in macroeconomics: Household
  production and aggregate fluctuations. Journal of Political Economy 99(6), 1166­1187.
Bento, A., K. Roth, and A. Waxman (2017). Avoiding traffic congestion externalities? the value
  of urgency. Technical report, Technical Report, Working Paper.
Besley, T., J. Hall, and I. Preston (1999). The demand for private health insurance: do waiting
  lists matter? Journal of Public Economics 72(2), 155­181.
Browning, M., T. Crossley, and J. K. Winter (2014, April). The measurement of household con-
  sumption expenditures. IFS Working Papers W14/07, Institute for Fiscal Studies.
Buchholz, N., L. Doval, J. Kastl, F. Matjka, and T. Salz (2020). The value of time: Evidence from
  auctioned cab rides. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Cameron, C. A. and D. L. Miller (2015). A practitioner's guide to cluster-robust inference. Journal
  of Human Resources 50(2), 317­372.
Castillo, J. C. (2019). Who benefits from surge pricing? Available at SSRN 3245533.
Cesario, F. J. (1976). Value of time in recreation benefit studies. Land Economics 52(1), 32­41.

                                                   39
Chen, Y., G. Y. Jeon, and Y.-M. Kim (2014). A day without a search engine: an experimental
  study of online and offline searches. Experimental Economics 17 (4), 512­536.
Chen, Y. and A. Whalley (2012). Green infrastructure: The effects of urban rail transit on air
  quality. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4(1), 58­97.
Cohen, P., R. Hahn, J. Hall, S. Levitt, and R. Metcalfe (2016). Using big data to estimate consumer
  surplus: The case of Uber. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Couture, V., G. Duranton, and M. A. Turner (2018). Speed. Review of Economics and Statis-
  tics 100(4), 725­739.
Crépon, B., E. Duflo, M. Gurgand, R. Rathelot, and P. Zamora (2013). Do labor market poli-
  cies have displacement effects? evidence from a clustered randomized experiment. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 128(2), 531­580.
Davidson, R., J. G. MacKinnon, et al. (2004). Econometric theory and methods, Volume 5. Oxford
  University Press New York.
Deacon, R. T. and J. Sonstelie (1985). Rationing by waiting and the value of time: Results from
  a natural experiment. Journal of Political Economy 93(4), 627­647.
DellaVigna, S., J. A. List, and U. Malmendier (2012). Testing for Altruism and Social Pressure
  in Charitable Giving. Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (1), 1­56.
DeSerpa, A. C. (1971). A theory of the economics of time. Economic Journal 81(324), 828­846.
Duranton, G. and M. A. Turner (2011). The fundamental law of road congestion: Evidence from
  u.s. cities. American Economic Review 101(6), 2616­52.
Efron, B. and R. J. Tibshirani (1994). An introduction to the bootstrap. CRC press.
Finkelstein, A. (2009). E-z tax: Tax salience and tax rates. Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(3),
  969­1010.
Gelber, A. M. and J. W. Mitchell (2012). Taxes and time allocation: Evidence from single women
  and men. Review of Economic Studies 79(3), 863­897.
Ghez, G., G. S. Becker, et al. (1975). The allocation of time and goods over the life cycle. NBER
  Books.
Goldin, C. (2014).   A grand gender convergence: Its last chapter.       American Economic Re-
  view 104(4), 1091­1119.
Goolsbee, A. and P. J. Klenow (2006). Valuing consumer products by the time spent using them:
  An application to the internet. American Economic Review 96(2), 108­113.
Green, D. I. (1894). Pain-cost and opportunity-cost. Quarterly Journal of Economics 8(2), 218­
  229.
Greenwood, J., N. Guner, and G. Vandenbroucke (2017). Family economics writ large. Journal of
  Economic Literature 55(4), 1346­1434.
Gronau, R. (1973). The intrafamily allocation of time: The value of the housewives' time. Ameri-
  can Economic Review 63(4), 634­651.

                                                40
Hall, J. D. (2020). Can tolling help everyone? estimating the aggregate and distributional conse-
  quences of congestion pricing. Journal of the European Economic Association.
Harrison, G. W. and J. A. List (2004). Field experiments. Journal of Economic Literature 42(4),
  1009­1055.
Johnson, M. B. (1966). Travel time and the price of leisure. Economic Inquiry 4(2), 135.
Juster, F. T. and F. P. Stafford (1991). The allocation of time: Empirical findings, behavioral
  models, and problems of measurement. Journal of Economic Literature 29(2), 471­522.
Kleibergen, F. and R. Paap (2006). Generalized reduced rank tests using the singular value
  decomposition. Journal of Econometrics 133(1), 97 ­ 126.
Kreindler, G. E. and Y. Miyauchi (2019). Measuring commuting and economic activity inside
  cities with cell phone records.
Krueger, A. B., D. Kahneman, D. Schkade, N. Schwarz, and A. A. Stone (2009). National time
  accounting: The currency of life. In Measuring the subjective well-being of nations: National
  accounts of time use and well-being, pp. 9­86. University of Chicago Press.
List, J. A. (2020). Non est disputandum de generalizability? a glimpse into the external validity
  trial. Technical report, Working paper.
Mäler, K.-G. (1971). A Method of Estimating Social Benefits from Pollution Control, pp. 106­118.
  London: Palgrave Macmillan UK.
Mäler, K.-G. (1974). Environmental Economics: A Theoretical Inquiry. Johns Hopkins Press.
Mas, A. and A. Pallais (2017). Valuing alternative work arrangements. American Economic
  Review 107 (12), 3722­59.
Mas, A. and A. Pallais (2019). Labor supply and the value of non-work time: Experimental
  estimates from the field. American Economic Review: Insights 1(1), 111­26.
McFadden, D. (1974).      The measurement of urban travel demand.        Journal of Public Eco-
  nomics 3(4), 303­328.
Mill, J. S. (1848). Principles of Political Economy. John W. Parker.
Miller, G. and B. P. Urdinola (2010). Cyclicality, mortality, and the value of time: The case of
  coffee price fluctuations and child survival in colombia. Journal of Political Economy 118(1),
  113­155.
Nevo, A. and A. Wong (2015). The elasticity of substitution between time and market goods:
  Evidence from the great recession. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Nordhaus, W. (2009). Measuring real income with leisure and household production. In Mea-
  suring the subjective well-being of nations: National accounts of time use and well-being, pp.
  125­144. University of Chicago Press.
Parry, I. W. and K. A. Small (2009). Should urban transit subsidies be reduced?        American
  Economic Review 99(3), 700­724.


                                               41
Phaneuf, D. J. and V. K. Smith (2005). Recreation demand models. Handbook of Environmental
  Economics 2, 671­761.
Philipson, T. J., G. Becker, D. Goldman, and K. M. Murphy (2010). Terminal care and the value
  of life near its end. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Ramey, V. A. and N. Francis (2009). A century of work and leisure. American Economic Journal:
  Macroeconomics 1(2), 189­224.
Robinson, J. P. and G. Godbey (1999). Time for life: The surprising ways americans use their
  time. 2nd.
Schrank, D., B. Eisele, and T. Lomax (2012). Tti 2012 urban mobility report. Texas A&M Trans-
  portation Institute. The Texas A&M University System 4.
Small, K. (2013). Urban Transportation Economics. Taylor & Francis.
Small, K. A., E. T. Verhoef, and R. Lindsey (2007). The economics of urban transportation. Rout-
  ledge.
Small, K. A., C. Winston, and J. Yan (2005). Uncovering the distribution of motorists' preferences
  for travel time and reliability. Econometrica 73(4), 1367­1382.
Smith, V. and S. Banzhaf (2007). Quality adjusted price indexes and the willig condition. Eco-
  nomics Letters 94(1), 43­48.
Smith, V. K. and C. Mansfield (1998). Buying time: Real and hypothetical offers. Journal of
  Environmental Economics and Management 36(3), 209­224.
Su, Y. (2018). The rising value of time and the origin of urban gentrification.
Sunstein, C. R. (2018). Sludge and ordeals. Duke Law Journal 68, 1843.
USDOT (2015). Revised departmental guidance on valuation of travel time in economic analysis.
  US Department of Transportation. Washington, DC.
Van Ommeren, J. and M. Fosgerau (2009). Workers' marginal costs of commuting. Journal of
  Urban Economics 65(1), 38­47.
von Wieser, F. (1876). Über das verhältnis der kosten zum wert (on the relation of cost to value).
  Technical report, Gesammelte Abhandlungen, pp. 377-404.
Wheaton, W. C. (1977). Income and urban residence: An analysis of consumer demand for loca-
  tion. American Economic Review 67 (4), 620­631.




                                                42
   Figures




Figure 1
Screenshots of the passenger Lyft app's user interface, at the time of the experiment. Left: no
destination entered and no Prime Time active. Middle: destination entered and no Prime Time
active. Right: destination entered and +25% Prime Time active.




                                              43
                                                                   Normal ETA High Price
          0.25                                                     Control
                                                                   Normal ETA Low Price
          0.20
Density 0.15

          0.10
          0.05
          0.00
             0.0     2.5       5.0      7.5       10.0      12.5    15.0     17.5      20.0
                                              ETA (minutes)
          0.20                                                     High ETA High Price
                                                                   High ETA Normal Price
          0.15                                                     High ETA Low Price

Density
          0.10

          0.05

          0.00
             0.0     2.5       5.0      7.5       10.0      12.5    15.0     17.5      20.0
                                              ETA (minutes)
                                          Figure 2
                   Distribution of ETAs across sessions in each exp group.




                                              44
          0.10
                                                                      High ETA Low Price
          0.08                                                        Normal ETA Low Price

          0.06
Density
          0.04

          0.02

                 0          50          100         150        200           250       300
                                                   PT (%)
          0.10
                                                                      High ETA Normal Price
          0.08                                                        Control

          0.06
Density
          0.04

          0.02

                 0          50          100         150        200           250       300
                                                   PT (%)
          0.10
                                                                      High ETA High Price
          0.08                                                        Normal ETA High Price

          0.06
Density
          0.04

          0.02

                 0          50          100         150        200           250       300
                                                   PT (%)
                                           Figure 3
                     Distribution of PT across sessions in each exp group.



                                              45
                      0.64

                      0.63

                      0.62
        Average
      Request Rate 0.61

                      0.60

                      0.59

                      0.58   Normal ETA   Control   Normal ETA High ETA High ETA High ETA
                              Low Price             High Price Low Price Normal Price High Price
                                                       Treatment Group
Figure 4
Average request rates across the six experimental groups. Error bars are 95% confidence inter-
vals based on user-level clustered standard errors.




               0.25                                                                     Control
                                                                                        Plus 60+
                                                                                        Plus 150+
               0.20                                                                     Plus 240+

               0.15
     Density

               0.10


               0.05


               0.000                5               10                   15       20                25
                                                         ETA (minutes)
                                                Figure 5
                       Distribution of ETAs across treatments in experiment two.



                                                     46
             0.62


             0.61

  Average
Request Rate 0.60


             0.59


             0.58

                       Control         Plus 60+           Plus 150+   Plus 240+
                                             Treatment Variant
                                      Figure 6
             Average demand across the four treatments in experiment two.




                                          47
40                            VOT                          1/3 Post-tax Mean Wage
                              Post-tax Mean Wage           95% C.I. for VOT
35                            1/2 Post-tax Mean Wage
30
25
20
15
10
5

     Austin      San Los Angeles Miami   Boston Seattle San Diego Atlanta New York
              Francisco                                                     City



40                         VOT                           1/3 Post-tax Median Wage
                           Post-tax Median Wage          95% C.I. for VOT
35                         1/2 Post-tax Median Wage
30
25
20
15
10
5

     Austin      San Los Angeles Miami   Boston Seattle San Diego Atlanta New York
              Francisco                                                     City

                               Figure 7
        Estimated VOTs vs. mean and median wages for each region.




                                         48
   All Six Regions


          Atlanta


           Boston


      Los Angeles


           Miami


    New York City


    San Francisco
                         VOT (low)                 95% C.I. for VOT (low)
                         VOT (medium)              95% C.I. for VOT (medium)
                         VOT (high)                95% C.I. for VOT (high)
                         Post-tax Mean Wage
                     0            10           20          30            40
                                                $/hour

                              Figure 8
Values of time estimated by three different treatment level contrasts.




                                          49
                                                Table 1
                       Distribution of users across the six experimental groups.

                                         Low Price        Normal Price      High Price
                     Normal ETA             5%             15% (control)       5%
                      High ETA              5%                 5%              2%
                    Notes: The remaining 63% of users were excluded from the experiment.


                                             Table 2
                      Average session ETA and Prime Time by treatment group.

                                      Avg. ETA            Avg. PT       Avg. Completed      Number of
                                      (minutes)             (%)          Ride Price ($)      sessions
Control                             3.082 (0.004)      10.014 (0.032)      13.835 (0.022)   2,123,671
Normal ETA High Price               3.103 (0.008)      16.362 (0.072)      14.204 (0.041)    689,325
Normal ETA Low Price                3.085 (0.008)       3.646 (0.024)      13.544 (0.037)    722,367
High ETA Low Price                  4.640 (0.011)       3.647 (0.025)      13.529 (0.038)    693,141
High ETA Normal Price               4.649 (0.011)      10.136 (0.055)      13.788 (0.039)    683,159
High ETA High Price                 4.661 (0.017)      16.271 (0.112)      14.062 (0.064)    265,695
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the user level.




                                                        50
                                          Table 3
                    First-stage regression results for full data sample.

                                                  ln(ETA)     ln(1 + PT)      ln(ETA)      ln(1 + PT)
 High ETA High Price                              0.474 
                                                               0.049  
                                                                              0.480 
                                                                                            0.049
                                                   (0.004)      (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)
 High ETA Normal Price                            0.473         0.001         0.479          0.001
                                                   (0.003)      (0.000)        (0.001)        (0.000)
 High ETA Low Price                               0.472        -0.041         0.479         -0.042
                                                   (0.003)      (0.000)        (0.001)        (0.000)
 Normal ETA High Price                              0.004      0.050            0.001        0.050
                                                   (0.003)      (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.000)
 Normal ETA Low Price                               0.001      -0.041           0.001       -0.041
                                                   (0.003)      (0.000)        (0.001)        (0.000)
 Controls                                                                        x           x
 N                                                5177358     5177358        5177358     5177358
 R2                                                 0.101       0.026          0.534       0.212
 F                                                13646       12784          116249      20455
 Kleibergen and Paap (2006) rk-statistic                 40175                      48791
 Notes:  p < 0.01,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.1. Clustered standard errors in parentheses. Independent vari-
ables are indicators for each treatment group. Controls include dummy variables for week of year,
hour of week, user geohash5, business, airport, and decile of pre-experiment lifetime rides. F statis-
tics are scaled cluster-robust Wald statistics of the null that the coefficients on the treatment indica-
tors are identically 0. Kleibergen and Paap (2006) statistics test underidentification of both endoge-
nous regressors, and follow a 2 (df = (5 - 1)(2 - 1)) distribution under the null.




                                                   51
                       Table 4
 Second-stage regression results for full data sample.

                                      (1)                 (2)
ln(ETA)                          -0.0231             -0.0264
                                  (0.0023)            (0.0018)
ln(1 + PT)                       -0.3601             -0.3665
                                  (0.0165)            (0.0132)
ETA Elasticity                   -0.0374             -0.0427
                                  (0.0025)            (0.0029)
PT Elasticity                    -0.5838             -0.5942
                                  (0.0213)            (0.0213)
VOT                               17.27                19.38
                                   (1.77)               (1.39)
Control Avg. ETA                     3.08               3.08
Control Avg. Price                   13.83              13.83
Control Request Rate                 0.620              0.620
Controls                                                  x
N                                 5177358              5177358
R2                                -0.008                0.072
 Notes:  p < 0.01,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.1. Clustered standard er-
rors in parentheses. ln(ETA) and ln(1 + PT) instrumented by ex-
perimental group indicators. Value of time expressed in 2015 US
dollars per hour. Controls include dummy variables for session geo-
hash5, local hour of week and week of year, decile of user lifetime
rides, whether the session is at and airport, and whether the user
is a business user.




                                52
                                Table 5
Summary of Elasticity and VOT Results: Features Affecting Opportunity Cost

           Sub-sample                 ETA Elasticity   PT Elasticity    VOT
           Full Sample                  -0.043          -0.594         19.38
                                         (0.003)         (0.021)        (1.39)
           Day of Week
              Monday                    -0.048          -0.627         20.08
                                         (0.005)         (0.046)        (2.47)
               Tuesday                  -0.046          -0.676         17.95
                                         (0.005)         (0.049)        (2.22)
               Wednesday                -0.046          -0.653         19.34
                                         (0.005)         (0.048)        (2.38)
               Thursday                 -0.041          -0.585         19.44
                                         (0.005)         (0.035)        (2.41)
               Friday                   -0.039          -0.473         21.26
                                         (0.005)         (0.023)        (2.45)
               Saturday                 -0.039          -0.596         18.74
                                         (0.004)         (0.031)        (2.04)
               Sunday                   -0.040          -0.640         17.12
                                         (0.005)         (0.030)        (2.01)
           Time of Day (Weekends)
              6­10 AM                   -0.056          -0.687         17.40
                                         (0.011)         (0.081)        (3.80)
               10 AM­4 PM               -0.053          -0.727         18.92
                                         (0.007)         (0.047)        (2.49)
               4 PM­7 PM                -0.048          -0.616         20.16
                                         (0.007)         (0.039)        (2.92)
               7 PM­11 PM               -0.033          -0.669         15.04
                                         (0.006)         (0.062)        (2.87)
               11 PM­6 AM               -0.023          -0.500         14.71
                                         (0.005)         (0.028)        (3.12)
           Time of Day (Weekdays)
              6­10 AM                   -0.068          -0.594         26.71
                                         (0.006)         (0.034)        (2.50)
               10 AM­4 PM               -0.047          -0.704         18.76
                                         (0.006)         (0.061)        (2.64)
               4 PM­7 PM                -0.046          -0.522         22.12
                                         (0.005)         (0.034)        (2.70)
               7 PM­11 PM               -0.024          -0.540         13.62
                                         (0.005)         (0.041)        (2.59)
               11 PM­6 AM               -0.040          -0.539         19.03
                                         (0.006)         (0.031)        (2.66)
           Notes:  p < 0.01,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.1. Clustered standard errors in
          parentheses. Controls include local week of year, local hour of week,
          user geohash5, business user, airport, and decile of pre-experiment
          lifetime rides.




                                           53
                            Table 6
Summary of Elasticity and VOT Results: Other Trip Characteristics

         Sub-sample          ETA Elasticity   PT Elasticity    VOT
         Full Sample           -0.043          -0.594         19.38
                                (0.003)         (0.021)        (1.39)
         Precipitation
            None               -0.042          -0.597         19.04
                                (0.003)         (0.024)        (1.50)
             Rain              -0.051          -0.560         23.10
                                (0.005)         (0.026)        (2.26)
             Snow              -0.103          -0.711         26.56
                                (0.029)         (0.119)        (7.83)
         User Type
            Business           -0.033          -0.399         24.42
                                (0.014)         (0.073)        (10.55)
             Non-Business      -0.043          -0.605         19.22
                                (0.003)         (0.022)         (1.39)
         Notes:  p < 0.01,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.1. Clustered standard
        errors in parentheses. Controls include local week of year, lo-
        cal hour of week, user geohash5, business user, and decile of
        pre-experiment lifetime rides.




                                      54
                           Table 7
    Summary of Elasticity and VOT Results: Market Factors

 Sub-sample                            ETA Elasticity   PT Elasticity    VOT
 Full Sample                             -0.043          -0.594         19.38
                                          (0.003)         (0.021)        (1.39)
 Region
    Austin                               -0.028          -0.709         11.37
                                          (0.012)         (0.161)        (4.76)
     San Francisco                       -0.026          -0.413         21.08
                                          (0.005)         (0.026)        (3.79)
     Los Angeles                         -0.040          -0.522         19.52
                                          (0.006)         (0.071)        (3.91)
     Miami                               -0.052          -0.595         16.36
                                          (0.010)         (0.103)        (3.95)
     Boston                              -0.074          -0.670         23.37
                                          (0.011)         (0.072)        (3.79)
     Seattle                             -0.053          -0.516         27.08
                                          (0.011)         (0.077)        (6.38)
     San Diego                           -0.044          -0.723         14.80
                                          (0.011)         (0.152)        (4.34)
     Atlanta                             -0.056          -0.825         11.24
                                          (0.017)         (0.256)        (4.40)
     New York City                       -0.056          -0.956         23.85
                                          (0.009)         (0.046)        (3.81)
 Location Type
    Airport                               -0.024         -0.553           27.55
                                          (0.015)         (0.153)        (18.02)
     Non-Airport                         -0.043          -0.595         18.84
                                          (0.003)         (0.021)         (1.35)
     Downtown                            -0.034          -0.524         21.64
                                          (0.003)         (0.019)         (1.99)
     Non-Downtown                        -0.060          -0.762         17.88
                                          (0.005)         (0.058)         (1.97)
 Distance to Nearest Public Transit
     Under 50 Meters                     -0.039          -0.495         23.81
                                          (0.004)         (0.026)        (2.56)
     50 to 200 Meters                    -0.040          -0.528         20.81
                                          (0.003)         (0.024)        (1.91)
     200 to 800 Meters                   -0.051          -0.802         16.90
                                          (0.006)         (0.049)        (2.03)
     Over 800 Meters                     -0.058          -1.162         10.88
                                          (0.014)         (0.161)        (2.82)
 Notes:  p < 0.01,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.1. Clustered standard errors in paren-
theses. Controls include local week of year, local hour of week, user geohash5,
business user, and decile of pre-experiment lifetime rides.




                                      55
                                             Table 8
                  Summary of Elasticity Results: Heterogeneity (2017 Experiment)

 Time of Week                  (1)     Trip Characteristics      (2)     Location                        (3)
 Full Sample               -0.043      Full Sample            -0.043     Full Sample                  -0.043
                             (0.001)                           (0.001)                                 (0.001)

 Day of Week                           Precipitation                     Region
    Monday                 -0.044         None                -0.042        San Francisco             -0.031
                            (0.002)                            (0.001)                                 (0.001)
     Tuesday               -0.047          Rain               -0.047         New York City            -0.086
                            (0.002)                            (0.002)                                 (0.002)
     Wednesday             -0.044                                            Chicago                  -0.039
                            (0.002)    User Type                                                       (0.002)
     Thursday              -0.047         Business            -0.049         Washington, D.C.         -0.054
                            (0.002)                            (0.002)                                 (0.002)
     Friday                -0.042          Non-Business       -0.043         Miami                    -0.021
                            (0.002)                            (0.001)                                 (0.002)
     Saturday              -0.039                                            New Jersey               -0.053
                            (0.002)                                                                    (0.004)
     Sunday                -0.040                                            Boston                   -0.055
                            (0.002)                                                                    (0.003)
                                                                             Philadelphia             -0.040
 Time of Day (Weekends)                                                                                (0.003)
    6­10 AM                -0.060                                            Atlanta                  -0.037
                            (0.004)                                                                    (0.004)
     10 AM­4 PM            -0.048                                            Los Angeles              -0.033
                            (0.003)                                                                    (0.002)
     4 PM­7 PM             -0.044
                            (0.003)                                      Location Type
     7 PM­11 PM            -0.033                                           Downtown                  -0.039
                            (0.003)                                                                    (0.001)
     11 PM­6 AM            -0.026                                            Non-Downtown             -0.048
                            (0.002)                                                                    (0.001)

 Time of Day (Weekdays)                                                  Distance to Public Transit
    6­10 AM                -0.061                                            Under 50 Meters          -0.042
                            (0.002)                                                                    (0.001)
     10 AM­4 PM            -0.041                                            50 to 200 Meters         -0.038
                            (0.002)                                                                    (0.001)
     4 PM­7 PM             -0.052                                            200 to 800 Meters        -0.049
                            (0.002)                                                                    (0.002)
     7 PM­11 PM            -0.035                                            Over 800 Meters          -0.084
                            (0.002)                                                                    (0.004)
     11 PM­6 AM            -0.037
                            (0.002)
Notes:  p < 0.01,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.1. Clustered standard errors in parentheses. Controls include local week of
year, local hour of week, user geohash5, business user, and decile of pre-experiment lifetime rides.




                                                       56
Table 9
Time elasiticities estimated by three different levels of treatment contrasts, across different base
ETA levels (minutes) (2017 experiment).

                            1          2            3         4            5           6           7           8            9          10
Control -- Plus 60     -0.005      -0.014     -0.026      -0.058     -0.087        -0.124       -0.142
                                                                                             -0.230       -0.188         -0.208
                     (0.001) (0.002) (0.002) (0.003) (0.003) (0.004) (0.005) (0.005) (0.006)  (0.007)
Control -- Plus 150 -0.008 -0.025 -0.044 -0.063 -0.103 -0.118 -0.166 -0.182 -0.203 -0.289
                     (0.001) (0.001) (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.003) (0.003) (0.004) (0.005)  (0.004)
Control -- Plus 240 -0.018 -0.042 -0.066 -0.075 -0.108 -0.137 -0.170 -0.217 -0.232 -0.289
                     (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.003) (0.003) (0.004)  (0.004)
 Notes:  p < 0.01,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.1. Clustered standard errors in parentheses. ln(ETA) instrumented by experimen-
tal group indicators. Controls include local week of year, local hour of week, user geohash5, business user, and decile of
pre-experiment lifetime rides.




                                                      Table 10
                             Time elasiticities estimated by three different treatments.

                                                                                    (1)
                                                Control -- Plus 60                -0.027
                                                                                   (0.001)
                                                Control -- Plus 150               -0.037
                                                                                   (0.001)
                                                Control -- Plus 240               -0.053
                                                                                   (0.001)
                                              Notes: Clustered standard errors in
                                             parentheses. ln(ETA) instrumented by
                                             experimental group indicators. Controls
                                             include local week of year, local hour of
                                             week, user geohash5, business user, and
                                             decile of pre-experiment lifetime rides.




                                                              Table 11
                                                          Convexity by city.

                      San Francisco New York City   Chicago   D.C.        Miami    New Jersey    Boston   Philadelphia   Atlanta   Los Angeles
Control -- Plus 60     -0.015        -0.055         -0.017 -0.026 -0.015 -0.041 -0.034                     -0.033        -0.023 -0.026
                        (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.003) (0.003) (0.004) (0.004) (0.003)                (0.004)       (0.006) (0.002)
Control -- Plus 150    -0.025        -0.081         -0.035 -0.048 -0.019 -0.043 -0.044                     -0.031        -0.031 -0.026
                        (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002) (0.002) (0.003) (0.004) (0.002)                (0.004)       (0.005) (0.002)
Control -- Plus 240    -0.039        -0.101         -0.048 -0.071 -0.025 -0.061 -0.067                     -0.050        -0.047 -0.040
                        (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.003) (0.002)                (0.003)       (0.004) (0.002)
Notes: Clustered standard errors in parentheses. ln(ETA) instrumented by experimental group indicators. Controls include local
week of year, local hour of week, user geohash5, business user, and decile of pre-experiment lifetime rides.



                                                                     57
Table 12
Number of regions for which each hypothesis test rejects the null that the VOT equals the given
rule-of-thumb approximation at the 5% level, using post-tax wages and assuming a constant 25%
tax rate.

            1/3- Rule                       1/2- Rule                            1/2+ Rule
             Median     Mean                  Median          Mean                Median     Mean
    Log         7        7          Log           7            6         Log         0        0
   Linear       7        7         Linear         6            6        Linear       0        0
                                           100%+ Rule
                                              Median          Mean
                                    Log           0            0
                                   Linear         0            4


Table 13
Number of regions for which each hypothesis test rejects the null that the VOT equals the given
rule-of-thumb approximation at the 5% level, using pre-tax wages.

            1/3- Rule                       1/2- Rule                            1/2+ Rule
             Median     Mean                  Median          Mean                Median     Mean
    Log         7        6          Log           6            3         Log         0        0
   Linear       7        6         Linear         6            2        Linear       0        0
                                           100%+ Rule
                                              Median          Mean
                                    Log          0             7
                                   Linear        4             8


                                           Table 14
             Regressions of log estimated VOT on log mean wage at the region level.

                                                      OLS       GLS
                                 ln(MeanWage)        1.73      1.28
                                                     (0.82)    (0.54)
                                 N                      9         9
                                 R2                   0.586     0.534
                                 Adj. R2              0.527     0.467
                               Notes:  p < 0.01,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.1.
                               Heteroskedasticity-robust (HC3) stan-
                               dard errors in parentheses. Dependent
                               variable is ln(V OT ).

                                                58
