                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          HOW WELL INSURED ARE JOB LOSERS?
                          EFFICACY OF THE PUBLIC SAFETY NET.

                                          Chloe N. East
                                          David Simon

                                        Working Paper 28218
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w28218


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2020




We are grateful to Delia Furtado, Hilary Hoynes, Emily Nix, Analisa Packham Danielle Sandler,
Barton Willage, Yangkeun Yun, Wei Zheng, and seminar participants at the University of Colorado
Denver, the University of Nebraska Lincoln, the Association for Public Policy Analysis and
Management, and the Southern Economic Association. David Simon was supported by funding from
the Upjohn Institute Early Career Research Award. As always, all errors are our own. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Chloe N. East and David Simon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
How Well Insured are Job Losers? Efficacy of the Public Safety Net.
Chloe N. East and David Simon
NBER Working Paper No. 28218
December 2020
JEL No. H0,H31,J18,J65

                                          ABSTRACT

An extensive literature in economics documents large and persistent declines in earnings
following involuntary job loss. We study whether the public safety net mitigates this loss in
resources using the Survey of Income and Program Participation in 1996-2013. With an
individual fixed effects model, we document which public safety net programs provide the most
insurance, and how this varies by pre-job-loss characteristics. We find that Unemployment
Insurance provides the largest buffer against lost income, but that due to the structure of the
program, the neediest are less-well insured (in terms of dollars transferred and percentage of lost
earnings replaced), compared to middle and higher income job losers. This has important
implications for the progressivity of the safety net, and how best to support displaced workers,
which is crucial to understand for job losers at any time, and especially now, in light of the
historic number of job losses during the COVID-19 pandemic.


Chloe N. East
University of Colorado Denver
chloe.east@ucdenver.edu

David Simon
Department of Economics
University of Connecticut
365 Fairfield Way, Unit 1063
Storrs, CT 06269
and NBER
david.simon@uconn.edu
1         Introduction
In an average year, 1.5% of the U.S. workforce experiences a job displacement (Fern´
                                                                                   andez Camp-
bell, 2019). This number is even higher in recessions, and during the first few months of
the COVID-19 pandemic, an estimated 22 million people (13% of the workforce) lost their
job in the US (Bartash, 2020). Workers who lose their job experience a decrease in earn-
ings of 14-66% in the first year after job loss, and these losses often persist for years after
displacement (Couch and Placzek, 2010). Moreover, the median displaced worker does not
have enough in liquid savings to cover even a month's worth of expenses (Rothstein and
Valletta, 2017), suggesting that self insurance is unlikely to be a viable option for many of
those displaced. Therefore, workers may rely on the public safety net for insurance against
lost earnings after displacement. The structure and generosity of the public safety net for
displaced workers has been highly debated, especially during the COVID-19 pandemic (e.g.
Snell (2020); Palmer and Sherman (2020)). The initial federal relief packages have already
expired or will soon, and more aid remains stalled in Congress.

          This paper explores the efficacy of the public safety net in mitigating negative economic
shocks on displaced workers' resources. We refer to both safety net programs­which are
means-tested­and social insurance programs­that workers pay into, and can claim benefits
from if an adverse event happens­as the "safety net". We document which programs provide
the largest buffering effects in terms of replacing lost income, and how this varies by demo-
graphics.1 We also look at the dynamics of these buffering effects over several years following
the job loss. We take a comprehensive view of the safety net, looking at many programs
beyond just Unemployment Insurance (UI), including Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program (SNAP), Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), Social Security (SS),
Supplemental Security Income (SSI), WIC, Free and Reduced Price Lunch (FRPL), energy
assistance, and public health insurance. Our findings reveal which job losers benefit from
the safety net, the degree to which they benefit, from which programs those benefits are
derived, and when those benefits occur.

          We use the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) from 1996-2013. The
SIPP is ideally suited for our study because it collects information about the duration of
each job and the reason each job ends. Additionally, the SIPP collects detailed, monthly
information about earned income, and receipt and benefit amount of many cash and in-kind
safety net programs. Finally, the SIPP follows individuals in the initial sample for 3-4 years,
so we can examine how these sources and amounts of income change around job loss in event
    1
        Changes in consumption are also important, however, we do not focus on consumption in this paper.



                                                      2
study and difference-in-difference models with individual fixed effects.

       We start by documenting large earnings losses following displacement, with magnitudes
consistent with the prior literature. We then go on to explore the potential buffering effects
of the safety net. Our first finding is that UI is the most important program for providing
income replacement for displaced workers, both because it is the most commonly used pro-
gram for job losers, and because it provides the largest benefit amounts. This is consistent
with the prior state-level literature on safety net caseloads and expenditures in response to
downturns (Bitler and Hoynes, 2016; Bitler et al., 2017a), as well as findings in Leung and
O'leary (2020). Extending this analysis, we show several other important facts. We find
that UI payments are regressive at the lower part of the income distribution. Workers with
pre-job-loss household income below the poverty line have only 21% of their lost earnings
replaced by the safety net. In contrast, workers with household income between 100-499%
of the poverty line, have 26-28% of their lost earnings replaced. This is likely due to the fact
that UI eligibility is conditional on meeting minimum work history and earnings require-
ments, and is not available to self-employed and gig workers, so it is less available for lower
income workers overall.2 Because of the structure of the program, UI benefits mostly run
out by two years after the job loss, even though earnings losses remain significant after two
years.

       For workers with pre-job-loss household income below 200% of the poverty line, means-
tested safety net benefits are also important­particularly the Supplemental Nutrition Assis-
tance Program (SNAP), and Free and Reduced Price Lunch (FRPL). However, these benefits
replace a much smaller fraction of lost income than UI, because they are less generous on
average in terms of eligibility rules and benefit amounts. We find no evidence that TANF,
WIC, FRPL, or energy assistance acts as a meaningful safety net for job losers.3

       In terms of the means tested health safety net: public health insurance helps offset
the loss of private insurance after a job loss. Households with pre-job-loss income below the
poverty line benefit from the buffering effects of public insurance, particularly children in
those households. However, public health insurance only modestly mitigates losses to private
insurance after job loss for middle income families (those who fall between 200% - 500 % of
the poverty line in pre-job-loss income).

       Finally, we look at employer-provided cash insurance in the form of severance pay to
see if this fills in any gaps in public insurance. On average this is relatively rare, and it is also
   2
    In future work, we will explore this possibility directly by modelling UI eligibility.
   3
    This is consistent with findings looking at more aggregate analyses on TANF, that finds little cyclicality
in TANF expenditures after welfare reform (Bitler and Hoynes, 2016; Bitler et al., 2017a).


                                                      3
less generous for the lowest income compared to the highest income. Taken together, our
results demonstrate that overall the public safety net for job losers is less protective for the
most economically vulnerable. Those in poverty receive the smallest increase in the dollar
value of public benefits, and also have a smaller fraction of their lost income replaced, when
compared to higher incomes.4

       Our work contributes to three related literatures. First, we build on the work exam-
ining the effect of displacement on own earnings. These papers consistently find large and
persistent earnings losses for displaced workers, as summarized by Couch and Placzek (2010).
However, no papers exist that study the buffering effects of the safety net in a comprehensive
way for all job losers in the US in recent decades, or examines heterogeneous impacts. As
we show, differences in impacts across pre-displacement income are particularly important
because safety net programs are often targeted based on income.5 Second, the moral hazard
costs and, to a lesser extent, consumption smoothing benefits of Unemployment Insurance
(UI) have been extensively studied by economists (e.g. Chetty (2008); Rothstein (2011); East
and Kuka (2015); Farber and Valletta (2015); Ganong and Noel (2019)), and we contribute
to this literature by examining which workers receive UI, and how UI fits into the broader
safety net landscape. Finally, our work relates to the literature on the cyclicality of safety net
and social insurance program expenditures and caseloads in the US (e.g. Bitler and Hoynes
(2016); Bitler et al. (2017a)). This past work has studied the aggregate (state-level) respon-
siveness of these programs to the business cycle, whereas we instead take an individual-level
approach and look at income receipt for the individual and their household following a job
loss. Our approach allows us to understand which types of individuals (e.g. high vs. low
income) benefit from which programs, as well as the dynamics of program receipt over time.
We show that these new dimensions of heterogeneity are important to getting a full picture
of the insurance value of the safety net, as well as understand important gaps in our current
safety net structure.

       Section 2 describes the data and estimation sample, Section 3 describes our estimation
strategy. Section 4 describes program participation and household resources effects. Section
5 concludes.
   4
     This same result holds true if we instead split the sample by individual's earnings measured before job
loss.
   5
     The closest paper to ours is Rothstein and Valletta (2017) who study the impacts UI benefit exhaustion
(and in some cases job loss) on household income sources. Our paper builds upon this prior work in several
ways: 1) we do not condition the sample of job losers who receive UI, or who lost their job during a
recession, and instead focus on no-fault job losers in all recent years in order to understand these effects on
a representative sample of most job losers, 2) we look at longer-run effects and dynamics around job loss,
and 3) we examine in more detail heterogeneous impacts.



                                                      4
2       Sample and Program Description
2.1      SIPP Data and Sample Definition
We use the 1996, 2001, 2004, and 2008 SIPP panels for our analysis. We define job losers
as those that lost their job through no fault of their own­due to a layoff, business closure,
or transfer of ownership of the business. We focus on the first job loss we observe after the
SIPP panel began. Following the literature, our sample is working-aged (24-60 at time of
job loss), heads of households or the spouse/unmarried partner of a household head.6 We
further condition on the displaced worker having at least 1 year of job tenure. This job tenure
restriction is common in the job loss literature and has several advantages (Oreopoulos et al.,
2008; Rege et al., 2011; Schaller and Zerpa, 2019): first, individuals who were more attached
to their job may experience a larger shock when they lose their job (Stevens, 1997); second,
since we examine income dynamics up to 12 months prior to job loss, this means that changes
prior to the job loss were less likely due to job transitions.7 We explore heterogeneous results
by pre-job-loss demographics, which is another advantage of our panel data.

        In table (1), we show demographics for the full sample, workers with 1 year of job
tenure, job losers with 1 year of tenure, and job losers with less than 1 year of tenure, in
the first survey month. Two distinct patterns emerge that are worth noting for interpreting
our results. First, job losers are less advantaged than their non-displaced counterparts,
as is evident by their initial earnings and education. This finding is consistent with prior
literature that shows displaced workers do not appear to be randomly selected (Hilger, 2016)
and is one motivation for our choice of empirical strategy, discussed in more detail below.
Second, restricting the sample to workers with at least one year of job tenure (either at the
beginning of the survey or before the job loss) yields a more advantaged sample (again based
on earnings and education). While we prefer this restriction for our main analysis for the
reasons described above, this yields a non-random sample of 64% of all job losers, and this
should be kept in mind when interpreting our results; in particular, the most disadvantaged
displaced workers are not in our analysis. Future work will explore the efficacy of the
safety net for these more disadvantaged workers. Additionally, we show in Figure (1) the
    6
      To account for potentially endogenous effect of job-loss on marital status we link job losers to the
observed spouse or unmarried partner first observed in the sample. Only 4% of our sample becomes not a
head, spouse, or partner at some point in the sample window. We follow these individuals even after they
are no longer a head, spouse, or partner.
    7
      Note, we drop observations more than 12 months before job loss and more than 23 months after job
loss. For our main analysis, we do not restrict the sample to be balanced, so some individuals we observe for
less than 12 months before the job loss and less than 23 months after, as shown in Appendix Figure (B1).
We test the robustness to restricting to a balanced sample in Appendix B, which limits the sample size, but
yields almost identical results.

                                                     5
distribution of years of first job loss in our sample. While there are more job losses in the
2001 and 2009 recessions, we have a meaningful portion of our sample who is displaced in
non-recessionary years as well. In future work we will explore how our results differ by
business cycle conditions at the time of job loss.

      We use the rich information the SIPP collects about many income sources. We examine
monthly earnings to replicate the findings of the prior literature on job loss. We also use
the detailed information about public safety net program receipt collected in the SIPP to
understand how these programs buffer income loss after job loss. Specifically, we look at the
monthly amount received of Unemployment Insurance (UI), Supplemental Nutrition Assis-
tance Program (SNAP), Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), Social Security
(SS), Supplemental Security Income (SSI), WIC, Free and Reduced Price Lunch (FRPL),
and energy assistance. We also examine public health insurance (PHI) take-up and its in-
teraction with private health insurance, since the latter is often tied directly to employment,
especially in the pre-ACA time frame we study. We describe each of these programs in more
detail in the next subsection.


2.2    Program Details
We focus on several features of each program to provide intuition and context for the expected
effects. First, whether they provide cash or in-kind benefits. Second, whether the eligibility
rules include income tests (means-tested) and/or other restrictions (categorical eligibility
rules). And, if there is a substantial waiting period between application time and initial
benefit receipt. We focus on individual-level program receipt, except for household-level
programs as noted below.

      Unemployment Insurance (UI): The UI program is the only safety net program
designed specifically to aid displaced workers. Cash payments from UI are available to
workers who lost their job through no fault of their own, and who meet work history and
minimum earnings requirements in the base period (often four out of the past five quarters),
though, the exact requirements and methods for calculating eligibility range from state to
state. Additionally, not all workers are covered by UI­ for example, self-employed workers
and gig workers are not typically covered by UI. Benefits are typically calculated as a little
less than half of the pre-job-loss wages, up to a maximum benefit amount, which is again
set by each state. Minimum benefits range from $5 (Hawaii) to $188 (Washington) in 2019.
Similarly, maximum benefits (excluding additional benefits for dependents) range from $235
(Mississippi) to $795 (Massachusetts). UI is available to workers for 26 weeks in most states,


                                              6
except during recessions, when the Extended Benefit program can provide an additional 13
or 20 weeks.8 Additionally, it is important to note that income from UI can directly affect
eligibility for the other programs described below. It is counted in household income tests
for SNAP, TANF, FRPL, WIC and public health insurance. Additionally, UI income may
reduce benefit amounts of SS and SSI.

      Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP): In contrast to UI, SNAP
is means-tested, rather than conditional on job loss, and it provides in-kind benefits in
the form of a debit card that can be used to purchase food only. Households with net
income below 130% of the federal poverty line, who meet applicable asset tests, qualify for
benefits and benefit amounts are a decreasing function of total household income. SNAP is
available to all income-and-asset-eligible households regardless of marital status and presence
of children. For most participants, there are no time limits of benefit receipt, however,
for working-aged non-disabled childless adults, there are time limits during periods of low
unemployment.9 Since SNAP eligibility and benefits amounts are determined based on
household information, we examine household-level receipt of SNAP.

      Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF): TANF is also a means-
tested program that provides cash benefits to low-income families with children.10 Created
as part of welfare reform in 1996, TANF has strict lifetime time limits on program receipt:
in 2002, over 30 states had a lifetime limit of 60 months or less.11 Additionally, states are
required to impose work requirements on at least some recipients.12 The benefits are also
relatively small compared to other programs­the median monthly benefit amount in 2020
was only 27% of the federal poverty line.13 Benefit amounts are a decreasing function of
household income. As with SNAP, we examine household-level TANF receipt.

      Social Security Programs (SS): Several groups of individuals may qualify for SS
income: those who retire at age 62 and older, those who are permanently disabled, and
surviving spouses and dependent children. To be eligible, the individual or decedent needs
  8
      Also, during the Great Recession, a temporary program extended benefit duration even longer between
July 2008 and December 2013. This information taken from Whittaker and Isaacs (2019).
    9
      Beginning in 1996, after the passage of welfare reform, many non-citizen documented immigrants become
ineligible for SNAP, TANF, public health insurance, and SSI. In our primary sample, we do not condition on
citizenship status, but in later analysis we plan to examine heterogeneity on this dimension. This discussion
taken primarily from Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2015).
   10
      TANF funds are also spent on other services to low-income families, however, we focus on the cash
benefit component here.
   11
      https://www.urban.org/sites/default/files/publication/58396/900769-State-Time-Limit-Policies.
PDF.
   12
      https://www.cbpp.org/sites/default/files/atoms/files/7-22-10tanf2.pdf.
   13
      https://www.cbpp.org/research/family-income-support/tanf-benefits-still-too-low-to-help-families-es



                                              7
to have sufficient work history before retirement, disability claim, or death. We condition
our sample on individuals aged 60 at job loss, and only follow them for up to two years
after job loss, so SS Retirement benefits are unlikely to be a large part of SS receipt in our
analysis. In order to qualify for SSDI (disability), an individual must demonstrate that they
are disabled, and that this disability is expected to inhibit their ability to work for at least
12 months. The individual must be earning below a threshold at the time they apply ($1260
per month in 2020) to demonstrate the disability limits their work ability. It typically takes
3-5 months from SSDI application to decision (which can then be appealed). If approved,
there is an additional 5 month waiting period before an individual receives the benefits.
Additionally, individuals who receive SSDI can received Medicare, but there is a two-year
waiting period for Medicare, so many receive Medicaid during this waiting period. For now,
we focus only on SS benefits received by the displaced worker.14

      Supplemental Security Income (SSI): Similar to SS, SSI is available to several
demographic groups: individuals over age 65, blind individuals, and disabled individuals. All
three groups must meet income tests, but there is no work history requirement in contrast
to SSDI. Adult recipients have to have monthly income lower than the minimum monthly
benefit amount ($733 in 2015). Average wait time to decision about disability for SSI is 4
months, and there is no mandatory waiting time after that before benefit receipt.15 For now,
we focus only on SSI benefits received by the displaced worker.

      Free and Reduced Price Lunch (FRPL): The free and reduced price lunch program
is available to school-aged children who live in low-income households. Households with
income below 130% of the poverty line qualify for free meals, and households with income
between 130-185% qualify for reduced price meals. Additionally, categorical eligibility exists
for children who receive SNAP benefits, TANF benefits, are a foster child, homeless, a
runaway or migrant, or if the child is in Head Start. In the mid-2000s states began to
expand the program information they used to directly certify children's eligibility to also
include Medicaid information. School breakfast operates similarly, but participation is more
limited in our time period, so we focus on school lunch only. Since only children are eligible
for this program, we create a variable indicating whether anyone in the household received
these benefits, which is also how the SIPP solicits this information. We also impute the
value of these monthly benefits by taking the maximum per meal reimbursement rate in the
48 contiguous states, multiplying by the number of children reported to be receiving these
  14
     Information taken from What You Should Know Before You Apply for Social Security Disability Benefits
(n.d.); If You Are The Survivor (n.d.); Disability Benefits -- How You Qualify (n.d.).
  15
     This information taken from Duggan et al. (2015).



                                                   8
benefits in the household, and finally multiplying this by 22 school days in the month.16

       Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children
(WIC): WIC is available to low-income children under age 5, as well as pregnant and post-
partum women. The program provides vouchers for specific food items and other services,
such as nutritional education and referrals to other social services. Individuals meeting
these categorical requirements must have income below 185% of the poverty line, or be
participating in SNAP, Medicaid, or TANF, and be deemed nutritionally needy (the latter
of which in practice is not a very binding constraint).17 Since only some demographic groups
are eligible for this program, we create variables indicating whether anyone in the household
received these benefits and the total reported household value of WIC benefits.

       Energy Assistance:18 The largest energy assistance program for low-income house-
holds is the Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program. Households must have income
below 150% of the federal poverty line and 60% of the state median income level.19 Addition-
ally, households participating in SNAP, SSI, or TANF may be automatically eligible.20 The
SIPP collects information about all energy assistance provided by federal, state, and local
governments, and we use information about this benefit receipt at the household level.

       Public Health Insurance (PHI): There are three major public health insurance
(PHI) programs that we examine here. First is Medicaid which provides PHI to low-income
individuals. Historically, the program was much more generous for children and pregnant
women than adults, but in the late 1990s and early 2000s states began to expand eligibility
to low-income parents and childless adults as well, though income eligibility thresholds were
still very low for these groups compared to for children (Buchmueller et al., 2015).21

       For children, the State Children's Health Insurance Program also provides PHI, often
to income eligibility thresholds greater than Medicaid. Finally, Medicare provides PHI to
elderly (age 65+) and disabled individuals. Since we restrict our sample to be job losers
age 60 or younger, elderly eligibility for Medicare is less likely to be important, however we
  16
      Information on maximum reimbursement amounts is from the Federal Register for each year. E.g.:
https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2014-07-16/pdf/2014-16719.pdf. This discussion taken
primarily from Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2015).
   17
      This discussion taken primarily from Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2015).
   18
      In future work we will also incorporate the value of housing assistance, but the SIPP only includes
information about whether the household receives these benefits, rather than their value, so we need to
impute the value of these benefits.
   19
      https://liheapch.acf.hhs.gov/delivery/income_eligibility.htm
   20
      https://www.benefits.gov/benefit/623
   21
      Additionally, the Affordable Care Act allowed states to expand Medicaid eligibility for low-income child-
less adults, however this didn't happen until 2014.



                                                      9
will explore this by testing the robustness of the results to lower age thresholds in future
work. We categorize any of these programs as "public health insurance", and employer or
on non-group market insurance as "private health insurance".


2.3     Summary Statistics
We show summary statistics of all the income and resource variables in Table (2) We adjust
all sources of income to be in constant 2015$s. Simply looking at these descriptive statistics
reveals that individuals have much lower earnings after job loss, are much more likely to
receive safety net program benefits, and are more likely to be in poverty.22 Given the
structure of the programs described above, we expect UI to be more widely available to
higher-income job losers, whereas the means-tested programs will be used more frequently
by lower-income job losers. Figure (2) confirms that this is the case. Panel (a) shows the
participation rates before job loss by household poverty ratio in the first survey month.23
Panel (b) shows the change in take-up after job loss compared to before, again by household
poverty ratio. Several important patterns emerge. First, even before job loss, displaced
workers with household income below 300% of the poverty line received benefits from means-
tested programs including FRPL, SNAP, and WIC at rates of 10% to 55%, depending on the
program and household income level.24 Additionally, for households below the poverty line,
a small percent (less than 10%) received TANF before job loss. Given that many households
received means-tested programs before job loss, we will also look at the impact on the dollar
value of benefits received from these programs, as this may be responsive to lower earnings
due to job loss, even if program participation doesn't change.

       Turning to panel (b), UI is clearly the program with the largest increase in take-up
post job-loss­increasing by about 40-60 percentage points. Take-up of UI is also increasing
in pre-job-loss household poverty ratio, a point we return to in more detail below. The
increase in take-up of means-tested programs is much smaller, with participation in SNAP
and FRPL increasing the most. These increases in means-tested programs are larger for
  22
     UI receipt is non-zero in the pre-period, and this is largely due to individuals who report experiencing
short periods of unemployment before the job separation. We believe these are temporary layoffs before a
permanent layoff, and in future work we will drop these individuals in a robustness check.
  23
     To calculate household poverty ratio, we use household-level total cash income, and the SIPP-assigned
Census poverty threshold for each household, which is based on household size and composition. We show
the number of job losers by household poverty ratio in Appendix Figure (A1).
  24
     In 2020, for a family of 4, the poverty threshold was $26,200, so 300% of the poverty threshold is $78,600
for a family of 4. https://aspe.hhs.gov/2020-poverty-guidelines. Note that the eligibility thresholds
for these programs is below 300% of the poverty threshold, however, since we only measure household poverty
ratio at one point in time (first survey month), variability in income pre-job-loss may explain non-zero take-up
even for households in the 200-299% bin.


                                                      10
lower-income individuals, although there are increases even for individuals with household
income 400-600% of the poverty line pre-job-loss. Changes in participation in the other
programs is very small across the income distribution.


3    Empirical Strategy
We follow the job loss literature (e.g. Jacobson et al. (1993); Stevens (1997); Sullivan and
Von Wachter (2009)) and estimate event study models with individual fixed effects to exam-
ine the dynamics of income around the job loss. Specifically, our baseline model is as follows:

                                            24
                           yit = i +                   t Dit + it +   it                   (1)
                                       t=-12,t=-1,-2

where yit measures income source y for individual i at time t, and time is relative to the
time of job loss, at t = 0. t measures the change in income relative to the omitted period,
which is the two months before job loss (-1 and -2). Additionally, we group months in two-
month bins to improve precision of our estimates. So, for example, 2 measures the change
in income 2-3 months after job loss, 4 measures the change in income 4-5 months after job
loss. In our baseline model, we only include controls for individual fixed effects (i ) and age
fixed effects (it ), following the job loss literature. We weight by the SIPP individual weight
at the time of job loss, and cluster standard errors by individual.

     As shown in Table (1), job losers are different on many observables than non-job-
losers. Therefore, the inclusion of individual fixed effects is important to take account of
time-fixed characteristics of these individuals. In models with individual fixed effects, the
key identifying assumption is that the timing of job loss is unrelated to individual trends
in income. Note that everyone in our sample experiences a job displacement, so there is no
untreated group. We will visually explore the validity of this assumption by examining the
pre-trends in the event study models.

     It is important to distinguish what type of casual estimates we are able to produce
with this design. We rely on the plausible randomness of the timing of no-fault job losses
to identify the casual impact of job loss on safety net program receipt. In addition, we
investigate how the effects of job loss differ by pre-job-loss characteristics. We do not (so
far) study the casual effect of safety net programs on job loser's outcomes. Finally, our
analysis factors in any behavioral effects induced by safety net programs, although we do
not directly estimate those behavioral effects here.



                                                 11
      We also estimate a difference in difference equivalent of equation (1) where we replace
all the post-job-loss dummy variables with one dummy variable indicating an observation is
after job loss. This provides a more parsimonious way of summarizing our findings, which
is particularly useful in our analysis by subgroups.


4     Effects on Safety Net Program Receipt
4.1    Job Loss and Earnings: Replication
We begin by replicating the analysis in the job loss literature that documents large and
persistent declines in earnings following an involuntary job loss. Figure (3) and column
(1) of Table (3) show the results of the event study analysis on the job loser's monthly
earnings (in 2015$s) with individual fixed effects and age fixed effects as controls. In the
first six months following the job loss, there is an earnings loss of $2,202-2,948, about 49-66%
relative to the pre-job-loss mean ($4495.19). Note that in the period event time equals zero,
the earnings loss is smaller, and this is because the job loss happens during this two-month
period, rather than always at the beginning of it. By one year after the job loss, earnings
losses are $1,708 compared to the month before job loss (38% lower). These magnitudes are
similar to that found in the prior literature, which has primarily examined annual (rather
than monthly) earnings and has found annual earnings losses of 14-66% in the first year after
job loss (Couch and Placzek, 2010). Also consistent with past findings, we see evidence of
persistence in these earnings losses­by the end of our sample period­24 months after the job
loss­earnings are still $1,362 (30%) lower than pre-job-loss. We also explore whether this
decline in earnings is due to lower wages, or a decline in the likelihood of working at all, by
looking at the effect on having any earnings in Figure (4). It is clear from this figure that
there are at least some people for whom the job loss leads to an extended period without any
work, which is again consistent with prior findings (e.g. Stevens (1997); Stephens (2002)). A
final important result is that there is no evidence of significant pre-trends in earnings before
job loss, which supports our identifying assumption.


4.2    Job Loss and the Safety Net
Next, we explore how the take-up of safety net programs changes around job loss using the
same event study model. In Figure (5) and Table (4), we report the results. Note, we scale
all the dummy variables by 100, so the vertical axis measures the percentage point change.
In panel (a) it is clear the program with the largest increase in take-up relative to pre-job-loss


                                               12
is UI; in the months immediately following job loss there is a roughly 40 percentage point
increase in take-up, consistent with our findings looking at mean changes in take-up above.
This is also consistent with past findings that UI is the most responsive program to state-
level economic downturns (Bitler and Hoynes, 2016). UI receipt is time-limited, so we also
observe a sharp decline in the likelihood of receiving UI as we move away from the initial job
loss. Recall that the longest UI duration was 99 weeks during the Great Recession, though
we still see significant increases in UI receipt up to 2 years following the job loss (Table
(4)). This is likely due to the fact that job losers often suffer multiple job losses (Stevens,
1997).25

        We see some evidence of increases in other safety net programs as well. In panel (b)
we drop UI and re-scale the vertical axis to visually examine the effects on other programs
better. The results indicate meaningful and significant (regression results show in Table (4))
increases in participation in SNAP, TANF, SS, SSI, and FRPL.26 These effects in percent-
age point terms are much smaller than for UI, but relative to the pre-job-loss mean, these
are very large increases; one year after job loss, SNAP participation has increased by 41%,
TANF participation increased by 34%, SS participation increased by 133%, SSI participation
increased by 94%, and FRP Lunch participation increased by 9%. While these programs are
modest in insuring income after a job loss; the impact of job-loss on a families' use is substan-
tial relative the programs' scope. Additionally, it is interesting to note that participation in
SNAP, SS and SSI remains higher than pre-job-loss levels for at least two years after the job
loss. This could be due to the persistent earnings decline from job loss which allows individ-
uals to remain eligible for these programs, or, to these programs dis-incentivizing work after
the job loss, or, to job loss leading to take up of programs that families had already qualified
for but had not made use of. These magnitudes of increased takeup in UI and SNAP are
similar to those in Rothstein and Valletta (2017), who study the short-run impact of job loss
on income among those who receive UI during recessions. However, as documented above,
the means-tested programs are available for the working poor before job loss, so, we look
next at the dollar value of benefits received from these programs, as this may respond to
a loss in income, even if households were already receiving these benefits prior to the job
loss.
  25
      The vast majority of states require 20 weeks of work, plus meeting minimum earnings requirements. So,
a worker could lose a job again within two years of the first job loss and re-qualify for UI. Information from:
https://oui.doleta.gov/unemploy/content/sigpros/2000-2009/January2008.pdf.
   26
      We do find significant negative coefficients before job loss for both UI and FRPL, however, there is a
clear break in trend in participation around job loss in both of these programs in the event study figures, so
we do not view these results as being driven by a pre-trend.




                                                      13
        We estimate to what extent these programs make up for the lost earnings of job losers
in Figure (6) and Table (3). The black dots replicate the findings from Figure (3), and then
the blue dots indicate the effect on the outcome variable of earnings plus UI income. The
other colored marks show the effect on income sequentially adding in the other safety net
programs (all measures are inclusive of zeros). From this figure it is very clear that UI is the
most important program for job losers, not only in terms of participation, as seen above, but
in terms of the dollar value of income received from the program. It is the only program that
meaningfully makes up for the lost income following the job loss in the full sample, despite
the very large percentage increases in take-up of the other programs compared to pre-job-
loss. This also indicates that displaced workers who were already receiving means-tested
safety net programs do not see a substantial increase in benefit amounts following job loss.
This finding is similar to Leung and O'leary (2020), who found that among low-income job
losers who are eligible for UI, UI provides more transfer dollars than TANF or SNAP.

        On average, UI provides $560 in benefits in the months immediately following job loss.
In comparison, SNAP, which is the second largest program in terms of transfer dollars 2-3
following job loss, provides on $10 in benefits on average. We explore the extent to which
benefit generosity might explain the importance of UI, by tabulating the mean monthly
benefit amount received after job loss for participants in each program in Figure (7).27 UI is
the most generous program in terms of average monthly benefit paid. SS and SSI benefits
are the second most generous after UI; though eligibility is much more restricted for these
programs. Finally, the means-tested programs (SNAP, TANF, FRPL, WIC, and energy
assistance) provide relatively small benefit amounts to participants compared to these social
insurance programs.

4.2.1     By Pre-Job-Loss Household Poverty Ratio

Because eligibility for many safety net programs is conditional on meeting income tests, we
examine heterogeneous effects by pre-job-loss household poverty ratio, measured in the first
survey month. To easily compare the effects across income groups, we estimate a difference-
in-difference equivalent of the event study model.28 Specifically, we replace the event time
dummies with one post-job-loss dummy, and we plot the coefficient on this dummy by pre-
job-loss household poverty ratio bins, in 99 percentage points up to 800+% of the poverty
line. The outcome variables are the value of safety net benefits received by each program.
  27
     This pattern of relative generosity is the same as is documented by Bitler and Hoynes (2016) who use
administrative data on average benefit amounts by program.
  28
     Note that because our sample is unbalanced, more weird is put towards observations right around the
job loss. However, the results are very similar on the balanced sample as shown in Appendix B.


                                                   14
We focus here on the change in the value of benefits received, rather than take-up, because
low-income households already participate in some programs before job loss.

        Figure (8) demonstrates that the value of the job loss safety net varies greatly by
income. The total value of transfers increases with pre-job-loss household poverty ratio (we
include $0s in these transfer value variables). Households with income below poverty before
job-loss receive less than half of the transfer dollars that households with incomes between
400-699% of the poverty line ($272 compared to $641-691). And, as we saw before, UI makes
of the vast majority of transfer dollars to displaced workers, which is true even for workers
below poverty, who are likely eligible for many means-tested programs.

        The level of earnings lost may also be increasing in pre-job-loss household poverty
ratio. We therefore tabulate the estimated change in total transfer dollars as a percent of the
estimated loss in earnings following job loss, by pre-job-loss household poverty ratio in Figure
(9).29 This pattern is a little more complicated than the absolute value of transfer dollars­
it follows an inverse "U" shape. Workers below poverty pre-job-loss receive replacement
rates of 21%. In contrast, workers in households at a poverty ratio between 100-499%, the
replacement rate is 26-28%, on average. For workers above 500% of the poverty line, the
replacement rate begins to decline, likely due to the caps on UI benefit amounts.

        We also explore whether this same pattern holds when we split the sample by indi-
viduals' pre-job-loss earnings, also measured in the first survey month. We split the sample
by earnings quintile in Figures (A2) and (A3). The same patterns­more dollars in aid to
higher earnings quintiles is evident­$261 to the lowest quintile, compared to more than $650
for the highest two quintiles. And, when we look at percent of lost earnings replaced, the
second through fourth quintiles have 29-30% of lost earnings replaced, compared to 22% for
the lowest earnings quintile.

4.2.2     Other Types of Heterogeneity

Income is clearly an important source of heterogeneity in the safety net for displaced workers,
and we next explore whether splitting the sample by race/ethnicity, or presence of children
also leads to differential results. Splitting into non-Hispanic white, non-Hispanic black, and
Hispanic, we see that non-Hispanic whites receive the largest value of benefits, however
scaling as a percent of lost earnings, the differences largely disappear (shown in Appendix
  29
     To calculate the numbers plotted in this figure, we sum the coefficients across all programs by poverty
ratio in Figure (8) for the numerator. For the denominator, we again estimate a difference in difference
model by household poverty ratio, with earnings as the outcome variable, and use the coefficient on this post
period dummy.


                                                     15
Figures (A4) and (A5)). This again indicates that the most advantaged (in terms of pre-
job-loss earnings) receive the largest value of transfer dollars after job loss.

       Children may be an important factor in determining take-up and benefit amounts for
some safety net programs; in most states UI benefit amounts are larger for workers with
children, TANF, FRPL and WIC are only available to workers with children (or pregnant
women in the case of WIC), and SNAP eligibility is unconditional on work for individuals
with children. In Appendix Figures (A6) and (A7), FRPL benefits are larger for workers
with kids, as are SNAP benefits, however the dollar value of the transfer is actually larger
for workers without children. As a percentage of lost earnings, the difference is minimal
whether or not the worker has children.


4.3     Disability Programs
Next, we investigate in more detail our finding that disability programs seem to play some
role as a safety net after job loss. In the full sample, there are significant, but small, increases
in participation in SS and SSI (Figure (5)). In order for working-aged individuals to qualify
for these programs, they must be able to demonstrate a work-limiting or work-preventing
disability, which is a relatively small fraction of the overall population. The SIPP directly
collects self-reported information on disability, and, in our sample, 6% reports having a
work-limiting disability at the beginning of the sample period.30

       We split the sample by whether an individual reported having a work-limiting disability
at the beginning of the survey in Figure (10) and Tables (A1)-(A2). The percentage point
increase in SS and SSI takeup is larger for those reporting a disability at the beginning of
the sample, however, there is still a significant increase for those reporting no disability. For
those initially disabled, participation in SS increases by about 4 percentage points one year
after job loss (71% increase of the pre-job-loss mean). And participation in SSI increases by
1 percentage point (54% increase of the pre-job-loss mean). Moreover, for the group initially
reporting a disability, the increase in the benefit amount of SS and SSI after job loss does
replace slightly more lost earnings than for the full sample, especially after six months post
job loss, as shown in Figure (11).

       Disability status is self-reported and may be subjective and a function of employer-
provided accommodations. Therefore, we explore self-reported disability status changes
around the time of job loss in Figure (12) and Appendix Table (A3). Interestingly, for those
  30
    For this analysis by disability, we drop from the sample individuals who report having a work-preventing
disability at the beginning of the sample.


                                                    16
reporting no disability at the beginning of the survey, there is an increase in reporting a
work-limiting disability after the job loss that appears to begin to trend up before the job
loss. The magnitude of this increase is very large­a 66-100% change over the baseline mean.
This is similar to the finding in Rothstein and Valletta (2017), who document a 48% increase
in self-reported disability following job loss. This finding indicates one of two possibilities:
that individuals lost their job because they become disabled (correlated shocks or reverse
causality), or, when individuals lose their job (or believe they are at risk of losing their job),
their perceptions of their disability change. The latter could be due to the fact that when
individuals lose their job, the cost of applying for SS and SSI become much lower, since
they do not have to give up wages to in order to qualify. Also, for those who report being
disabled at the beginning of the period, there is actually a decrease in self-reported disability
following the job loss that appears to be related to the timing of the job loss. This decline is
meaningful in magnitude­one year after job loss, the likelihood of reporting a work-limited
disability has declined by 13%. One possible explanation is that work itself exacerbates
physical or mental pain related to a disability. Another possibility is that because the job
losers daily activities have changed, they encounter their disability less often and therefore
are less likely to report it. Regardless, these results suggest that we cannot rule out either
reverse causality, or changes in subjective reporting that may explain the link between job
loss and disability take up; though neither case invalidates the role of SSI/SSDI in acting as
a post job loss safety net.


4.4     Health Insurance
So far we have not considered one of the major facets of the safety-net: public health
insurance.31 Some earlier work has examined how health insurance changes around job loss,
finding that declines in employer-provided private health insurance are at least partially
made up for with increases in public health insurance (Schaller and Stevens, 2015; Schaller
and Zerpa, 2019). We build off that work by looking at the impacts across all members of
the household (rather than just the job loser or their children) and looking at heterogeneity
by pre-job loss household poverty ratio.

       Figure (13) shows changes health insurance by type, plotting in event time the proba-
bility of having any insurance, public insurance, or private insurance. Panel (a) focuses on
job losers own coverage, and shows a large, 17 percentage point decline in private insurance
  31
     Unlike cash and near cash transfers, public insurance is difficult to monetize because it is not only valued
in terms of the amount spent on premiums, but also the value to risk adverse consumers of having insurance
that smooths income over periods.



                                                       17
coverage after job loss. This is modestly offset by a roughly 2 percentage point increase in
public insurance. Panel (b) shows a similar pattern for the likelihood that any adult in the
household (including the job loser) is covered by insurance.32 Though, the decline in any
adult covered by private insurance is smaller than for the job loser, and is offset similarly
by public insurance. It is also striking how persistent these effects are; two years after job
loss the likelihood of not having insurance for at least one adult in the household is still 5
percentage points lower. Finally, panel (v) looks at coverage of any child in the household
for a given type of insurance. The effect of public insurance on offsetting declines in private
insurance is larger for children than adults­there is a 5 percentage point increase in public
health insurance that persists for two years. This makes sense given that income eligibility
thresholds are on average much higher for children than adults. Within half a year to a year
after the job loss, overall insurance coverage for children has returned to the baseline level,
and the remaining gap in private coverage is fully made up for by public insurance.

       Figure (14) considers these patterns across pre-job loss household poverty ratios.33
Panel (a) shows results for adults and panel (b) for children, where both panels plot the
coefficients from difference in differences models on an indicator for having private insurance
(in red) and for having public insurance (in blue). The results reveal that public insurance is
more progressive than the cash and near cash safety net. Focusing first on adults, households
below poverty experience relatively small declines in private insurance and larger increases
in public insurance.34 Conversely, adults in households with the highest incomes have the
smallest declines in private insurance and little to no increase in public insurance. This sug-
gests that the middle class are the ones most vulnerable to losing health insurance following
a job loss with a net increase of no adult having insurance in the household of around 15
percentage points following a job loss. For children, the pattern by household income is
similar, though public insurance is clearly more generous for children. In households below
the poverty line, children's loss in private insurance is almost completely offset by public
insurance. The increases in public insurance for children with pre-job loss household income
of 100-400% of the poverty line is similar in magnitude to children in households below
  32
      We have also run models where the dependent variable is the proportion of adult/children in the house-
hold with a given type of insurance. The results follow the same pattern as our dummy variable approach
here. Therefore, we show results on any adult/child having a given insurance type, because the coefficients
are easier to interpret.
   33
      As noted above, recall that because our sample is unbalanced, more weight is put towards observations
right around the job loss, so these difference in difference estimates look more like the estimates in the first
few months after job loss, rather than two years after job loss. Future work will explore this more explicitly
by modelling effects at different points in time after job loss.
   34
      The relatively small decline in private insurance may be due to lack of private coverage even while
working.



                                                      18
poverty. However, there are somewhat larger declines in private insurance following job loss
for children in these households as well.


4.5     Severance Pay
Another possibly important safety net for job losers­though not publicly provided­is sev-
erance pay they receive from their employer. We explore how this may buffer the loss in
income compared to the public safety net. Only 20% of all full and part-time workers were
covered by employer-provided severance pay in 2000, and this coverage is not evenly dis-
tributed by employer type. For example, workers in professional occupations were more
than twice as likely as those in blue collar occupations to have access to severance pay (35%
vs. 12%).35

       We look at the effects of job loss on receipt and amount of severance pay in Figures (15)
and (16). Take-up of severance pay increases directly after job loss­by 7 percentage points­
and appears to only payout for up to 3 months after the job loss on average. Similarly, the
only period in which severance pay makes up meaningfully for lost income is in the period
of the job loss, where it provides about $600 in benefits on average.36 Finally, we look at
heterogeneity in the takeup and value of severance pay by pre-job-loss household poverty
ratio in Figure (17). This shows that the private safety net in the form of severance pay is
also regressive; takeup is increasing in pre-job-loss earnings, as is the value of severance pay
(inclusive of $0s), and the percent of lost earnings replaced. Taken with our above findings
on the public safety net, there is strong evidence that the lowest income individuals are less
insured (both publicly and privately) in the face of job loss.37


4.6     Total Household Resources
Finally, we look at the impact of job loss on several measures of household resources to get
a sense of overall well-being. We follow Bitler et al. (2017a) and create three measures of
household resources, all relative the Census poverty threshold that we used above. First,
we divide total household earned income by the poverty threshold. Second, we divide total
household cash income by the poverty threshold (the standard measure of income used for
calculating the poverty rate and how we measure household poverty in the heterogeneity
analysis above). This second measure includes cash transfers from UI, TANF, SS, SSI, and
  35
     https://www.bls.gov/ncs/ebs/sp/ebbl0019.pdf
  36
     Regression results reported in Appendix Tables (A4) and (A5).
  37
     We do not considered the added worker effect here, which is another potentially important source of
private insurance.


                                                  19
severance pay, as well as cash income from other sources. Finally, the third measure adds
the cash value of the other near-cash safety net programs we measure: SNAP, FRPL, WIC,
and energy assistance. The differences between the poverty measures will inform us about
how much the cash and near-cash programs help individuals stay out of poverty after a job
loss.

        Figure (18) displays the results for these three poverty measures, also shown in Table
(5). Looking only at earned income (panel (a)), there is an immediate increase the likelihood
of being below 100% and 200% of the poverty line by almost 30 percentage points after job
loss. This decreases over time, but even two years after the job loss, the likelihood is more
than 10 percentage points higher than pre-job-loss. The likelihood of being below 400%
of the poverty line based only on earned income follows a similar pattern, though with
smaller effect sizes. Turning to the second measure of poverty, based on all cash income
(panel (b)), it is clear that the effects on poverty are smaller once we take into account cash
transfers. The increase in the likelihood of being below 100% of poverty is between 7-15
percentage points. Interestingly, now the increase in the likelihood of being below 200%
and 400% of poverty is larger than 100% of poverty, though those level increases are still
smaller than when we looked at earnings only. This indicates that cash transfers (as we have
shown, primarily UI) reduce the likelihood of falling below the poverty line, and instead
move some of those households into slightly higher parts of the income distribution. Finally,
adding in near-cash benefits in panel (c), does not meaningfully change the results relative
to panel (b), demonstrating that these means-tested programs (SNAP, FRPL, WIC, and
energy assistance) are not as an important of sources of income for the average displaced
worker at risk of falling into poverty.


5       Conclusion
This paper investigates the role of the safety net after a job loss in mitigating lost income.
We look at the effects on take-up and benefit amount received of a large number of safety net
programs. We quantify which programs compensate the most for lost income, who benefits
from these programs across pre-job loss socio-economic status, and the dynamics of when
those programs matter during the two-year period following displacement. Our individual
fixed effects research design compares within job loser before relative to after a job loss.

        Our results demonstrate that UI is by far the most important source of insurance for
displaced workers. Additionally, we show that UI, and by extension the safety net as a whole,
is less generous for those in poverty compared to those with income 100-699% of poverty

                                               20
pre-job-loss. For workers with pre-job-loss household income below 200% of the poverty line,
means-tested safety net benefits are also important: with SNAP and FRPL offsetting lost
income from work the most after UI. Finally, there is persistence in participation in means-
tested programs including public health insurance, well after job loss, even as household
earnings recover. While receipt of SS, SSI and severance pay also increase following job loss,
the value of these benefits is relatively small for the average worker.

       These results are important to understand how to design programs and who to target to
help mitigate the decline in household resources after a displacement. In that sense, the lack
of insurance following job loss for poor households is perhaps the most important finding.
This suggests that expanding the generosity of SNAP and FRPL could improve their ability
to act as social insurance. Alternatively, targeting UI to provide more and larger transfers
to those who work in lower wage jobs pre-job-loss could also decrease the regressivity of the
system. Finally, we note that we do not include tax credits, such as the Earned Income Tax
Credit, which also may be important for displaced workers (Bitler et al., 2017b).38

       Our findings are particularly relevant in light of the COVID-19 recession of 2020. In
early 2020, lawmakers passed several relief laws that expanded UI, SNAP, and FRPL. The
expansions to UI counteracted some of the regressivity we pointed out here, by increasing
benefits by a flat amount for everyone, and by extending eligibility to groups that previously
were not covered by UI (e.g. self-employed and gig workers) (Bitler et al., 2020; Ganong et
al., 2020). Additionally, there was a 13 week benefit extension and work history requirements
were waived. Consistent with our findings here, preliminary evidence suggests that the UI
expansions led to the largest relief payments in terms of dollars spent, relative to SNAP and
FRPL expansions (Bitler et al., 2020). But, many of these provisions have expired or will
expire soon. We have demonstrated that many workers and their families, particularly the
neediest, are likely to experience losses in resources and increased material hardship if the
federal government does not pass more relief packages.




  38
    EITC eligibility changes annually with tax filing, compared to the programs here where eligibility and
receipt can change monthly. The SIPP has more limited information about the EITC in special topical
modules that are not collected in every survey year. In future work, we will exploit this information, and
possibly model EITC eligibility using NBER TAXSIM.


                                                   21
References
Bartash, Jeffry, "The U.S. has only regained 42% of the 22 million jobs lost in the pandemic.
 Here's where they are," 2020.
Bitler, Marianne and Hilary Hoynes, "The more things change, the more they stay the same?
  The safety net and poverty in the Great Recession," Journal of Labor Economics, 2016, 34 (S1),
  S403­S444.
  , , and Elira Kuka, "Child poverty, the great recession, and the social safety net in the
  United States," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 2017, 36 (2), 358­389.
  , , and , "Do in-work tax credits serve as a safety net?," Journal of Human Resources,
  2017, 52 (2), 319­350.
  , Hilary W Hoynes, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, "The social safety net in the
  wake of COVID-19," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.
Buchmueller, Thomas, John C Ham, and Lara D Shore-Sheppard, "The Medicaid Pro-
 gram," Working Paper 21425, National Bureau of Economic Research July 2015.
Campbell, Alexia Fern´
                     andez, "American layoffs and firings are at a 20-year low," 2019.
Chetty, Raj, "Moral hazard versus liquidity and optimal unemployment insurance," Journal of
 political Economy, 2008, 116 (2), 173­234.
Couch, Kenneth A and Dana W Placzek, "Earnings losses of displaced workers revisited,"
 American Economic Review, 2010, 100 (1), 572­89.
 Disability Benefits -- How You Qualify
Disability Benefits -- How You Qualify, Social Security Administration.
Duggan, Mark, Melissa S Kearney, and Stephanie Rennane, "The Supplemental Security
 Income Program," in "Economics of Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States,
 Volume 2," University of Chicago Press, 2015, pp. 1­58.
East, Chloe N and Elira Kuka, "Reexamining the consumption smoothing benefits of Unem-
 ployment Insurance," Journal of Public Economics, 2015, 132, 32­50.
Farber, Henry S and Robert G Valletta, "Do extended unemployment benefits lengthen
  unemployment spells? Evidence from recent cycles in the US labor market," Journal of Human
  Resources, 2015, 50 (4), 873­909.
Ganong, Peter and Pascal Noel, "Consumer spending during unemployment: Positive and
 normative implications," American Economic Review, 2019, 109 (7), 2383­2424.
  , Pascal J Noel, and Joseph S Vavra, "US Unemployment Insurance Replacement Rates
  During the Pandemic," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.
Hilger, Nathaniel G, "Parental job loss and children's long-term outcomes: evidence from 7
 million fathers' layoffs," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2016, 8 (3), 247­
 83.
Hoynes, Hilary and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, "US food and nutrition programs," in



                                              22
  "Economics of Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States, Volume 1," University of
  Chicago Press, 2015, pp. 219­301.
  If You Are The Survivor
If You Are The Survivor, Social Security Administration.
Jacobson, Louis S, Robert J LaLonde, and Daniel G Sullivan, "Earnings losses of displaced
  workers," The American economic review, 1993, pp. 685­709.
Jr, Melvin Stephens, "Worker displacement and the added worker effect," Journal of Labor
  Economics, 2002, 20 (3), 504­537.
Leung, Pauline and Christopher O'leary, "Unemployment Insurance and Means-Tested Pro-
  gram Interactions: Evidence from Administrative Data," American Economic Journal: Eco-
  nomic Policy, 2020, 12 (2), 159­92.
Oreopoulos, Philip, Marianne Page, and Ann Huff Stevens, "The intergenerational effects
 of worker displacement," Journal of Labor Economics, 2008, 26 (3), 455­483.
Palmer, Anna and Jake Sherman, "POLITICO Playbook: NEW: Pelosi leaves the Covid
 relief blame on Trump's doorstep," 2020.
Rege, Mari, Kjetil Telle, and Mark Votruba, "Parental job loss and children's school per-
 formance," The Review of Economic Studies, 2011, 78 (4), 1462­1489.
Rothstein, Jesse, "Unemployment insurance and job search in the Great Recession," Technical
 Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2011.
   and Robert G Valletta, "Scraping by: Income and program participation after the loss of
  extended unemployment benefits," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 2017, 36 (4),
  880­908.
Schaller, Jessamyn and Ann Huff Stevens, "Short-run effects of job loss on health conditions,
  health insurance, and health care utilization," Journal of health economics, 2015, 43, 190­203.
   and Mariana Zerpa, "Short-run effects of parental job loss on child health," American
  Journal of Health Economics, 2019, 5 (1), 8­41.
Snell, Kelsey, "What's Inside The Senate's $2 Trillion Coronavirus Aid Package," 2020.
Stevens, Ann Huff, "Persistent effects of job displacement: The importance of multiple job
  losses," Journal of Labor Economics, 1997, 15 (1, Part 1), 165­188.
Sullivan, Daniel and Till Von Wachter, "Job displacement and mortality: An analysis using
  administrative data," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124 (3), 1265­1306.
  What You Should Know Before You Apply for Social Security Disability Benefits
What You Should Know Before You Apply for Social Security Disability Benefits,
 Social Security Administration.
Whittaker, Julie and Katelin Isaacs, "Unemployment Insurance: Programs and Benefits,"
 Congressional Research Service, 2019.




                                               23
6   Figures
                                   Figure 1: Sample Size by Year of Job Loss




    Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses,
    and unmarried partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to
    losing it.




                                                            24
               60                 Figure 2: Receipt of Safety Net Programs by Pre-Job-Loss Household Poverty




                                                                                                                     60
   Fraction Ever Received




                                                                                                            Change in Receipt
                   40




                                                                                                                         40
       20




                                                                                                             20      0
               0




                            100                           400                        700                    1000 100                    400                        700   1000
                                                                Poverty Ratio                                                                 Poverty Ratio

                                                              UI                SNAP                                                      UI                  SNAP
                                                              TANF              SS                                                        TANF                SS
                                                              SSI               FRPL                                                      SSI                 FRPL
                                                              WIC               Energy                                                    WIC                 Energy



                                   (a) Before Job Loss                                                                          (b) Change After Job Loss
Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. The results are weighted
using individual survey weight in the month of job loss. The data is collapsed into bins based on the ratio of total household cash income
to the household poverty threshold in the first survey month. The bins are below 100%, 100-199%, 200-299%, 300-399%, and so on by
99 percentage points, up to the highest bin of above 800% of the poverty line. The Census poverty line threshold is assigned to each
household in the SIPP based on household size and composition. Panel (a) plots the likelihood of displaced workers ever taking up each
program in the year prior to job loss. Panel (b) plots the change in the likelihood of ever taking up each program in the two years after
job loss compared to the year prior to job loss.




                                                                 Figure 3: Event Study around Job Loss: Own Earnings
                                                0
                                    Change in Dollar Amount
                                    -2000           -1000
                                                -3000




                                                              -12 -10 -8        -6       -4   -2    0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
                                                                                                   Month Relative to Job Loss

Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. The model includes
individual fixed effects and age fixed effects. The horizontal axis denotes months from job loss. The black dots represent the event study
coefficients. The results are weighted using individual survey weight in the month of job loss. Standard errors clustered at the individual
level and the 95% confidence intervals are plotted in the dashed lines.




                                                                                                       25
                      Figure 4: Event Study around Job Loss: Own Likelihood of Any Earnings
                                   0
                       Percentage Point Change
                          -.4      -.6    -.2




                                                 -12 -10 -8   -6   -4   -2    0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
                                                                             Month Relative to Job Loss

Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. The model includes
individual fixed effects and age fixed effects. The horizontal axis denotes months from job loss. The black dots represent the event study
coefficients. The results are weighted using individual survey weight in the month of job loss. Standard errors clustered at the individual
level and the 95% confidence intervals are plotted in the dashed lines.




                                                                                 26
                                     Figure 5: Event Study around Job Loss: Receipt of Safety Net Programs




                                                       50
                    Percentage Point Change in Receipt
                    0     10     20     30     40




                                                            -12 -10 -8   -6   -4     -2    0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
                                                                                          Month Relative to Job Loss

                                                                                   Any UI            Any SNAP
                                                                                   Any TANF          Any SS
                                                                                   Any SSI           Any FRPL
                                                                                   Any WIC           Any Energy Assistance


                                                                                   (a) Percentage Point Effect
                                                       10
                    Percentage Point Change in Receipt
                     0      2.5       5       7.5




                                                            -12 -10 -8   -6   -4     -2    0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
                                                                                          Month Relative to Job Loss

                                                                                   Any SNAP                     Any TANF
                                                                                   Any SS                       Any SSI
                                                                                   Any FRPL                     Any WIC
                                                                                   Any Energy Assistance


                                                                          (b) Percentage Point Effect, Omit UI
Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. The model includes
individual fixed effects and age fixed effects. The horizontal axis denotes months from job loss. The markers represent the event study
coefficients. The results are weighted using individual survey weight in the month of job loss. Standard errors clustered at the individual
level and the 95% confidence intervals are plotted in the dashed lines.



                                                                                                27
             Figure 6: Event Study around Job Loss: Own Earnings and Value of Safety Net Programs
                  0
             Dollar Amount
          -2000     -1000
                  -3000




                             -12 -10 -8   -6   -4   -2    0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
                                                         Month Relative to Job Loss

                                                           Earnings            + UI
                                                           + SNAP              + TANF
                                                           + SS                + SSI
                                                           + FRPL              + WIC
                                                           + Energy

Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. The model includes
individual fixed effects and age fixed effects. The horizontal axis denotes months from job loss. The markers represent the event study
coefficients from models with earnings and earnings plus safety net programs additively as noted. The results are weighted using individual
survey weight in the month of job loss.




                                                                  28
                    Figure 7: Monthly Benefit Amount Received Among Participants by Program




Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. Only observations after
job loss are included to calculate the means. The results are weighted using individual survey weight in the month of job loss.




   Figure 8: Difference in Difference Estimates of Safety Net Program Value, by HH Poverty Status in First
                                                            Survey Month




Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. The plotted estimates are
from a difference in difference version of equation (1) with a post period dummy replacing the event time coefficients. We estimate this
model for the full sample, and split by household poverty ratio in the first survey month. The outcome variables are dollar value of the
benefits received from each program. The results are weighted using individual survey weight in the month of job loss.




                                                                   29
 Figure 9: Difference in Difference Estimates of Safety Net Program Value as Percentage of Lost Earnings, by
                                           HH Poverty Status in First Survey Month




Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. The plotted estimates are
from a difference in difference version of equation (1) with a post period dummy replacing the event time coefficients. We estimate this
model for the full sample, and split by household poverty ratio in the first survey month. We sum the estimated effect on each program
from Figure (8) for the numerator. For the denominator, we run regressions with earnings as the outcome variable and use the estimated
coefficient on the post dummy for each sample. The results are weighted using individual survey weight in the month of job loss.




                                                                   30
            Figure 10: Event Study around Job Loss: Receipt of Safety Net Programs, Disability Subgroups
                                           50




                                                                                                                                                        50
        Percentage Point Change in Receipt




                                                                                                                     Percentage Point Change in Receipt
                                   40




                                                                                                                                                40
                            30




                                                                                                                                         30
                     20




                                                                                                                                  20
              10




                                                                                                                           10
        0




                                                                                                                     0
                                                -12 -10 -8   -6   -4     -2    0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
                                                                              Month Relative to Job Loss                                                      -12 -10 -8   -6   -4     -2    0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
                                                                                                                                                                                            Month Relative to Job Loss
                                                                       Any UI          Any SNAP
                                                                       Any TANF        Any SS                                                                                        Any UI          Any SNAP
                                                                       Any SSI         Any FRPL                                                                                      Any TANF        Any SS
                                                                       Any WIC         Any Energy Assistance                                                                         Any SSI         Any FRPL
                                                                                                                                                                                     Any WIC         Any Energy Assistance

           (a) Work-Limiting Disability, Percentage Point
                              Effect                                                                                                                         (b) No Disability, Percentage Point Effect
                                           10




                                                                                                                                                        10
        Percentage Point Change in Receipt




                                                                                                                     Percentage Point Change in Receipt
                                  7.5




                                                                                                                                               7.5
                          5




                                                                                                                                       5
                 2.5




                                                                                                                             2.5
          0




                                                                                                                      0




                                                -12 -10 -8   -6   -4     -2    0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22                                                 -12 -10 -8   -6   -4     -2    0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
                                                                              Month Relative to Job Loss                                                                                    Month Relative to Job Loss

                                                                       Any SNAP                   Any TANF                                                                           Any SNAP                   Any TANF
                                                                       Any SS                     Any SSI                                                                            Any SS                     Any SSI
                                                                       Any FRPL                   Any WIC                                                                            Any FRPL                   Any WIC
                                                                       Any Energy Assistance                                                                                         Any Energy Assistance


           (c) Work-Limiting Disability, Percentage Point                                                            (d) No Disability, Percentage Point Effect, Omit
                         Effect, Omit UI                                                                                                    UI
Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. We split the sample
by self-reported disability status (self-reported work-limiting disability or no disability that affects work) in the first survey month. We
exclude individuals who report a work-preventing disability in the first survey month. The model includes individual fixed effects and
age fixed effects. The horizontal axis denotes months from job loss. The markers represent the event study coefficients. The results are
weighted using individual survey weight in the month of job loss. Standard errors clustered at the individual level and the 95% confidence
intervals are plotted in the dashed lines.




                                                                                                                31
    Figure 11: Event Study around Job Loss: Own Earnings and Value of Safety Net Programs, Disability
                                                                                      Subgroups




                                                                                                          0
                0
           Dollar Amount




                                                                                                     Dollar Amount
                                                                                                            -1000
                  -1000




                                                                                                  -2000
        -2000




                                                                                                          -3000
                -3000




                            -12 -10 -8    -6    -4    -2    0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22                            -12 -10 -8    -6    -4    -2    0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
                                                           Month Relative to Job Loss                                                                Month Relative to Job Loss

                                                             Earnings   + UI                                                                           Earnings   + UI
                                                             + SNAP     + TANF                                                                         + SNAP     + TANF
                                                             + SS       + SSI                                                                          + SS       + SSI
                                                             + FRPL     + WIC                                                                          + FRPL     + WIC
                                                             + Energy                                                                                  + Energy



                                        (a) Work-Limiting Disability                                                                          (b) No Disability
Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. We split the sample
by self-reported disability status (self-reported work-limiting disability or no disability that affects work) in the first survey month. We
exclude individuals who report a work-preventing disability in the first survey month. The model includes individual fixed effects and
age fixed effects. The model includes individual fixed effects and age fixed effects. The horizontal axis denotes months from job loss. The
markers represent the event study coefficients from models with earnings and earnings plus safety net programs additively as noted. The
results are weighted using individual survey weight in the month of job loss. Standard errors clustered at the individual level and the
95% confidence intervals are plotted in the dashed lines.




           Figure 12: Event Study around Job Loss: Self-Reported Disability Status, Disability Subgroups
        .1




                                                                                                  .04
        0




                                                                                                  .02
        -.1




                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                  -.02
        -.2




                           -12 -10 -8    -6    -4    -2     0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22                           -12 -10 -8    -6    -4    -2     0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
                                                           Month Relative to Job Loss                                                                Month Relative to Job Loss


                                        (a) Work-Limiting Disability                                                                          (b) No Disability
Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. We split the sample
by self-reported disability status (self-reported work-limiting disability or no disability that affects work) in the first survey month. We
exclude individuals who report a work-preventing disability in the first survey month. The model includes individual fixed effects and
age fixed effects. The horizontal axis denotes months from job loss. The markers represent the event study coefficients. The results are
weighted using individual survey weight in the month of job loss. Standard errors clustered at the individual level and the 95% confidence
intervals are plotted in the dashed lines.




                                                                                             32
                                Figure 13: Event Study on Insurance Coverage and Type




           (a) Percentage Point Change in Insurance                       (b) Percentage Point Change in Insurance
                     Coverage, Job Loser                                            Coverage, All Adults




                                           (c) Percentage Point Change in Insurance
                                                    Coverage, All Children
Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. The model includes
individual fixed effects and age fixed effects. The horizontal axis denotes months from job loss. The black dots represent the event study
coefficients. The results are weighted using individual survey weight in the month of job loss. Standard errors clustered at the individual
level and the 95% confidence intervals are plotted in the dashed lines.




                                                                  33
        Figure 14: Difference in Difference Estimates of Insurance Coverage by Household Poverty Ratio




                             (a) Insurance, Any adult                                                      (b) Insurance, Any child
Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. The results are weighted
using individual survey weight in the month of job loss. The orange bar represents the percentage point decline in the likelihood of having
insurance for at least one person in the household (child or adult). The blue bar shows the percentage point increase in having public
insurance coverage for at least one (child or adult) in the household.




                                                         Figure 15: Event Study around Job Loss: Receipt of Severance Pay
                                      50            40
                    Percentage Point Change in Receipt
                    10         20     0  30




                                                          -12 -10 -8   -6   -4    -2    0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
                                                                                       Month Relative to Job Loss

                                                                                 (a) Percentage Point Effect
Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. The model includes
individual fixed effects and age fixed effects. The horizontal axis denotes months from job loss. The markers represent the event study
coefficients. The results are weighted using individual survey weight in the month of job loss. Standard errors clustered at the individual
level and the 95% confidence intervals are plotted in the dashed lines.




                                                                                             34
                       Figure 16: Event Study around Job Loss: Own Earnings and Value of Severance Pay
                    0   -1000
              Dollar Amount
          -2000     -3000




                                -12 -10 -8   -6   -4   -2    0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
                                                            Month Relative to Job Loss

                                                            Earnings      + Severance

Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. The model includes
individual fixed effects and age fixed effects. The horizontal axis denotes months from job loss. The markers represent the event study
coefficients on earnings and earnings plus severance pay. The results are weighted using individual survey weight in the month of job
loss. Standard errors clustered at the individual level and the 95% confidence intervals are plotted in the dashed lines.




                                                                   35
 Figure 17: Difference in Difference Estimates of Severance Pay, by HH Poverty Status in First Survey Month




Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. The plotted estimates are
from a difference in difference version of equation (1) with a post period dummy replacing the event time coefficients. We estimate this
model for the full sample, and split by household poverty ratio in the first survey month. For the value of severance on the right scale, we
plot the coefficients with severance pay value as the outcome variable. For receipt, on the left scale, we plot the coefficients with receipt
of severance pay as the outcome variable. For the percent of lost earnings replaced, also on the left scale, we coefficient on severance
pay value for the numerator, and, for the denominator, we run regressions with earnings as the outcome variable and use the estimated
coefficient on the post dummy for each sample. The results are weighted using individual survey weight in the month of job loss.




                                                                   36
                                                           Figure 18: Event Study around Job Loss: Household Poverty
               30




                                                                                                                                                 30
   Percentage Point Change




                                                                                                                                     Percentage Point Change
                      20




                                                                                                                                                       20
       10




                                                                                                                                         10
               0




                                                                                                                                                 0
                             -12 -10 -8   -6    -4   -2    0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22                                                                      -12 -10 -8   -6    -4   -2    0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
                                                          Month Relative to Job Loss                                                                                                        Month Relative to Job Loss

                                               Below Poverty        Below 200% Poverty                                                                                           Below Poverty        Below 200% Poverty
                                               Below 400% Poverty                                                                                                                Below 400% Poverty



     (a) Household Earned Income / Poverty Threshold                                                                                           (b) Household Cash Income / Poverty Threshold
                                                                                30
                                                                    Percentage Point Change
                                                                        10      0     20




                                                                                              -12 -10 -8   -6    -4   -2    0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
                                                                                                                           Month Relative to Job Loss

                                                                                                                Below Poverty                      Below 200% Poverty
                                                                                                                Below 400% Poverty


                                                                             (c) Household Cash and Near-Cash Income /
                                                                                         Poverty Threshold




Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. The model includes individual
fixed effects and age fixed effects. The outcome variables are the ratio of total household income, as noted, to Census household poverty
thresholds, which are assigned to each household in the SIPP based on household size and composition. The horizontal axis denotes
months from job loss. The markers represent the event study coefficients. The results are weighted using individual survey weight in the
month of job loss.




                                                                                                                               37
7   Tables
            Table 1: Demographics of Job Losers and Full Sample in 1st Survey Month

                         All Job Losers   Job Losers w 1 Year Job Tenure   Full Sample of Workers   Workers w 1 Year Job Tenure


    Earnings (2015$s)       3791.21                  4491.55                      4550.93                     5915.17
    Age                      39.81                    41.24                        41.95                       42.09
    Female                    0.45                     0.48                         0.52                        0.49
    Hispanic                  0.17                     0.16                         0.12                        0.10
    Non-Hispanic Black        0.12                     0.11                         0.10                        0.10
    Non-Hispanic White        0.66                     0.68                         0.73                        0.74
    Other                     0.05                     0.05                         0.05                        0.05
    Less than HS              0.14                     0.12                         0.10                        0.07
    HS                        0.48                     0.47                         0.44                        0.44
    Some College              0.18                     0.18                         0.17                        0.17
    College                   0.20                     0.23                         0.29                        0.32
    Married                   0.61                     0.64                         0.70                        0.71
    # Kids                    0.91                     0.88                         0.92                        0.89
    N                        12,081                   7,781                       173,875                      98,557
    Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads,
    spouses, and unmarried partners aged 24-60. The results are weighted using individual survey weight in the first
    survey month.




                                                               38
                                       Table 2: Summary Statistics

                                                                            Pre-Job-Loss Post-Job-Loss


               Monthly Income Receipt
               Receipt of Own UI                                               2.45          24.48
               Receipt of Hhold SNAP                                            7.12         10.19
               Receipt of Hhold TANF                                            1.09          1.21
               Receipt of Own Social Security                                   0.57          1.46
               Receipt of Own Supplemental Security Income                     0.33          0.58
               Receipt of Hhold FRPL                                           15.34         16.99
               Receipt of Hhold WIC                                            5.81           6.02
               Receipt of Hhold Energy Subsidy                                  0.20          0.19
               Monthly Health Insurance Receipt
               Own Private Health Insurance                                    0.77          0.62
               Own Public Health Insurance                                     0.05          0.07
               Own Any Health Insurance                                        0.81          0.68
               Monthly Income Amounts (2015$s)
               Own Earnings                                                   4539.48       2460.13
               Own UI Benefits                                                 27.87         322.77
               Hhold SNAP Benefits                                             24.67          37.11
               Hhold TANF Benefits                                              5.18           5.77
               Own Social Security Benefits                                     5.77          17.25
               Own Supplemental Security Income Benefits                       2.01            4.38
               Hhold FRPL Benefits                                             19.44          21.07
               Hhold WIC Benefits                                              3.82            3.85
               Hhold Energy Subsidy                                             0.19           0.60
               Household Poverty Status
               Hhold Earned Income Below Poverty Line                          11.23         30.13
               Hhold Cash Income Below Poverty Line                             8.19         18.17
               Hhold Cash Income + Near-Cash Transfers Below Poverty Line      6.19          16.51
               N                                                              68,649        122,864
Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses,
and unmarried partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to
losing it. The results are weighted using individual survey weight in the month of job loss. Pre-period observations
are 12 to 1 month prior to job loss. Post-period observations are 1 to 24 months after the job loss.




                                                        39
    Table 3: Event Study Coefficients on Earnings and Income Made Up for by Safety Net Benefits
                          Earnings      Plus UI      Plus SNAP     Plus TANF      Plus SS       Plus SSI     Plus FRPL     Plus WIC      Plus Energy
-12                       111.378        72.475        70.946        71.613        73.602        74.113        73.128        73.169         73.269
                          (55.454)      (55.050)      (55.035)      (55.046)      (54.954)      (54.923)      (54.924)      (54.926)       (54.927)

-10                       83.623         52.814        53.547        53.739        55.134        55.285        54.568        54.612        54.666
                          (49.967)      (49.497)      (49.489)      (49.498)      (49.426)      (49.401)      (49.410)      (49.412)      (49.412)

-8                       123.821        86.921        87.288        87.447        90.023        90.514        89.577        89.621        89.658
                          (44.053)      (43.749)      (43.739)      (43.743)      (43.709)      (43.694)      (43.700)      (43.702)      (43.702)

-6                       126.762        86.673        85.563        85.723        88.751        89.361        88.111        88.119        88.047
                          (39.623)      (39.619)      (39.599)      (39.600)      (39.619)      (39.612)      (39.617)      (39.618)      (39.619)

-4                       154.545       120.121       118.582       118.980       120.067       120.406       119.708       119.699       119.669
                          (38.055)      (38.180)      (38.175)      (38.177)      (38.179)      (38.178)      (38.180)      (38.180)      (38.180)

0                        -1187.598     -827.844      -822.532      -822.307      -821.192      -821.232      -820.673      -820.670      -820.657
                           (69.152)      (69.907)      (69.909)      (69.910)      (69.924)      (69.926)      (69.926)      (69.926)      (69.925)

2                        -2948.353     -2388.005     -2377.972     -2377.313     -2376.052     -2375.534     -2374.512     -2374.479     -2374.342
                           (66.865)      (65.744)      (65.761)      (65.763)      (65.773)      (65.786)      (65.787)      (65.786)      (65.785)

4                        -2560.732     -2087.562     -2076.294     -2075.662     -2073.841     -2073.286     -2071.964     -2071.908     -2071.798
                           (70.086)      (68.689)      (68.724)      (68.726)      (68.742)      (68.754)      (68.747)      (68.745)      (68.744)

6                        -2202.492     -1857.853     -1846.301     -1845.356     -1840.476     -1840.406     -1838.762     -1838.686     -1838.467
                           (70.298)      (68.362)      (68.367)      (68.369)      (68.366)      (68.371)      (68.354)      (68.351)      (68.350)

8                        -1919.515     -1662.198     -1651.089     -1649.798     -1642.065     -1640.996     -1639.185     -1639.014     -1638.628
                           (71.673)      (70.021)      (70.013)      (70.016)      (69.985)      (69.982)      (69.970)      (69.969)      (69.967)

10                       -1765.883     -1554.684     -1543.098     -1541.647     -1532.572     -1530.299     -1528.491     -1528.372     -1527.729
                           (74.953)      (73.556)      (73.543)      (73.562)      (73.548)      (73.546)      (73.533)      (73.529)      (73.527)

12                       -1708.196     -1530.389     -1520.658     -1519.603     -1510.894     -1508.194     -1506.510     -1506.492     -1505.676
                           (76.737)      (75.441)      (75.400)      (75.417)      (75.427)      (75.425)      (75.405)      (75.400)      (75.402)

14                       -1590.212     -1435.008     -1425.481     -1425.310     -1415.155     -1411.416     -1409.678     -1409.811     -1409.118
                           (85.283)      (84.056)      (83.968)      (83.977)      (83.961)      (83.955)      (83.933)      (83.929)      (83.929)

16                       -1480.870     -1357.419     -1347.343     -1347.608     -1335.000     -1330.275     -1328.373     -1328.360     -1327.717
                           (88.761)      (87.624)      (87.551)      (87.556)      (87.557)      (87.552)      (87.529)      (87.523)      (87.521)

18                       -1456.507     -1364.423     -1355.429     -1356.715     -1345.561     -1339.580     -1337.884     -1337.841     -1337.264
                           (91.608)      (90.398)      (90.296)      (90.298)      (90.285)      (90.291)      (90.271)      (90.262)      (90.257)

20                       -1382.341     -1308.180     -1300.104     -1301.380     -1291.148     -1285.189     -1284.038     -1284.092     -1283.032
                           (98.625)      (97.408)      (97.277)      (97.277)      (97.343)      (97.352)      (97.337)      (97.330)      (97.323)

22                       -1362.890     -1319.810     -1312.310     -1313.247     -1299.749     -1294.223     -1293.122     -1293.132     -1292.003
                           (103.090)     (101.748)     (101.616)     (101.612)     (101.699)     (101.711)     (101.698)     (101.693)     (101.693)
Mean Y Before Job Loss      4495.19       4524.22       4549.24       4554.59       4560.91       4563.30       4583.44       4587.25       4587.49
Observations                198689        198689        198689        198689        198689        198689        198689        198689        198689

      Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses,
      and unmarried partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to
      losing it. The model includes individual fixed effects and age fixed effects. We display the estimates on the event time
      variables. The results are weighted using individual survey weight in the month of job loss. Standard errors clustered
      at the individual level. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                                       40
                             Table 4: Event Study Coefficients on Safety Net Receipt

                                            UI      SNAP      TANF        SS        SSI      FRPL        WIC Energy
               -12                       -2.418      -0.390    0.158     0.092     0.079    -0.948      -0.201  0.077
                                          (0.468)   (0.366)   (0.175)   (0.152)   (0.121)   (0.456)    (0.322) (0.064)

               -10                       -1.851      0.157     0.076     0.060     0.039    -0.826      -0.212    0.052
                                          (0.426)   (0.334)   (0.144)   (0.133)   (0.105)   (0.442)    (0.287)   (0.067)

               -8                        -2.485      0.104     0.051     0.047     0.069    -0.720      -0.179    0.087
                                          (0.357)   (0.291)   (0.117)   (0.110)   (0.083)   (0.355)    (0.247)   (0.061)

               -6                        -2.802      -0.319    0.041     0.060    0.099     -0.881      -0.077    0.007
                                          (0.291)   (0.238)   (0.096)   (0.079)   (0.059)    (0.299)   (0.207)   (0.049)

               -4                        -2.509     -0.341     0.079     -0.002   0.061     -0.660      -0.009    -0.021
                                          (0.215)   (0.166)   (0.059)   (0.043)   (0.036)    (0.205)   (0.132)   (0.033)

               0                        29.122      1.107      0.009     0.086     -0.025   0.422       0.027     -0.010
                                         (0.507)    (0.195)   (0.070)   (0.064)   (0.037)   (0.191)    (0.133)   (0.050)

               2                        41.111      2.341      0.101     0.148     0.010    0.795       0.212     0.027
                                         (0.671)    (0.299)   (0.100)   (0.097)   (0.061)   (0.316)    (0.203)   (0.072)

               4                        34.284      2.844     0.196     0.221      0.022    1.099       0.269     0.027
                                         (0.681)    (0.329)   (0.117)   (0.117)   (0.072)   (0.363)    (0.251)   (0.077)

               6                        25.443      2.831     0.323     0.450      0.011    1.448       0.283     0.091
                                         (0.670)    (0.357)   (0.145)   (0.144)   (0.082)   (0.412)    (0.295)   (0.098)

               8                        19.126      2.827     0.403     0.659      0.129    1.435       0.427     0.082
                                         (0.672)    (0.388)   (0.160)   (0.168)   (0.107)   (0.440)    (0.325)   (0.103)

               10                       15.815      3.174     0.488     0.818     0.266     1.352       0.476     0.000
                                         (0.692)    (0.437)   (0.187)   (0.182)   (0.124)   (0.482)    (0.368)   (0.095)

               12                       13.735      2.925     0.387     0.836     0.367     1.477       0.451     -0.068
                                         (0.713)    (0.472)   (0.195)   (0.187)   (0.137)   (0.516)    (0.399)   (0.097)

               14                       12.156      2.892      0.275    0.818     0.419     1.634       0.310     -0.056
                                         (0.742)    (0.525)   (0.192)   (0.212)   (0.164)   (0.564)    (0.427)   (0.113)

               16                        9.709      3.055      0.207    0.886     0.552     1.735       0.407     0.026
                                         (0.757)    (0.526)   (0.199)   (0.232)   (0.206)   (0.589)    (0.456)   (0.144)

               18                        7.229      3.220      0.054    1.023     0.682     1.656       0.372     -0.060
                                         (0.782)    (0.568)   (0.206)   (0.257)   (0.237)   (0.638)    (0.485)   (0.133)

               20                        5.900      3.031      -0.017   1.303     0.581     1.180       0.441     -0.018
                                         (0.823)    (0.603)   (0.224)   (0.281)   (0.267)   (0.689)    (0.517)   (0.140)

               22                        3.707      3.031      0.049    1.604     0.610      1.192      0.424     0.044
                                         (0.875)    (0.653)   (0.243)   (0.310)   (0.286)   (0.729)    (0.541)   (0.162)
               Mean Y Before Job Loss      2.56       7.20     1.15       0.63     0.39      15.90      5.80      0.10
               Observations              198689     198689    198689    198689    198689    198689     198689    198689
Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. The model includes
individual fixed effects and age fixed effects. We display the estimates on the event time variables. The results are weighted using
individual survey weight in the month of job loss. Standard errors clustered at the individual level. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                                41
                             Table 5: Event Study Coefficients on Household Poverty

                                       Earned Income                        Cash Income              Cash Income + Near-Cash Transfers
                             <100%        <200%        <400%     <100%        <200%       <400%      <100%      <200%       <400%
   -12                        0.171        -0.754       -0.644    0.528        -0.140      0.489      0.690      -0.099      0.549
                             (0.562)      (0.652)      (0.637)   (0.499)      (0.636)     (0.653)    (0.482)    (0.647)     (0.653)

   -10                        -0.184      -1.236        -0.364    0.024        -0.562      0.524      0.155      -0.619      0.583
                             (0.491)      (0.599)      (0.581)   (0.436)      (0.581)     (0.601)    (0.427)    (0.596)     (0.601)

   -8                        -0.847       -1.076        -0.458    -0.554       -0.521      0.452      -0.519     -0.613      0.524
                             (0.435)      (0.517)      (0.502)   (0.393)      (0.510)     (0.516)    (0.376)    (0.521)     (0.515)

   -6                        -0.751      -1.446         -0.349   -0.574        -0.704      0.448      -0.438    -0.795       0.473
                             (0.378)      (0.455)      (0.439)   (0.341)      (0.453)     (0.452)    (0.332)    (0.453)     (0.453)

   -4                        -1.034      -0.874     -0.684       -0.674       -0.696       -0.108    -0.570     -0.788       -0.069
                              (0.264)     (0.334)   (0.326)       (0.247)     (0.330)     (0.341)    (0.245)    (0.327)     (0.341)

   0                         18.128      16.930     9.577        10.512      13.205       7.833      10.624     13.378      7.848
                              (0.443)     (0.459)   (0.427)       (0.395)     (0.443)     (0.428)     (0.396)    (0.446)    (0.428)

   2                         29.106      27.923     18.746       14.739      21.045       16.023     14.600     21.131     16.079
                              (0.659)     (0.672)    (0.607)      (0.545)     (0.633)      (0.594)    (0.543)    (0.642)    (0.595)

   4                         23.891      23.694     16.139       11.421      17.071       13.634     10.920     17.096     13.718
                              (0.663)     (0.698)    (0.642)      (0.537)     (0.657)      (0.630)    (0.532)    (0.666)    (0.631)

   6                         20.337      20.513     14.269       10.089      14.699       12.211     9.803      14.834     12.300
                              (0.676)     (0.727)    (0.664)      (0.540)     (0.683)      (0.659)   (0.532)     (0.691)    (0.660)

   8                         17.985      18.376     11.986       9.036       13.942       10.271     8.543      14.035     10.352
                              (0.706)     (0.757)    (0.698)     (0.575)      (0.718)      (0.690)   (0.562)     (0.726)    (0.692)

   10                        16.224      16.879     11.444       8.148       12.376       9.869      7.732      12.568      9.913
                              (0.744)     (0.789)    (0.726)     (0.613)      (0.751)     (0.717)    (0.602)     (0.761)    (0.718)

   12                        15.690      16.326     11.114       8.430       12.338       9.909      7.955      12.380      9.913
                              (0.783)     (0.829)    (0.753)     (0.657)      (0.792)     (0.756)    (0.647)     (0.806)    (0.758)

   14                        14.871      15.794     10.314       8.376       11.883       8.648      7.868      12.022      8.692
                              (0.824)     (0.881)    (0.811)     (0.697)      (0.846)     (0.812)    (0.684)     (0.855)    (0.814)

   16                        13.330      14.324     9.518        7.099       11.022       7.920      6.665      11.102      7.924
                              (0.864)     (0.926)   (0.841)      (0.733)      (0.893)     (0.846)    (0.716)     (0.902)    (0.848)

   18                        12.681      13.026     8.390        7.253       10.731       6.918      6.836      10.801      6.962
                              (0.908)     (0.987)   (0.896)      (0.777)      (0.953)     (0.900)    (0.764)     (0.948)    (0.902)

   20                        11.209      12.652     8.469        6.380       10.177       6.973      5.980      10.339      7.026
                              (0.974)     (1.051)   (0.942)      (0.833)      (1.012)     (0.944)    (0.808)     (1.009)    (0.946)

   22                        11.291      12.650     7.802        6.868       10.254       6.899      6.333      10.522      6.914
                              (1.048)     (1.130)   (1.008)      (0.908)      (1.087)     (1.017)    (0.880)     (1.083)    (1.019)
   Mean Y Before Job Loss      11.63       30.27     64.10         8.44        25.97       60.97       6.97       25.36      60.90
   Observations               198689      198689    198689       198689       198689      198689     198689      198689     198689
Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. The model includes
individual fixed effects and age fixed effects. We display the estimates on the event time variables. The results are weighted using
individual survey weight in the month of job loss. Standard errors clustered at the individual level. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                                   42
8      Appendix: Additional Results
                                       Figure A1: Sample Size by Pre-Job-Loss Household Poverty




                                  1500 1000
                          Num Job Losers
                        500       0




                                              100            400                   700                 1000
                                                                   Poverty Ratio

Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it.




                                                                    43
Figure A2: Difference in Difference Estimates of Safety Net Program Value, by Pre-Job-Loss Monthly Earnings




Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. The plotted estimates are
from a difference in difference version of equation (1) with a post period dummy replacing the event time coefficients. We estimate this
model for the full sample, and split by pre-job-loss earnings quintile. The outcome variables are dollar value of the benefits received from
each program. The results are weighted using individual survey weight in the month of job loss.




Figure A3: Difference in Difference Estimates of Safety Net Program Value as Percentage of Lost Earnings, by
                                                 Pre-Job-Loss Monthly Earnings




Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. The plotted estimates are
from a difference in difference version of equation (1) with a post period dummy replacing the event time coefficients. We estimate this
model for the full sample, and split by pre-job-loss earnings quintile. We sum the estimated effect on each program from Figure (A2) for
the numerator. For the denominator, we run regressions with earnings as the outcome variable and use the estimated coefficient on the
post dummy for each sample. The results are weighted using individual survey weight in the month of job loss.




                                                                   44
         Figure A4: Difference in Difference Estimates of Safety Net Program Value, by Race/Ethnicity




Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. The plotted estimates
are from a difference in difference version of equation (1) with a post period dummy replacing the event time coefficients. We estimate
this model for the full sample, and split by race and ethnicity. The outcome variables are dollar value of the benefits received from each
program. The results are weighted using individual survey weight in the month of job loss.




Figure A5: Difference in Difference Estimates of Safety Net Program Value as Percentage of Lost Earnings, by
                                                          Race/Ethnicity




Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. The plotted estimates
are from a difference in difference version of equation (1) with a post period dummy replacing the event time coefficients. We estimate
this model for the full sample, and split by race and ethnicity. We sum the estimated effect on each program from Figure (A4) for the
numerator. For the denominator, we run regressions with earnings as the outcome variable and use the estimated coefficient on the post
dummy for each sample. The results are weighted using individual survey weight in the month of job loss.




                                                                  45
 Figure A6: Difference in Difference Estimates of Safety Net Program Value, by Presence of Children in First
                                                            Survey Month




Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. The plotted estimates are
from a difference in difference version of equation (1) with a post period dummy replacing the event time coefficients. We estimate this
model for the full sample, and split by presence of children. The results are weighted using individual survey weight in the month of job
loss.




Figure A7: Difference in Difference Estimates of Safety Net Program Value as Percentage of Lost Earnings, by
                                          Presence of Children in First Survey Month




Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. The plotted estimates
are from a difference in difference version of equation (1) with a post period dummy replacing the event time coefficients. We estimate
this model for the full sample, and split by presence of children. We sum the estimated effect on each program from Figure (A4) for the
numerator. For the denominator, we run regressions with earnings as the outcome variable and use the estimated coefficient on the post
dummy for each sample. The results are weighted using individual survey weight in the month of job loss.




                                                                   46
         Table A1: Event Study Coefficients on Safety Net Receipt, For Those Initially Disabled

                                             UI     SNAP      TANF         SS       SSI     FRPL       WIC      Energy
                -12                        -2.229    0.412     1.009     -1.265    0.525     0.390     1.838     -0.021
                                          (1.543)   (1.792)   (0.750)   (0.973)   (0.755)   (1.663)   (1.452)   (0.350)

                -10                        -1.497    1.457     0.588     -0.995    0.204     0.781     1.149     -0.168
                                          (1.387)   (1.593)   (0.725)   (0.920)   (0.627)   (1.456)   (1.364)   (0.555)

                -8                        -2.457     1.052     0.135     -0.753    0.567     1.190     1.309     -0.099
                                          (1.181)   (1.275)   (0.390)   (0.778)   (0.517)   (1.131)   (1.426)   (0.571)

                -6                       -2.647      0.241     0.093     0.078     0.560     0.485     1.199     -0.281
                                          (1.015)   (1.008)   (0.310)   (0.551)   (0.517)   (0.961)   (1.102)   (0.520)

                -4                         -0.988    0.127     0.095     0.143     0.439     0.298    1.569      -0.152
                                          (0.707)   (0.744)   (0.223)   (0.298)   (0.425)   (0.730)   (0.580)   (0.240)

                0                        24.218     1.542      -0.127    0.552     -0.032   0.962      -0.040    -0.303
                                          (1.842)   (0.855)   (0.277)   (0.517)   (0.297)   (0.435)   (0.668)   (0.309)

                2                        35.910     3.961      0.372     0.674     0.523    1.480      0.135     -0.370
                                          (2.529)   (1.386)   (0.344)   (0.643)   (0.519)   (0.847)   (0.831)   (0.419)

                4                        29.825     5.928      0.642     1.250     0.665    1.945      0.328     -0.351
                                          (2.597)   (1.617)   (0.395)   (0.874)   (0.467)   (0.941)   (0.953)   (0.413)

                6                        22.308     5.649     1.370     2.173      0.772    3.192      1.687     -0.109
                                          (2.493)   (1.750)   (0.726)   (1.011)   (0.520)   (1.245)   (1.203)   (0.544)

                8                        16.112     4.938      0.956    3.455     1.093     2.914      1.912     -0.260
                                          (2.588)   (1.778)   (0.677)   (1.238)   (0.644)   (1.362)   (1.190)   (0.644)

                10                       14.703     3.873      0.277    4.137     1.174      1.197     1.578     -0.789
                                          (2.758)   (1.889)   (0.545)   (1.355)   (0.683)   (1.483)   (1.270)   (0.557)

                12                       12.520     3.649      -0.085 3.948       1.241      0.611     1.353     -0.763
                                          (2.833)   (1.953)   (0.668) (1.274)     (0.709)   (1.502)   (1.299)   (0.597)

                14                        9.795     3.998      -0.148 4.109       2.068      1.046     1.770     -0.778
                                          (2.969)   (1.995)   (0.708) (1.352)     (0.806)   (1.623)   (1.332)   (0.652)

                16                        7.666     4.293      -0.602 4.008       2.378      2.192     2.142     -0.762
                                          (2.953)   (2.093)   (0.786) (1.382)     (0.919)   (1.731)   (1.492)   (0.675)

                18                         4.681    5.765      -0.645 4.437       2.886     4.145     3.278      -0.751
                                          (2.941)   (2.329)   (0.883) (1.497)     (1.016)   (2.026)   (1.659)   (0.713)

                20                         2.810    5.911      -0.529 4.824       2.940     4.501     3.468      -0.487
                                          (3.068)   (2.412)   (0.935) (1.646)     (1.043)   (2.086)   (1.729)   (0.827)

                22                         0.960    5.966      -0.712 6.503       2.926     4.001     3.135      -0.476
                                          (3.319)   (2.619)   (1.030) (1.917)     (1.207)   (2.113)   (1.762)   (0.870)
                Mean Y Before Job Loss      2.74     10.19      1.47    5.55        2.29     17.97      5.07      0.57
                Observations               12890     12890     12890   12890       12890     12890     12890     12890
Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. The model includes
individual fixed effects and age fixed effects. We display the estimates on the event time variables. The results are weighted using
individual survey weight in the month of job loss. Standard errors clustered at the individual level. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                                47
      Table A2: Event Study Coefficients on Safety Net Receipt, For Those Initially Not Disabled

                                            UI      SNAP      TANF        SS        SSI      FRPL        WIC Energy
               -12                       -2.447      -0.401    0.103     0.186     0.055    -0.991      -0.306  0.087
                                          (0.487)   (0.373)   (0.180)   (0.147)   (0.120)   (0.474)    (0.328) (0.065)

               -10                       -1.900      0.109     0.041     0.131     0.031    -0.900      -0.283    0.068
                                          (0.444)   (0.341)   (0.147)   (0.128)   (0.105)   (0.460)    (0.291)   (0.062)

               -8                        -2.503      0.072     0.039     0.099     0.039    -0.815      -0.266   0.099
                                          (0.372)   (0.298)   (0.122)   (0.106)   (0.083)   (0.370)    (0.246)   (0.053)

               -6                        -2.830      -0.330    0.035     0.062     0.068 -0.956         -0.158    0.026
                                          (0.303)   (0.245)   (0.100)   (0.076)   (0.054) (0.312)      (0.209)   (0.040)

               -4                        -2.603     -0.354     0.078     -0.008    0.035    -0.707      -0.101    -0.013
                                          (0.224)   (0.170)   (0.061)   (0.043)   (0.028)    (0.213)   (0.135)   (0.031)

               0                         29.417     1.075      0.020     0.059     -0.027   0.390       0.032     0.004
                                          (0.526)   (0.201)   (0.072)   (0.060)   (0.035)   (0.201)    (0.135)   (0.050)

               2                         41.423     2.228      0.088     0.123     -0.021   0.756       0.212     0.047
                                          (0.695)   (0.306)   (0.104)   (0.096)   (0.057)   (0.332)    (0.209)   (0.071)

               4                         34.550     2.633      0.171     0.164     -0.015   1.045       0.256     0.046
                                          (0.704)   (0.334)   (0.122)   (0.112)   (0.071)   (0.381)    (0.260)   (0.077)

               6                         25.618     2.634     0.264     0.356      -0.034   1.333       0.189     0.095
                                          (0.694)   (0.364)   (0.148)   (0.140)   (0.081)   (0.430)    (0.305)   (0.099)

               8                         19.282     2.672     0.373     0.505      0.071    1.334       0.329     0.093
                                          (0.694)   (0.398)   (0.165)   (0.162)   (0.107)   (0.459)    (0.337)   (0.103)

               10                        15.848     3.105     0.506     0.628     0.209     1.356       0.397     0.038
                                          (0.714)   (0.450)   (0.195)   (0.174)   (0.125)   (0.502)    (0.382)   (0.095)

               12                        13.777     2.852     0.424     0.661     0.313     1.531       0.385     -0.035
                                          (0.736)   (0.487)   (0.203)   (0.182)   (0.139)   (0.540)    (0.415)   (0.097)

               14                        12.280     2.791      0.309    0.639     0.313     1.672       0.212     -0.022
                                          (0.766)   (0.543)   (0.199)   (0.210)   (0.166)   (0.590)    (0.445)   (0.114)

               16                        9.828      2.942      0.269    0.715     0.435     1.707       0.303     0.062
                                         (0.783)    (0.543)   (0.205)   (0.231)   (0.211)   (0.616)    (0.476)   (0.148)

               18                        7.378      3.010      0.110    0.823     0.543     1.494       0.195     -0.031
                                         (0.809)    (0.584)   (0.212)   (0.258)   (0.243)   (0.666)    (0.504)   (0.136)

               20                        6.100      2.808      0.027    1.087      0.432     0.965      0.259     -0.004
                                         (0.852)    (0.622)   (0.231)   (0.280)   (0.277)   (0.720)    (0.538)   (0.141)

               22                        3.890      2.813      0.104    1.298      0.470     1.012      0.256     0.062
                                         (0.905)    (0.673)   (0.249)   (0.306)   (0.295)   (0.763)    (0.563)   (0.164)
               Mean Y Before Job Loss      2.55       6.99     1.13       0.29     0.26      15.76       5.85     0.06
               Observations              185799     185799    185799    185799    185799    185799     185799    185799
Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. The model includes
individual fixed effects and age fixed effects. We display the estimates on the event time variables. The results are weighted using
individual survey weight in the month of job loss. Standard errors clustered at the individual level. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                                48
       Table A3: Event Study Coefficients on Self-Reported Disability, By Initial Disability Type

                                                                All    No Disability   Disability
                                    -12                       -0.004     -0.006          0.025
                                                             (0.004)     (0.003)        (0.032)

                                    -10                       -0.005      -0.006         0.016
                                                             (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.029)

                                    -8                       -0.008      -0.009          0.010
                                                             (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.026)

                                    -6                       -0.007      -0.007          0.008
                                                             (0.003)      (0.002)       (0.024)

                                    -4                       -0.004      -0.003          -0.006
                                                             (0.002)     (0.002)        (0.017)

                                    0                        0.006       0.007           -0.011
                                                             (0.002)     (0.002)        (0.013)

                                    2                        0.010       0.014         -0.058
                                                             (0.003)     (0.003)        (0.021)

                                    4                        0.013       0.018         -0.075
                                                             (0.003)     (0.003)        (0.023)

                                    6                        0.016       0.023         -0.104
                                                             (0.003)     (0.003)        (0.028)

                                    8                        0.017       0.024         -0.096
                                                             (0.004)     (0.004)        (0.030)

                                    10                       0.017       0.021         -0.068
                                                             (0.004)     (0.004)       (0.033)

                                    12                       0.016       0.022         -0.077
                                                             (0.004)     (0.004)       (0.034)

                                    14                       0.019       0.027         -0.096
                                                             (0.005)     (0.004)        (0.036)

                                    16                       0.022       0.028          -0.072
                                                             (0.005)     (0.005)        (0.038)

                                    18                       0.023       0.028           -0.052
                                                             (0.005)     (0.005)        (0.042)

                                    20                       0.022       0.028          -0.076
                                                             (0.006)     (0.005)        (0.045)

                                    22                       0.024       0.030          -0.082
                                                             (0.007)     (0.006)        (0.046)
                                    Mean Y Before Job Loss     0.06        0.03           0.58
                                    Observations             198689      185799          12890
Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. The model includes
individual fixed effects and age fixed effects. We display the estimates on the event time variables. The results are weighted using
individual survey weight in the month of job loss. Standard errors clustered at the individual level. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                                49
                         Table A4: Event Study Coefficients on Severance Pay Receipt

                                                                         Severance
                                                -12                      -0.973
                                                                          (0.117)

                                                -10                       -0.936
                                                                           (0.111)

                                                -8                        -0.907
                                                                           (0.107)

                                                -6                        -0.907
                                                                           (0.101)

                                                -4                        -0.300
                                                                           (0.112)

                                                0                         7.299
                                                                          (0.274)

                                                2                         0.797
                                                                          (0.169)

                                                4                         -0.663
                                                                           (0.123)

                                                6                         -0.706
                                                                           (0.119)

                                                8                         -0.715
                                                                           (0.124)

                                                10                        -0.759
                                                                           (0.128)

                                                12                        -0.724
                                                                           (0.140)

                                                14                        -0.764
                                                                           (0.147)

                                                16                        -0.738
                                                                           (0.155)

                                                18                        -0.684
                                                                           (0.170)

                                                20                        -0.679
                                                                           (0.181)

                                                22                        -0.671
                                                                           (0.191)
                                                Mean Y Before Job Loss       0.32
                                                Observations               198689
Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. The model includes
individual fixed effects and age fixed effects. We display the estimates on the event time variables. The results are weighted using
individual survey weight in the month of job loss. Standard errors clustered at the individual level. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                                50
      Table A5: Event Study Coefficients on Earnings and Income Made Up for by Severance Pay

                                                                 Earnings     Plus Severance
                                      -12                        111.378          46.409
                                                                 (55.454)        (62.167)

                                      -10                         83.623          21.946
                                                                  (49.967)       (56.159)

                                      -8                         123.821          59.265
                                                                  (44.053)       (49.761)

                                      -6                         126.762          64.913
                                                                  (39.623)       (44.946)

                                      -4                         154.545        139.276
                                                                  (38.055)       (53.547)

                                      0                         -1187.598      -600.138
                                                                  (69.152)      (105.850)

                                      2                         -2948.353      -2893.645
                                                                  (66.865)       (76.462)

                                      4                         -2560.732      -2605.471
                                                                  (70.086)       (74.762)

                                      6                         -2202.492      -2247.877
                                                                  (70.298)       (75.631)

                                      8                         -1919.515      -1963.226
                                                                  (71.673)       (77.938)

                                      10                        -1765.883      -1815.165
                                                                  (74.953)       (80.895)

                                      12                        -1708.196      -1752.291
                                                                  (76.737)       (84.080)

                                      14                        -1590.212      -1638.242
                                                                  (85.283)       (92.782)

                                      16                        -1480.870      -1527.286
                                                                  (88.761)       (97.163)

                                      18                        -1456.507      -1500.881
                                                                  (91.608)       (100.994)

                                      20                        -1382.341      -1427.321
                                                                  (98.625)       (108.531)

                                      22                        -1362.890      -1405.050
                                                                  (103.090)      (113.297)
                                      Mean Y Before Job Loss       4495.19        4517.85
                                      Observations                 198689         198689
Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. The model includes
individual fixed effects and age fixed effects. We display the estimates on the event time variables. The results are weighted using
individual survey weight in the month of job loss. Standard errors clustered at the individual level. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                                51
9   Appendix: Fully Balanced Sample




                          52
                                           Figure B1: Sample Size by Month Relative to Job Loss




                              70006000
                      Num Job Losers
                     5000     4000




                                         -12       -6        0           6            12   18         24
                                                             Month Relative to Job Loss

Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it.




                                                                    53
                     Figure B2: Event Study around Job Loss: Own Earnings, Balanced Sample




                                     1000        0
                         Change in Dollar Amount
                       -2000       -1000
                                     -3000




                                                     -12 -10 -8   -6   -4   -2    0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
                                                                                 Month Relative to Job Loss

Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. The model includes
individual fixed effects and age fixed effects. The horizontal axis denotes months from job loss. The black dots represent the event study
coefficients. The results are weighted using individual survey weight in the month of job loss. Standard errors clustered at the individual
level and the 95% confidence intervals are plotted in the dashed lines.


         Figure B3: Event Study around Job Loss: Own Likelihood of Any Earnings, Balanced Sample
                                     0
                       Percentage Point Change
                            -.4      -.6   -.2




                                                     -12 -10 -8   -6   -4   -2    0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
                                                                                 Month Relative to Job Loss

Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. The model includes
individual fixed effects and age fixed effects. The horizontal axis denotes months from job loss. The black dots represent the event study
coefficients. The results are weighted using individual survey weight in the month of job loss. Standard errors clustered at the individual
level and the 95% confidence intervals are plotted in the dashed lines.



                                                                                     54
                                    Figure B4: Event Study around Job Loss: Household Poverty, Balanced Sample
                      30
          Percentage Point Change
              10      0      20




                                     -12 -10 -8    -6    -4   -2    0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
                                                                   Month Relative to Job Loss

                                                        Below Poverty           Below 200% Poverty
                                                        Below 400% Poverty

Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. The model includes
individual fixed effects and age fixed effects. The outcome variables are the ratio of total household cash income to Census household
poverty thresholds, which are assigned to each household in the SIPP based on household size and composition. The horizontal axis
denotes months from job loss. The results are weighted using individual survey weight in the month of job loss.




                                                                        55
          Figure B5: Event Study around Job Loss: Receipt of Safety Net Programs, Balanced Sample




                                                       50
                    Percentage Point Change in Receipt
                    0     10     20     30     40




                                                            -12 -10 -8   -6   -4     -2    0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
                                                                                          Month Relative to Job Loss

                                                                                   Any UI            Any SNAP
                                                                                   Any TANF          Any SS
                                                                                   Any SSI           Any FRPL
                                                                                   Any WIC           Any Energy Assistance


                                                                                   (a) Percentage Point Effect
                                                       10
                    Percentage Point Change in Receipt
                       0      2.5      5      7.5




                                                            -12 -10 -8   -6   -4     -2    0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
                                                                                          Month Relative to Job Loss

                                                                                   Any SNAP                     Any TANF
                                                                                   Any SS                       Any SSI
                                                                                   Any FRPL                     Any WIC
                                                                                   Any Energy Assistance


                                                                          (b) Percentage Point Effect, Omit UI
Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. The model includes
individual fixed effects and age fixed effects. The horizontal axis denotes months from job loss. The markers represent the event study
coefficients. The results are weighted using individual survey weight in the month of job loss. Standard errors clustered at the individual
level and the 95% confidence intervals are plotted in the dashed lines.



                                                                                                56
Figure B6: Event Study around Job Loss: Own Earnings and Value of Safety Net Programs, Balanced Sample
                  0
             Dollar Amount
          -2000     -1000
                  -3000




                             -12 -10 -8   -6   -4   -2    0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
                                                         Month Relative to Job Loss

                                                           Earnings            + UI
                                                           + SNAP              + TANF
                                                           + SS                + SSI
                                                           + FRPL              + WIC
                                                           + Energy

Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. The model includes
individual fixed effects and age fixed effects. The horizontal axis denotes months from job loss. The markers represent the event study
coefficients from models with earnings and earnings plus safety net programs additively as noted. The results are weighted using individual
survey weight in the month of job loss. Standard errors clustered at the individual level and the 95% confidence intervals are plotted in
the dashed lines.




                                                                  57
  Figure B7: Difference in Difference Estimates of Safety Net Program Value After Job Loss, by HH Poverty
                                       Status in First Survey Month, Balanced Sample




Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. The plotted estimates are
from a difference in difference version of equation (1) with a post period dummy replacing the event time coefficients. We estimate this
model for the full sample, and split by household poverty ratio in the first survey month. The outcome variables are dollar value of the
benefits received from each program. The results are weighted using individual survey weight in the month of job loss.




  Figure B8: Difference in Difference Estimates of Safety Net Program Value as Percentage of Lost Earnings
                    After Job Loss, by HH Poverty Status in First Survey Month, Balanced Sample




Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. The plotted estimates
are from a difference in difference version of equation (1) with a post period dummy replacing the event time coefficients. We estimate
this model for the full sample, and split by household poverty ratio in the first survey month. We sum the estimated effect on each
program from Figure (B7) for the numerator. For the denominator, we run regressions with earnings as the outcome variable and use
the estimated coefficient on the post dummy for each sample. The results are weighted using individual survey weight in the month of
job loss.




                                                                   58
                                                           Figure B9: Event Study around Job Loss: Household Poverty




                                                                                                                                                 30
               30
   Percentage Point Change




                                                                                                                                     Percentage Point Change
                                                                                                                                                        20
        10           20




                                                                                                                                         10
               0




                                                                                                                                                 0
                             -12 -10 -8   -6    -4   -2    0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22                                                                      -12 -10 -8   -6    -4   -2    0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
                                                          Month Relative to Job Loss                                                                                                        Month Relative to Job Loss

                                               Below Poverty        Below 200% Poverty                                                                                           Below Poverty        Below 200% Poverty
                                               Below 400% Poverty                                                                                                                Below 400% Poverty



     (a) Household Earned Income / Poverty Threshold                                                                                           (b) Household Cash Income / Poverty Threshold
                                                                                30
                                                                    Percentage Point Change
                                                                        10      0     20




                                                                                              -12 -10 -8   -6    -4   -2    0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
                                                                                                                           Month Relative to Job Loss

                                                                                                                Below Poverty                      Below 200% Poverty
                                                                                                                Below 400% Poverty


                                                                             (c) Household Cash and Near-Cash Income /
                                                                                         Poverty Threshold




Notes: Data are from the 1996-2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample includes heads, spouses, and unmarried
partners aged 24-60 at the time of job loss who worked at their lost job for at least one year prior to losing it. The model includes individual
fixed effects and age fixed effects. The outcome variables are the ratio of total household income, as noted, to Census household poverty
thresholds, which are assigned to each household in the SIPP based on household size and composition. The horizontal axis denotes
months from job loss. The markers represent the event study coefficients. The results are weighted using individual survey weight in the
month of job loss.




                                                                                                                               59
