                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   EDUCATION AND CONSANGUINEOUS MARRIAGE

                                        . Pelin Akyol
                                        Naci H. Mocan

                                      Working Paper 28212
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28212


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020




We thank Lena Edlund, Noam Yuchtman, Murat Kirdar, Anastasia Litina, Jonathan Schulz,
Cagla Okten, Gunes Gokmen, Leyla Mocan, James Fenske, Jared Rubin, Munir Squires, Jean-
Paul Carvalho, Pauline Grosjean and the participants of the 24-Hour 2020 ASREC Virtual
Conference helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by . Pelin Akyol and Naci H. Mocan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Education and Consanguineous Marriage
. Pelin Akyol and Naci H. Mocan
NBER Working Paper No. 28212
December 2020
JEL No. I15,I18,I20,J10,Z1

                                          ABSTRACT

At least one of every five marriages is consanguineous (between couples who are second cousins
or closer) in the Middle East and North Africa, and the rate is higher than 50 percent in some
parts of the world. Consanguineous marriage generates serious health problems for the offspring
and constitutes an economic problem with its associated medical costs and the impact on human
capital. The prevalence of consanguineous marriage can shape various dimensions of the society
ranging from institutional structure to attitudes such as trust, individualism, and nepotism. Using
data from Turkey and leveraging an education reform which increased mandatory schooling by
three years, we find that the reform made women less likely to find consanguineous marriage as
an acceptable practice, and that the reform reduced women's propensity to marry a first cousin or
a blood relative. Exposure to the reform altered women's preferences in favor of personal
autonomy. Women who are exposed to the reform are more likely to have met their husbands
outside of family networks, they are less likely to get forced into marriage against their consent,
and they are less likely to agree that only a son can ensure the continuation of the family blood
line. These results indicate that educational attainment can alter behaviors and attitudes which
may be rooted in culture.


. Pelin Akyol
Bilkent University
Department of Economics
06800 Ankara / TURKEY
pelina@bilkent.edu.tr

Naci H. Mocan
Department of Economics
Louisiana State University
2439 BEC
Baton Rouge, LA 70803-6306
and NBER
mocan@lsu.edu
                                Education and Consanguineous Marriage


I.       Introduction
            It has been estimated that more than 10 percent of the world's population is related as
     second cousins or closer (Bittles and Black 2010), and that more than one billion people in North
     Africa, the Middle East and parts of Asia live in areas where at least 20 percent of marriages are
     consanguineous, which is defined as a union between couples who are second cousins or closer
     (Romeo and Bittles 2014). 1 The rate of consanguineous marriage is as high as 50 percent in some
     regions of the world (Hamamy et al. 2011, Tadmouri et al. 2009). As we describe in Section II,
     the underlying cultural and religious factors are likely dominant forces that determine the
     prevalence of consanguineous marriage in a country, although the change in this prevalence over
     time and across regions within a country suggests that other factors, including economic ones, are
     important as well.
            Using data from Turkey, where 20 percent of marriages are consanguineous, we investigate
     the impact of education on individuals' propensity to marry their first cousins and to marry blood
     relatives, as well as education's influence on people's tendency to approve such marriages. We
     leverage a Turkish education reform which went into effect in 1997. For political reasons, the
     reform was implemented very quickly and rather unexpectedly, and it increased the mandatory
     years of education from 5 to 8 years. Students who had completed the fifth grade in the Summer
     of 1997 have been exempted from the mandate of the reform, while younger cohorts were required
     to complete at least eight years of schooling. Using a nationally-representative micro data set,
     which contains detailed information on marriage characteristics, marital preferences and
     educational attainment, we confirm the well-documented finding that the reform had a significant
     impact on educational attainment.
            Our results show that the reform made women less likely to find consanguineous marriage
     as an acceptable practice, and that the reform reduced women's propensity to marry a first cousin
     or a blood relative. These behavioral changes are related to changes in women's preferences and
     to a rise in the extent of women's self-determination. For example, we demonstrate that women



     1
      The word consanguinity is derived from the Latin words of con (common, or the same) and sanguineus
     (blood)


                                                      1
who were exposed to the education reform are less likely to be in an arranged marriage, and that
they are less likely to have met their husbands through networks of their family, relatives or
neighbors. Importantly, we provide evidence that the reform reduced women's propensity of being
in a marriage to which they were forced by their families. Put differently, the exposure to the
reform reduced the tendency of women getting married without their consent. The reform also
changed women's preferences in favor of an educated husband, and it made women less likely to
agree with the statement that "only a son can ensure the continuation of the family blood line."
       The reform increased age at first marriage for women, and reduced the age difference
between married couples. Although the reform increased men's educational attainment as well, it
had no significant impact on men's preferences in these dimensions. We show that men's
propensity for consanguineous marriage declined because women tend to marry men who are four
years older on average, and as a result, some men who missed the reform are nevertheless impacted
by it indirectly, through the change in women's behavior.
       We make contributions to several areas of investigation. First, we add to a growing body
of research on nonpecuniary benefits of educational attainment. While there is a large literature
concentrating on private returns to education, nonpecuniary benefits of education and the
associated social returns have not been investigated as extensively. 2 Examples of this line of
inquiry include the impact of education on civic participation (Dee 2004; Milligan, Moretti and
Oreopoulos 2004), on criminal proclivity (Hjalmarsson, Holmlund and Lindquist 2015; Machin,
Marie and Vuji 2011), and on production of health (Chou et al. 2010; Lleras-Muney 2005).
       Within this literature, we contribute to a strand of research which focuses on the evolution
of cultural traits, and specifically to research that focuses on the influence of education on the
formation of beliefs and preferences. Education impacts beliefs and attitudes in a number of
dimensions, ranging from religiosity and superstition (Becker, Nagler and Woessmann 2017;
Mocan and Pogorelova 2017; Glaeser and Sacerdote 2008) to immigration (Cavaille and Marshall
2019). Education can also alter preferences and attitudes that directly impact women's well-being.
There is evidence that educational attainment makes women more intolerant of practices that are
harmful for their well-being, and that education makes individuals more likely to challenge


2
 See Card (2001) and Oreopoulos (2007) as examples research estimating the impact of education on
wages.



                                                2
authority (Cannonier and Mocan 2018; Friedman et al. 2016). 3 We add to this literature by
investigating the extent to which education impacts preferences for and the practices of
consanguineous marriage. In many societies around the world, the practice of consanguineous
marriage is part of the fabric of culture. Nevertheless, our results reveal that the propensity to
approve this practice and the propensity to be actually in a consanguineous marriage are malleable
and that these tendencies are influenced by women's educational attainment.
        Second, our results are important for research on the determinants of infant health. A large
literature in economics has demonstrated that infant health is influenced by in-utero exposure to
environmental hazards. 4       Similar to the deleterious effects of these environmental hazards,
medical literature has documented substantial health risks to the offspring of consanguineous
marriages, including premature birth, low birth weight, infant mortality, and serious congenital
diseases. These effects, however, are larger in consanguineous marriage in comparison to those
generated by environmental hazards. We provide the details in Section II.
        While the negative long-run impact of some undesirable birth outcomes, such as low birth
weight, can be counteracted by parental investments in childhood (Heckman 2006; Cunha and
Heckman 2008), permanent health problems such as congenital heart failure and cerebral palsy,
which are prevalent in children of consanguineous parents, are very difficult and costly to
counterbalance using ex-post interventions. This means that the reduction in consanguineous
marriage, generated by an increase in education, can be a vehicle through which improvements in
child health can be achieved. This is especially true in developing countries where high rates of
consanguinity, low education, and public health problems related to high infant and child mortality




3
  A broader literature has focused on the impact of female education on various behaviors and outcomes
ranging from fertility to infant health, to consumption of deleterious substances (Osili and Long 2008; Chou
et al. 2010).
4
  For example, fetal exposure to air pollution is shown to cause infant mortality (Greenstone and Hanna
2014; Currie and Neidell 2005; Chay and Greenstone 2003). Almond, Edlund and Palme (2009) find that
in-utero exposure to radiation lowers school performance of children and reduces future earnings, likely
by hindering cognitive development. Along the same lines, Sanders (2012) shows that exposure to
ambient pollution in-utero has a detrimental effect on test scores in high school. Low birth weight, which
is a significant predictor of future health and educational attainment (Bharadwaj, Lundborg and Rooth
2018; Currie 2009), is impacted by pregnant women's exposure to motor vehicle emissions (Currie and
Walker 2011), toxic air emissions from industrial plants (Currie et al. 2015), and by carbon monoxide
pollution (Coneus and Spiess 2012).


                                                     3
and morbidity co-exist, but public policy attempts to discourage such marriages are not pursued
because consanguineous marriage is considered to be a product of tradition and religion. 5
        Third, our results provide evidence on the empowerment effect of female education.
Education can empower women through a number of direct channels, such as the impact on labor
market opportunities and wages, and access to leadership positions in society (Duflo 2012).
Education can also empower women by altering women's preferences and attitudes regarding
issues that impact their well-being, which can ultimately influence their decision-making. 6 Under
the assumption that consanguineous marriage is not the optimal marital decision for most women,
education empowers them as it becomes a conduit through which women switch away from such
marriages.
        We show that women who are treated by the education reform are more likely to choose
their marriage partners from outside of their circle of family and relatives. This means that more
educated women prefer somebody other than their first cousin as their spouse. Edlund (2018)
argues that cousin marriage is not a voluntary choice for women. Even if her argument is not fully
applicable in the context of Turkey because of the legal and cultural environment, and even if one
is prepared to believe that all Turkish women are allowed to freely choose their husbands from the
pool of all available candidates, that education makes women less likely to pick a cousin for a
husband is evidence for empowerment. That the reform reduced women's propensity to get
married against their free will, and that it changed women's beliefs that only a son can ensure the
continuation of the family blood line provide further evidence for a significant degree of
empowerment of women, generated by the education reform.
        Finally, these results are potentially important for economic development. This is because
human capital is an ingredient of development (see Hanushek and Woessmann 2020 for a review
of this literature). Improvement in child health, due to reduced incidence of consanguineous



5
  It is well-established that more educated individuals are better producers of health because education
yields to improvement in allocative or productive efficiency (Grossman 2006; Rosenzweig and Schultz
1982; Grossman 1972), and that an increase in maternal education improves child health (Grépin and
Bharadwaj 2015; Chou et al. 2010; Makate and Makate 2016). Our results, however, underscore education
as a policy lever to improve child health through a different preventative mechanism.

6
 An example is the impact of education on fertility preference and fertility behavior of women (Keats 2018;
Osili and Long 2008).



                                                    4
marriage, caused by increased educational attainment, is expected to have a positive impact on
human capital and economic development. 7
       In addition, family formation and sorting of individuals into families can have an impact
on economic development through a number of mechanisms (Fernández 2003; Fernandez and
Rogerson 2001). Greif and Tabellini (2017) and Greif (2006) argue that the formation of state as
an institution and the evolution of its organizational structure depends, among other things, on
loyalty to kinship networks and the extent of kin-based clan organizations. These authors postulate
that marriage laws and practices that restricted consanguineous marriage, instituted by the
medieval Church in Europe, undermined kinship groups. This move eventually led to the
emergence of nuclear families and gave rise to corporation-based institutions and economic growth
in Europe. De La Croix et al. (2018) argue that a shift from closed kinship systems towards a
system where knowledge is transmitted across individuals helped Europe to progress economically
in comparison to regions dominated by extended families or clans. Ghosh, Hwang and Squires
(2020) demonstrate the long term economic consequences of legally banning cousin marriages in
the U.S.
           Along the same lines, Schulz et al. (2019) argue that the movement away from kinship-
based institutions led to independent and isolated nuclear or stem families, which generated
personal traits such as individualism, non-conformity, and trust. Schulz (2020) shows that
prohibition of blood marriages has led to the formation of self-governed cities with political
structures that were precursors for parliaments.       Kinship networks and nepotism, fostered by
consanguineous marriages, can lead to a culture of corruption (Akbari et al. 2019). Thus,
education-triggered modifications in the way people sort themselves into families can have long-
term cultural and macroeconomic implications.
       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II provides the historical background
of consanguineous marriage and the health risks associated with such marriages. Section III
describes the Turkish education reform details, and Section IV presents the conceptual framework




7
 At the macro-level, Diebolt and Perrin (2013) add to the unified growth theory the role played by women
and gender equality, arguing that women's empowerment is a key factor of economic development. To the
extent that education empowers women, education has this indirect effect on development as well.




                                                   5
and empirical implementation. Section V describes the data, Section VI presents the results and
the robustness analyses. Section VII provides a summary and discussion.

II. Consanguineous Marriage

      Background
          A consanguineous marriage is defined as a union between two people who are second
cousins or closer. 8 There is substantial variation between countries in the prevalence of such
marriages, with rates ranging 0.2 percent in the U.S. to 3.9 percent in Japan, between 10 and 40
percent in many counties in the Middle East, North Africa and West Asia, and reaching 45-50
percent in parts of China, Afghanistan, India, Saudi Arabia and Syria (Hamamy et al. 2011, Global
Consanguinity website.)
          Although consanguinity is more wide-spread among countries with majority-Muslim
populations, it is not confined to Muslim nations, nor is it an exclusive product of Islam. For
instance, as detailed in Bittles (1998) and Bittles and Black (2010), the rules of marriage in Islam
are similar to those in the Judaic instructions stated in Leviticutes18:7-18, even though there are
differences. As an example, uncle-niece marriages are forbidden in Islam, whereas they are
allowed in Judaism. Buddhism permits first-cousin marriages, while the rules are more complex
in Hinduism where the interplay between religion and local customs has generated substantial
heterogeneity in regulations (Bittles and Black 2010). 9 Close-kin marriages are permissible for
Roman Catholics with the proviso that couples receive Diocesan dispensation. The Protestant
Reformation accepted the guidelines in Leviticus 18:7-18, which make first cousin marriages
permissible for Protestants (Goody 1983). 10


8
  This corresponds to an inbreeding coefficient (F), which is equal to 0.0156 or higher. This, in turn,
signifies that parental couples share 1/32 of their genes inherited from common ancestors and that their
offspring has a probability of 1/64 (or 0.0156) of having identical gene copies of all loci, inherited from
both parents. In cases of first cousin marriage F goes up 0.0625 and in case of uncle-niece marriages
practiced in South India, F becomes 0.125 (Hamamy 2012).
9
 As detailed in Bittles (1998), the Aryab Hindus of northern India analyze seven generations on the groom's
family and five generations of the bride's side before a consanguineous marriage is permitted. On the other
hand, marriages between first cousins are favored and uncle-niece marriages are prevalent among the
Dravidian Hindus in south India.
10
     Orthodox churches, on the other hand, do not allow for consanguineous marriage.



                                                     6
        Until the early 20th century, the practice of first-cousin marriage was accepted in Europe
and it was frequently exercised, especially among the elites. 11 Sabean, Teuscher and Mathieu
(2007) point out that despite differences in religious denominations between European countries,
the prevalence of first-cousin marriage has risen markedly everywhere in Europe in the 18th
century, and then it has declined rapidly since the 1920s. The rise and decline of consanguinity in
Europe over the last three centuries and its current uneven distribution between regions, as well as
the variation in the prevalence of consanguinity between locations within countries, underline the
importance of regional traditions and socio-economic variables in determining the propensity for
consanguineous marriage. 12 Similarly, that consanguineous marriage has persisted over centuries,
and that it is still widespread in many parts of the world (despite its detrimental effects on the
offspring and the related costs for both the offspring and the family) suggest that consanguinity is
associated with benefits to families. 13 Thus, the determinants of the formation of consanguineous
marriages and endogamy (marriage within the local community) have recently been investigated
as a rational decision made by individuals given the economic and institutional constraints
(Bahrami-Rad 2019; Mobarak et al. 2013; Do, Iyer and Joshi 2013; Dow, Reed and Woodcock
2016). 14



11 For example, Queen Victoria of England married Prince Albert, her mother's brother's son. Kuper
(2002) states that "[Her marriage to her cousin] was, and remains a Hanovarian tradition. George I had
married his father's brother's daughter, and George IV his father's sister's daughter. George V and
Elizabeth II carried on this tradition, both marrying second cousins" (Kuper 2002, p. 166).
12
   See Global Consanguinity website (consang.net) for detailed information on the variation in
consanguinity rates within counties.
13
   For example, Johow, Willführ and Voland (2019) show that although marriages between cousins were
very rare among the landless population in the 18th and 19th centuries in Krummhörn, Germany, the rate of
cousin marriage was 5-10 percent among large-scale farmer marriages and that consanguineous marriages
were a wealth retention/consolidation strategy, as consanguinity is found to be associated with increased
intergenerational transmission of land holdings. The persistence of consanguineous marriage in developing
nations, may signal the existence of economic benefits generated by such marriages in the form of wealth
accumulation and consolidation, and network creation. If the returns to nepotism and in-group favoritism
are non-trivial in the society, this can help preserve in-marriage as a social norm (Akbari et al. 2019).
14
  More generally, economists have investigated, theoretically and empirically, the determinants of marriage
practices (Fenske 2015; Gould, Moav and Simhon 2008; Edlund 1999) dowry payments and bride price
(Ashraf et al. 2020; Ambrus, Field and Torero 2010; Botticini and Siow 2003), and the decisions
surrounding inheritance (La Ferrara 2007; Bernheim and Severinov 2003; Chu 1991).




                                                    7
Health Risks of Consanguineous Marriage

        It has been shown that the probability of prematurity and prenatal mortality is higher for
the newborns of consanguineous parents (Naderi 1979). For example, in-hospital neonatal
mortality is more than twice as likely in infants whose parents are first cousins in comparison to
parents who are not blood-related (Charafeddine et al. 2012). Similarly, Jaber et al. (1997) report
that the neonatal mortality rate is almost twice as high among first cousin marriages, and Magnus
et al. (1985) find that neonatal mortality among the offspring of consanguineous parents is about
2.5 times higher than infants born to genetically unrelated parents. The same pattern holds for post-
neonatal, infant and under-5 mortality rates for first cousin marriages (Hussain et al, 2001,
Hotchkiss and King 1999).
        Stoltenberg et al. (1999a) report that the risk or early death (stillbirth plus infant death) is
twice as high for the offspring of first cousins. Similarly, Stoltenberg et al. (1998) find the risk of
infant death twice as high in children with consanguineous parents. Jaber et al. (1997) report that
the infant mortality rate is almost five times higher among consanguineous couples in comparison
to infants of couples who are genetically unrelated. Pederson (2002) finds an increase in infant
mortality of 15 additional deaths per 1,000 live births among the progeny of first cousins. 15
        Holding constant a vector of family and pregnancy attributes, babies born to
consanguineous parents are lighter than those of unrelated parents. The difference ranges from
two-to-three percent (Mumtaz et al. 2007; Magnus et al.1985) to six percent (Al-Sekait 1989).
The odds of being low birth weight (<2.5 kg at birth) is more than four times higher for the
offspring of consanguineous parents (Bellad et al. 2012) 16


15
  Environmental pollution too leads to infant mortality with non-trivial but modest impact. For example,
Currie and Neidell (2005) find that a one-unit reduction in carbon monoxide (CO) concentration in the air
would prevent 34 deaths per 100,000 live births. In the sample they analyze the mean value of CO is 2
ppm, which is also the average ambient CO level in the U.S. (https://www.epa.gov/air-trends/corabon-
monoxide-trends). Thus, a one-unit reduction of CO would reflect a 50% decrease from a low baseline (the
EPA standard is not to exceed the CO level of 9 ppm more than once a year). Chay and Greenstone (2005)
analyze the impact of total suspended particulate (TSP) concentration on infant mortality rate and report an
elasticity of 0.35, which translates into 5-8 fewer infant deaths per 100,000 live births for a one-unit
reduction in TSP (average TSP=64)
16
  Smoking is the most important risk factor of low birth weight (Almond et al. 2005, Grossman and Joyce
1990, Sexton and Hebel 1984). Smoking during pregnancy lowers birth weight up to six percent, which
indicates that consanguinity has about the same impact on birthweight as smoking.



                                                     8
       Medical literature has established that the mutation of recessive genes, inherited from a
common ancestor, increases the likelihood of serious recessive disorders in the offspring. 17 As a
result, there is a long list of congenital anomalies and disorders which are prevalent in the
progeny of consanguineous marriages (Oniya et al. 2019; Harlap et al. 2008; Bittles 2003; Naderi
1979). 18 These disorders range from hearing loss to blindness, from childhood glaucoma to a
number of neurodegenerative conditions. Consanguinity also increases the risk of congenital
heart defects and of cerebral palsy in newborns (Erkin et al. 2008; Khalid et al. 2006; Sinha et al.
1997), and severe mental retardation (Bener and Hussain 2006; Fernell 1998). Birth defects and
congenital malformations rate is more than twice as high among the offspring of first cousins
(Tadmouri et al. 2009; Stoltenberg et al. 1999b; Jaber et al. 1998; Magnus et al. 1985). Mete et
al. (2020) adjust for potential endogeneity of consanguineous marriage and show that these
unions cause lower cognition, lower height-for-weight in the offspring and that these children are
more likely to be stunted. Learning and reading disorders are more prevalent among children of
consanguineous marriages (Eapen et al. 1998; Abu-Rabia and Maroun 2005). In short, a large
body of medical evidence underlines that consanguineous marriage constitutes a substantial risk
factor for the offspring and that it is a public health concern.

III.   The 1997 Education Reform

       In August 1997, a newly formed government in Turkey passed a law to increase
mandatory education from five to eight years (Law No: 4306). Prior to the enactment of this law,
students had to complete five years of elementary school education, but attendance to middle
school (grades 6-8) was voluntary. The reform combined elementary and middle school
education and required all students, who were covered by the mandate of the law, to obtain a
middle school diploma. Students who had completed the fourth grade or lower in the summer of
1997 had to comply with the new law and had to continue their education until they have
completed eight years of schooling, while those who had already completed the fifth grade in
Summer 1997 were exempt.


17
  The probability of homozygosity, the receipt of identical alleles of a given gene from each parent, is
higher for recessive genes for the offspring in case of consanguineous marriages.




                                                   9
        Although most children who were born in 1986 would have been enrolled in the first
grade in 1992 and would have completed the fifth grade in Summer 1997 barring grade
repetition, some children who were also born in the same year would have completed only the
fourth grade in 1997, and therefore would have been impacted by the reform. This is because of
the imperfect compliance with a law that regulates school starting age in Turkey (Kirdar,
Dayiolu and Koç 2018; Cesur and Mocan 2018; Dinçer, Kaushal and Grossman 2014). 19 In
addition, some families whose children were exempt from the law (those born in 1986 and
completed the fifth grade in 1997), may have decided to send their children to school for an
additional three years to obtain the middle school diploma, to prevent their kids from being in a
disadvantaged position in comparison to the immediately younger cohorts. 20 Thus, the extent to
which the reform impacted the cohort of 1986 is unclear.
        The speed with which the law was passed was because of domestic and international
politics. In 1997, Turkey was engaged in negotiations for the membership to the European Union
(EU), and increasing the mandatory years of education was considered the right move to increase
the chances of EU membership (Dulger 2004). The law was also an attempt to limit the religious
education in the country. 21 The reform did not involve any modifications to the curriculum; that
is, neither the content nor the composition of courses were affected by the reform (Dulger
2004). 22 Compulsory education is free in Turkey. Thus, the reform did not involve any change


19
  The law that regulates the school starting age in Turkey states that a child may start the first grade in the
Fall if she is 72 months old at the end of that calendar year. This implies that children born in 1986,
especially those born towards the end of that year could have started school in 1992. The age cut-off,
however, is loosely enforced and children can start school even if they are a few months younger than the
72-month cut-off. Thus, those who were born in early 1986 could start the first grade in Fall 1991, rather
than Fall 1992.
20
  Therefore, we follow the previous research and exclude those born in 1986 from the benchmark model
(Cesur and Mocan 2018; Kirdar, Dayiolu and Koç 2018; Mocan and Pogorelova 2017; Fort, Schneeweis
and Winter-Ebmer 2016; Battistin et al. 2009), although as we show that including them does not alter the
results.
21
  More specifically, a previous government, which had a religious bent, resigned in June 1997 and the new
secular government passed the education reform law on August 18, 1997. Details of this point and the
political landscape in Turkey in 1997 can be found in Cesur and Mocan (2018) and on pp. 80-83 of Cesur
and Mocan (2013).
22
  The Ministry of Education incorporated a number changes to increase enrollment, including hiring
additional teachers, adding new classrooms to existing schools, starting a bus system to transport students
from rural localities to urban schools, as well as system of free lunches and books to low income children


                                                      10
in the cost of education for families. Although non-compliance is subject to fines, it is not strictly
enforced. As a result, although the proportion with at least a middle school diploma rose above
90 percent, full compliance is not achieved. Additional details regarding increased enrollment,
employment of new teachers and so on can be found in Kirdar, Dayiolu and Koç (2018, 2015).

IV Conceptual Framework and Empirical Implementation
         Following the discussion in the introduction, an individual's propensity for
consanguineous marriage (M) in Equation (1) is impacted by individual characteristics such as age
and gender (X), malleable traits such as religiosity and political views (R), as well as labor market
activity and relevant market wages (W). Local cultural traditions (C) also influence the proclivity
for consanguineous marriage. Alternatively, M represents various marriage characteristics, such
as age at first marriage and the manner in which the individual met his/her spouse. M also
characterizes individuals' preferences for several attributes of a spouse and the marriage, such as
the desirability of an educated spouse, the importance of shared religious beliefs between husband
and wife, and the acceptability of the practice of marrying a blood relative.            Individuals'
educational attainment (Educ) can directly influence M through a number of channels, including
by altering time discounting (Becker and Mulligan 1997; Perez-Arce 2017), by influencing risk
aversion via the rise in cognition (Dohmen et al. 2010; Harrison, Lau and Rutström 2007) and by
altering attitudes towards matters that are related to women's well-being (Cannonier and Mocan
2018).
                                  = 1 (, ,  ,  ,  )               (1)

Equation (2) indicates that educational attainment is a function of personal characteristics of the
individual (X), religiosity and political views (R), as well as cultural attributes (C). Educational
attainment is also influenced by exposure to the reform (T) because those who are treated by the
reform are required to obtain additional years of education.

                                    = 1 (,  ,  , )              (2)

         Because an individual's educational attainment is endogenous, estimation of Equation (1)
using OLS would produce a biased estimate of the impact of education on consanguineous


(Ministry of National Education (MONE) 2001; Dulger 2004). The capacity of boarding schools was also
expanded to facilitate the enrollment of rural children in urban areas (Dulger 2004; World Bank 2005).


                                                  11
marriage. 23 The education reform leveraged in this paper mandated some students to receive three
additional years of schooling while it exempted other students from this requirement (based on the
grade the students had completed when the law was passed). Thus, exposure to T in equation (2)
is exogenous, and therefore the reform can, in principle, be used as an instrument for educational
attainment in an effort to estimate Equation (1) (Aydemir et al. 2020; Cesur and Mocan 2018;
Dursun, Cesur and Mocan 2018). This instrumental variables procedure, however, is not advisable
in this particular context because of likely violation of the exclusion restriction. This is because
previous research, using a variety of data sets, has shown that exposure to this reform in Turkey
had a significant impact on the educational attainment of both women and men (Mocan 2014;
Cesur and Mocan 2018; Kirdar, Dayiolu and Koç 2018, Torun 2018, Akyol and Kirdar 2020).
We confirm this finding in our data as well. That the reform influenced the educational attainment
of both sexes prevents us from using this instrumental variables strategy because our outcome
variables are related to various aspects of marriage. More specifically, an increase in education,
triggered by the reform, may have an impact on women's propensity to marry by altering their
preferences or by changing costs and benefits of marriage. But, by the same token, the same
observed change in the propensity to marry can be the result of the change in the behavior, or the
preferences of the opposite sex, because the same education reform increased men's education as
well. Thus, exposure to the reform, although exogenous, cannot be convincingly used as an
instrument for female (male) educational attainment because the instrument, education reform, can
plausibly impact female (male) marriage outcomes indirectly, through its impact on male (female)
education. 24 We, therefore, focus on estimating the reduced-form impact of the reform, depicted
by Equation (3) below.
          Two additional considerations are important. First, education can have an indirect effect
on marriage decisions and marital preferences (M) through its impact on personal attributes such
as religiosity and political views (R) (Cesur and Mocan 2018; Becker, Nagler and Woessmann

23
  For example, risk aversion, which is shown to be related to educational attainment (Harrison, Lau and
Rutström 2007) can also impact the propensity for consanguineous marriage. Similarly, other difficult-to-
observe personal attributes (e.g. cognitive ability) or family attributes (e.g. the family's attitudes towards
female education and women's role in the society) can influence both M and Educ in Equations (1) and (2).
More specifically, unobservable factors that influence an individual's educational attainment can be
correlated with her proclivity for consanguineous marriage.

24
     See Kirdar, Dayiolu and Koç (2018) and Akyol and Kirdar (2020) who make same argument.



                                                     12
2017; Mocan and Pogorelova 2017). Second, it has been well-established that education impacts
labor force participation and wages. 25 This means that vectors R and W are functions of education,
which in turn implies that the reduced form Equation (3) excludes these components.


                                         = 4 (,  , )           (3)

          We focus on Equation (3) to investigate the impact of the reform on consanguineous
marriage and related outcomes and preferences. The empirical counterpart of this formulation is
presented by Equation (4) which portrays the specific models estimated in the paper.


 = 0 + 2  + 3  × ( - 1986) + 4 (1 -  ) × ( - 1986) + 5  +                                         (4)



          The dependent variable M in Equation (4) is an indicator to represent whether the
individual is married to a first cousin. Alternatively, M stands for other related outcomes such as
whether the person is married to a blood relative, age at first marriage, the age difference between
husband and wife, whether the person is in an arranged marriage, whether the person was forced
into marriage against her own free will, and whether the person believes that spouse's educational
attainment, spouse's political views, and compatibility of religious views are important aspects of
a marriage. Using the same specification, we also investigate whether education reform had an
impact on the extent to which the individual finds consanguineous marriage acceptable. Finally,
we analyze if married individuals met their spouses through family and neighbors, or through other
avenues such as friend networks, workplace connections, internet and so on, and we investigate if
the extent to which the person agrees with the statement that only a son can ensure the continuation
of the family blood line.
           is a binary variable, equal to one, if the individual has been treated by the reform; i.e.,
born after 1986. As described in the Section III, the extent to which the cohort of 1986 has been
affected by the reform is unclear. Thus, following the approach of Cesur and Mocan (2018),
Mocan and Pogorelova (2017), Fort, Schneeweis and Winter-Ebmer (2016), and Battistin et al.
(2009), this particular cohort is excluded from the main analysis, although adding it to the sample
does not influence the results. Our main analysis sample includes individuals who were born within

25
     See Card (1999) and Meghir and Rivkin (2011) for excellent reviews.


                                                    13
eight years before or after the pivotal cohort of 1986. This bandwidth for the benchmark models
was chosen based on the procedure of Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2012). We show in the
robustness section that the results are not sensitive to the increase or decrease in the size of this
window.
           The variable Yob represents the year of birth. Thus, the model accounts for potentially
differential trends in the outcomes of both the treatment and control cohorts. Local cultural
characteristics are accounted for by a set of fixed effects (FE). They include region of current
residence indicators, region of childhood fixed effects, an indicator of whether the individual spent
his/her childhood years (up to age 15) in a village, and the interaction between the indicators of
childhood region and growing up in a village. 26 These variables intend to capture the impact of
economic factors and the extent of religiosity and traditional cultural values at the local level,
including the prevalence of inbreeding in the geographic region in which the individual resides,
and well as exposure to such values while growing up in the childhood region. 27
           Although region of residence and region of childhood dummies account for differences in
customs related to marriage practices between regions, variations in personal heritage are also
important. For example, minority populations in Turkey that speak Kurdish or Arabic at home
have arguably different customs and traditions than those that speak Turkish. The survey does not
contain a question about the primary language spoken at home. It, however, contains a question
about whether the survey respondent speaks a second language. The ability to speak a second
language may represent different traits, based on the region of residence. For example, in Eastern
Turkey, two languages being spoken may imply Turkish and Kurdish, whereas speaking two
languages in the Western part of the county may mean Turkish and English. To provide a more
granular account for such differences, we included to the models a dummy to indicate whether the
individual speaks a second language and its interaction with region of residence dummies. 28



26
     Age 15 is significant because it is the age at which a typical student graduates from the middle school.
27
  The design of the data collection permits identification of 12 regions of current residence, while the region
of childhood is identified at a more granular level, with 26 regions.
28
  The ability to speak a second language may be a function of education as much as it is a function of the
local culture, which would make this variable endogenous. Dropping the variable from the model, however,
had no impact on the results.



                                                       14
        The model is estimated separately for men and women. The error term  captures the
impact of individual-specific idiosyncrasies that influence graduation from middle school.
Standard errors are calculated in two ways. They are clustered at the childhood region-by birth
cohort level, and also at the birth cohort level. 29 We also report the p-values adjusted for multiple
hypothesis testing, using the improved Benforroni correction method of Simes (Simes 1986;
Newson 2010; Benjamini and Yekutieli 2001).
        We employ the same formulation when we demonstrate the impact of the reform on
educational attainment ( ). In this specification, the dependent variable is a dichotomous
indicator which takes the value of one if individual i has at least a middle school diploma (8 years
of schooling), and zero otherwise.

V. Data and Descriptive Statistics

        We use data from the Turkish Family Structure Survey (TFSS) of 2016, which is a
nationally representative survey, conducted by the Turkish Statistical Institute and the Ministry of
Family and Social Policies between June 1 and September 26, 2016. The FTSS is administered in
17,239 households. Those who are older than 15 in each household are surveyed, generating
information on 35,475 individuals. The household questionnaire of the survey contains
information on the dwelling and household conditions, and the individual questionnaire includes
information about the basic demographic characteristics such as age, sex, education, and marital
status. Because the primary purpose of the survey is to gather information about the family
structure, key questions include those on lifestyles and the value judgments concerning the family
life, marriage characteristics and preferences. It is important to note that the survey does not
include refugees who moved to Turkey from Syria in large numbers since 2011.
        Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics of the analysis sample. Columns (1) and (2)
display information about all women, and columns (3) and (4) pertain to ever married women.
Columns (5)-(6), and (7)-(8) are related to all men, and to ever married men, respectively. The
variable Middle School Degree is a dichotomous indicator that takes the value of one if the person
has a middle school diploma, which is obtained after eight years of education. Recall that the

29
  Clustering by childhood region-by birth cohort is sensible to the extent that the effectiveness of the reform
varied by region, especially in the early years of the reform's implementation. Standard errors, clustered by
birth cohort, are bootstrapped.



                                                      15
education reform mandated students to attain at least this particular level of education. The odd-
numbered columns of Table 1 display the means and standard deviation of variables for those who
are treated by the reform (born after 1986), and the even numbered columns pertain to the control
group, consisting of those who escaped the mandate of the reform (those born before 1986). For
both men and women the proportion with a middle school degree is substantially greater among
those who were exposed to the mandate of the reform in comparison to those who were not. This
is true regardless of whether the person is ever married. Figures 1 and 2 display the proportion of
women and men, respectively, who have a middle school diploma in each cohort. The number
zero on the horizontal axis signifies the pivotal cohort: those born in 1986. The values on the
horizontal axis identify the distance of the person's year of birth from 1986. Individuals born in
1987, 1988 and so on (where the horizontal axis takes the values of 1, 2, and so on) constitute the
treatment group, and those with negative values on the horizontal axis (born before 1986) are in
the control group.
        As evident from the figures, the reform increased the propensity to obtain a middle school
diploma for both men and women, and the impact was stronger for women. That this Turkish
reform had a significant impact on middle school completion for both men and women has been
demonstrated by previous work using a variety of data sets (Torun 2018; Cesur and Mocan 2018;
Dursun et al. 2018; Aydemir and Kirdar 2017; Dursun and Cesur 2016; Kirdar et al. 2015; Mocan
2014). The information displayed in the first row of Table 1 and in Figures 1 and 2 are consistent
with those reported by previous research. 30
        Figure 3 presents the proportion of ever married women who have a middle school
diploma, and Figure 4 displays the same information for men. A comparison between Figures 1-
2 and 3-4 shows that while there was a steady rise in the proportion of all women and all men with
middle school education after the reform (Figures 1 and 2), this proportion leveled off for younger
cohorts in the ever-married sample (Figures 3 and 4). This implies that non-compliance with the
reform is more prevalent among the ever-married individuals of younger cohorts.



30
  We also calculated the proportion of individuals with at least a high school diploma. These proportions
were the same between the treatment and control groups in the ever married men sample (0.52 vs. 0.53),
but the proportion with high school diploma was higher for the treated groups in all other samples (0.55 vs.
0.37 for all women, 0.40 vs. 0.35 for ever married women, 0.63 vs. 0.54 for all men), indicating that the
reform had a positive spillover effect on high school education.



                                                    16
        Table 1 shows that about nine percent of the sample is married to a first cousin, and that
about 20 percent are married to a blood relative (which consists of cousins and other blood relatives
from either the mother's or father's side). These rates are consistent with those reported by earlier
surveys (Kaplan et al. 2016, Tunçbilek and Koç 1994). Although there is no significant overall
difference in this rate between the treatment and control groups, Figures 5 to 8, coupled with
Figures 3 and 4, depict a more complete and accurate picture. Specifically, Figures 5 to 8 reveal
an increase in the propensity of first cousin and blood relative marriages among the younger
cohorts. 31 Figures 5 to 8 are, of course, based on ever-married sample, and as mentioned above,
non-compliance with the reform is more prevalent among ever-married individuals. This means
that some of those who are in the treatment group of the ever-married sample are in fact not treated
by the reform and that these individuals are the ones who have higher rates of first cousin and
blood marriage. To be exact, one quarter of individuals in the treated group of ever married women
do not have a middle school diploma. These women married two years younger in comparison to
women who are also in the treatment group but who have received a middle school diploma (19
years of age vs. 21). Non-compliers are almost 2.5 times more likely to have married to a first
cousin (14.2 percent vs. 5.9 percent), or a blood relative (35.4 percent vs. 14.8 percent). 32 The
strong correlation between non-compliance and high propensity to marry a first cousin or blood
relative suggests that this pattern (refusal to go to middle school, or dropping out of school, and
marrying a blood relative) is likely driven by the individual's or her family's attachment to customs
and traditional values. Because we classify these individuals as having been treated by the reform,
we would tend to underestimate the reform's impact on consanguinity.
        It is also important to note that the sample size is smaller in younger groups, which is
particularly the case in the ever-married sample. This is the result of the fact that individuals need
to be both younger and be married to be included in this group. For example, in Figure 8 the
observation pertaining to men born in 1994 (when the horizontal axis takes the value of 8), is

31
  Figures 5 to 8, as well as all other figures related to outcomes, present outcomes net of exogenous
controls, i.e., residuals from Equation (4).
32
  The non-compliance rate among the treated ever-married men (12.7 percent) is half the rate of ever-
married women. The difference between compliers and non-compliers in consanguinity among ever-
married men is similar to those found in ever-married women. Ever married men who have not received a
middle school diploma are more likely to have married a first cousin (20.9 percent vs. 7.5 percent) or to
have married a blood relative (39.5 percent vs. 16.7 percent).



                                                   17
calculated based only on 18 men in this group. Similarly, in Figure 7, there are only 121 ever-
married women who were 22 years old during the survey year of 2016 (who were born in 1994).
We nevertheless include in the regressions all individuals who are within the 8-year bandwidth
and give them equal weight.
       Table 1 shows that there are differences in the second language rates between the treatment
and control groups, especially in the sample of all women. However, any difference between the
control and treatment groups is explained by cohort effects. Specifically, regressions where second
language dummy is regressed on cohort trends and the treatment dummy reveal that the coefficient
of the treatment dummy is always small (about 0.014) and never different from zero. This is even
true in simple models that omit all fixed effects. Appendix Figures A.1 presents this information
graphically and reveals no jump in the second language rates attributable to exposure to the reform.
As explained in the robustness section, dropping the Second Language variable has no impact on
the inference.
       Table 1 also presents the descriptive statistics of five marriage characteristics: age at first
marriage, the age difference between husband and wife, whether the union was an arranged
marriage, whether the person was forced into marriage against her own free will, and whether the
person met his/her spouse through the family, relatives, or neighbors, This information is, of
course, provided only by those who are married, and the latter two variables pertain to the
individual's current marriage. If the individual was divorced before the current marriage, the latter
two questions pertain to the first marriage. Arranged Marriage is an indicator that takes the value
of one if the person was married through the initiative of a matchmaker. This variable takes the
value of zero, if the person married the spouse (with or without the consent of the family) without
an intermediary, or eloped. Forced into Marriage is a dichotomous indicator which equals one if
the person was forced by the family to marry his/her spouse, despite the fact that he/she did not
want to marry that particular person. Less than five percent of women in the treatment group are
in marriages to which they did not consent. The rate is twice as high among women in the control
group. The variable Met through Family/Relatives/Neighbors is another indicator which takes the
value of one if the person met his/her spouse through family, relatives or neighbors; and it is zero
if the future spouse was met through the network of school, work, friends, or through the internet
or a dating agency. The propensity to have found a spouse through family, relative and neighbor




                                                 18
networks is lower among those who are exposed to the reform. Figures 9-13 pertain to these five
variables for women. Appendix Figures A.2 display the same information for men.
        The bottom section of Table 1 displays preferences regarding attributes in a spouse. It is
OK to Marry a Blood Relative takes the value of one if the individual declared that it is acceptable
to marry a close blood relative such as a first cousin. Spouse's Education is Important equals one
if the person believes that is somewhat important, important or very important for the spouse to be
well-educated, and zero if the person believes that this spousal attribute is unimportant or very
unimportant. Similarly, Spouse's Religious Sect is Important and Spouse's Political Views are
Important are variables that reveal the extent to which these attributes are somewhat important,
important, or very important in a spouse. The proportion of ever married women who agreed with
these statements are displayed in Figures 14-17 by birth cohort, and Appendix Figures A.3 presents
the same information for all women. Only a Son can ensure the Continuation of the Family Blood
Line takes the value of one if the survey respondent agreed or strongly agreed with the statement.
Appendix Figures A.4 presents the proportion of ever married women and men who agreed with
this statement.

VI. Results

        Table 2 presents the estimation results of Equation (4) by gender, and demonstrates that
the reform has generated an increase in the propensity of having at least a middle school education
by almost 14 percentage points for all women, and about 13 percentage points for all men in our
sample (column 1). 33 Table 2 also shows that the impact of the reform on educational attainment
is similar between all women and ever married women; and that the same is true for men. Also
evident from Table 2 is that the reform had a positive impact on high school completion as well,
but that it had no discernable effect on college education.
        Table 3 presents the reduced form (intent-to-treat) estimates obtained from Equation (4).
Columns (1) and (2) display the estimated effect of the reform on the probability of marrying a



33
  These magnitudes are very similar to those reported by Dursun, Cesur and Mocan (2018) who used
Turkish Statistical Institute's Health Survey, and the Tobacco Survey of the same Institute. They are slightly
smaller than those reported by Mocan (2014), who used a large sample from Turkish Household Labor
Force Survey, and those reported by Kirdar, Dayiolu and Koç (2018). Torun (2018), who also used THLS,
reported an increase in the propensity to complete at least a middle school by 17 pp for females, and 11 ppt
for males.


                                                     19
first cousin and marrying a blood relative, respectively, for ever married individuals. Panel A
pertains to females, and Panel B displays the results for males. Recall that marriage to a first
cousin is a subset of marriages to blood relatives, as the latter includes marriages to individuals
who are related by blood but who are not first cousins. Entries in parentheses report the standard
errors clustered at the childhood region-by-birth cohort level. Childhood region is relevant
because it is where the individual lived until age 15 and was exposed to the education reform.
Using the region of residence instead did not alter the standard errors appreciably. P-values,
adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing are reported in {curly brackets}. Entries in [square
brackets] are the wild-bootstrapped p-values of the estimated coefficients, obtained from clustering
the standard errors at the birth cohort level. Columns (1) and (2) show that the reform decreased
women's propensity to marry a first cousin by 3.6 percentage points (about 42 percent from the
baseline), and that it decreased women's propensity to marry a blood relative by 5.6 percentage
points (28 percent from the baseline). 34 On the other hand, the reform had no impact on men's
proclivity for consanguineous marriage, indicated by small and statistically insignificant point
estimates in Panel B. For example, columns (1) and (2) reveal that the coefficient of the reform is
0.013 in the model that explains men's propensity to marry a first cousin, and it is 0.003 when the
dependent variable is being married to a blood relative and they are highly insignificant.
       That the reform had an impact on women's propensity for consanguineous marriage, but
that it had no impact on men is surprising. One explanation for this finding can be provided by
the fact that, as displayed in Table 1, husbands are on average four years older than the wives,
which indicates that the first four cohorts of women who were impacted by the reform are married
to four cohorts of men who missed the reform by a few years. More specifically, in Figure 5 the
first cohorts of women fully impacted by the reform were born in years 1987-1990. They
correspond to time periods 1, 2, 3 and 4 on the horizontal axis. These women are typically married
to men who belong to cohorts -1, -2, -3 and -4 in Figure 6, and as evident from the figure, the
proportion of men married to first cousins is lower in these particular cohorts. This means that the
insignificant effect of the reform on men is likely because about half of the men in the control
group (those born between 1982-1985) are indirectly impacted by the reform by the virtue of the


34
  Analyzing the impact of the same Turkish education reform Asker (2020) concludes that the reform had
no impact on women's propensity for first-cousin marriage. He reports a negative, but non-robust impact
on the propensity for consanguinity for women raised in urban areas.


                                                  20
fact that the reform reduced the propensity for consanguineous marriage for women these men
tend to marry. This in turn implies that the results in columns (1) and (2) of Panel B in Table 3
reflect a downward bias of the reform's impact on men's propensity for consanguineous marriage.
        To make this point more clear, we shifted the data points for men in Figure 6 forward by
four years and superimposed them on Figure 5 (women). That is, we matched the 1982 cohort of
men with the 1986 cohort of women; the 1983 cohort of men with the 1987 cohort of women, and
so on. The idea behind this exercise is to match the cohorts of men and women who are likely
marry each other given that husbands are four years older than their wives on average. The result,
displayed in Figure 18, shows that the proportion of first cousin marriages are not significantly
different between men and women within most of these cohorts that are matched by the husband-
wife age difference. It is also noticeable that there is a drop in Figure 18 when the horizontal axis
is positive. This region includes women who were treated by the reform and the corresponding
cohorts of men who were in these women's marriage pool. 35 This procedure is meaningful to the
extent that the reform influenced women's attitudes and behavior regarding consanguineous
marriage and that the consanguineous marriage of men is influenced as a result. This conjecture
is supported by the data because, as we demonstrate below, the reform influenced women in a
number of domains related to marriage preferences, but the reform had no impact on men's
attitudes or behavior in any outcome analyzed.
        Figure 19 displays the same information as in Figure 18, but it pertains to blood relative
marriages. That is, to obtain Figure 19 we moved the cohorts of men in Figure 8 up by four years
and superimposed them on Figure 7. Once again, the assumption here is that the cohorts of men
born between 1982 and 1985 are de facto impacted by the reform because these men's marriage
pool (younger women who are exposed to the reform) has altered its behavior towards consanguine
marriage. Figure 19 is similar to Figure 18, and running a pooled regression using the cohort-




35
  When we ran the regression for the propensity for marrying a first cousin in this pooled sample shown in
Figure 18, we found that the coefficient of the reform was -0.020 (p=0.084, N=9,068), and that the impact
of the reform was not different between men and women (the interaction term of the reform indicator and
gender indicator was very small and highly insignificant). This regression included the cohort of 1986 as
displayed in Figure 18. Dropping this cohort produced the impact of the reform on first cousin marriage as
-0.024 (p=0.069, N=8,562).



                                                   21
matched sample of Figure 19 indicated that the reform reduced the propensity to marry a blood
            36
relative.
        Column (3) of Table 3 reveals that the reform increased age at first marriage for women by
about half a year. This could be the result of preferences changing in favor of delaying marriage;
it could also be a mechanical result of "incapacitation" because of staying in school longer. To the
extent that those who are still in school are less likely to get married, exposure to the reform may
have delayed age at marriage mechanically. As Table 2 demonstrates, the reform not only
increased the propensity to receive a middle school diploma, it also had a positive impact on high
school graduation. Recall that the reform increased educational attainment of men also, but panel
B of Table 3 shows that the reform had no statistically significant impact of men's age at first
marriage. Column (4) in Panel A of Table 3 shows that the reform reduced the age gap between
husbands and wives by 0.44 years for ever married women. Given that the reform had no impact
of men's behavior, (see Panel B where none of the estimated coefficients is different from zero),
this finding suggests that the narrowing of the husband-wife age difference is driven by women
delaying their age at first marriage.
        As shown in Table 1, about 52 percent of ever married women and 43 percent of ever
married men got married through an arranged marriage, where an informal match-maker (a
relative, a family friend, or a friend) introduced the future bride and groom to each other, typically
with the consent of the families. Column (5) of Table 3 shows that women who were exposed to
the reform are about seven percentage points (about 13 percent) less likely to have an arranged
marriage orchestrated by a match-maker. On the other hand, the reform has no impact on men's
propensity to get married through a match-maker.
        Column (6) of Table 3 shows that the reform reduced women's likelihood of being married
to someone who they did not want to marry by 2 percentage points (29 percent). 37 In other words,
the reform reduced women's propensity for having been forced by their families to marry a

36
   When we ran the model in this pooled sample shown in Figure 19, we found that the coefficient of the
reform was -0.026 (p=0.097, N=9,068), and that the impact of the reform was not different between men
and women (the interaction term of the reform indicator and gender indicator was very small and highly
insignificant). This regression included the cohort of 1986 as displayed in Figure 19. Dropping this cohort
produced the impact of the reform on first cousin marriage as -0.025 (p=0.170, N=8,562).
37
   While the estimated coefficient is not statistically significant when the standard errors are clustered at the
childhood region-by-birth year, they are significant with a p-value of 0.028 when the standard errors are
clustered by birth year. Later in the paper we show the robustness of this result.



                                                       22
particular person. This is a strong impact given that the prevalence of this outcome among married
women is only seven percent. Finally, the last column of Table 3 reveals that the reform altered
women's propensity to meet their future husbands via their families, neighbors or relatives. The
left-out category of this dependent variable includes meeting the spouse through friends, school,
the workplace, or on the internet. Thus, this result, consistent with those of columns 5 and 6,
indicates that the reform increased women's propensity to make their marriage decisions
independently.
        Table 4 presents the results of the analyses where we investigate the impact of the reform
on women's marriage preferences. Panel A displays the results for ever married women, and Panel
B reports the results for all women. The results for men, displayed in Appendix Table A.1, reveal
that the reform had no impact on the outcomes displayed in Table 4 for men. 38
        In Panel A of Table 4, column (1) presents the estimates of the education reform on the
extent to which ever married women find a union between two blood relatives acceptable. The
reform reduced the acceptability of such marriages by 3.8 percentage points for ever married
women although the p-value obtained from bootstrapped standard errors clustered by birth cohort
are larger than conventional levels. This translates into a 25.3 percent decline in women's approval
of marriages to blood relatives. It could be the case that cognitive dissonance might alter women's
responses to this question. More specifically, women might indicate their approval of marriages to
blood relatives because they themselves are (or were in the past) married to a blood relative.
Therefore, we also estimate the model using all women, including those who were never married.
The results reported in column (1) of Panel B show that neither the coefficient nor the standard
error changes appreciably suggesting that the impact is not confounded by marital status.
        Column (2) of Table 4 reveals that the reform changed ever married women's preferences
in favor of more educated husbands. On the other hand, the point estimates in columns (3) and (4)
are small and not different from zero. This indicates that the reform did not alter the extent to


38
    It has been shown that an increase in education, when the baseline education is low, exerts little-to-no
impact on men's behavior and preferences in developing countries, although it impacts women. For
example, Cesur and Mocan (2018) find that the same Turkish education reform has an impact on women's
religiosity and the propensity to vote for religious parties, but had no impact on men on these dimensions.
Similarly, Cannonier and Mocan (2018) find that an education reform, which targeted primary school age
children in Sierra Leone, altered women's attitudes on matters that impact women's health, on the number
of desired children, and on attitudes regarding violence against women. The same reform, however, had
no impact on men along these dimensions.


                                                    23
which women believe that it is important for a married couple to belong to the same religious sect
(column 3) or the extent to which they think that a wife and her husband should share the same
political views (column 4).
           In summary, the results reveal that the reform reduced acceptability of consanguineous
marriage to women, and that it lowered women's likelihood of marrying a first cousin or a blood
relative. The reform increased women's age at first marriage, reduced the age difference between
husband and wife, and made women more likely to declare that education is a desirable attribute
of a husband. The reform also caused women to make their marriage decisions more independently
from the influence of their families. Specifically, the reform reduced women's propensity to get
involved in an arranged marriage, reduced their propensity for marrying somebody against their
will (having been forced into marriage by their family), and it made women more likely to meet
their spouse through school, friends, workplace, the internet or other avenues, as opposed to
meeting their spouse via family, relatives or neighbors.


Robustness Checks and Placebo Tests
           To investigate the sensitivity of the results, we implemented a number of exercises. First,
we estimated the models by including linear and quadratic terms in age, rather than differential
age trends in the treatment and control groups, which did not alter the conclusions. Second, recall
that those born in 1986 are not included in the analyses because, as detailed in the data section, it
is unclear whether they are treated by the reform. As a sensitivity check, we added this cohort to
the analysis sample and considered it as part of the treated group. The results did not change
appreciably. 39
           The empirical specifications effectively compare individuals who differ in age by eight
years. There was no sudden change in the country, other than the education reform, that could have
impacted a cohort of individuals differently from another cohort. However, by design, those who
are treated by the reform are younger than those who are not treated. It can be argued that the
results may be driven by this age effect because younger individuals may be more rebellious
against social norms, and that people may conform to cultural norms and traditions as they get
older. That we find a significant effect for women, but not for men, argues against this conjecture
and indicates that the results are unlikely to be driven by an across-the-board age effect.

39
     Similarly, assigning the value of 0.5 to this cohort did not change the results.


                                                        24
Nevertheless, as a third exercise, we estimated the models of Table 3 using different bandwidths,
which are displayed in Appendix Table A.2. The table presents the results obtained from models
which are based on bandwidths of 6, 7, 9, and 10 years. It also displays the results of the same
exercise for the two outcomes of Table 4 that are significantly impacted by the reform (It is OK to
Marry a Blood Relative and Spouse's Education is Important).
         The sample size gets smaller as the bandwidth becomes narrower, which is expected to
negatively impact the precision of the estimates. On the other hand, control and the treatment
groups become arguably more dissimilar as the bandwidth gets larger. Nevertheless, the estimated
coefficients are rather stable across different bandwidths, indicating that while narrowing or
widening the age intervals of the treatment and comparison groups changes the sample
composition, it has no meaningful impact on the results.
        We also implemented placebo tests by imposing incorrect reform years on the data. The
first cohort that was fully impacted by the reform is the cohort of 1987. We ran regression on the
same sample, but assumed that the first affected cohort was 1988, 1990 or 1991. Similarly, we
moved the reform year back in time, taking the cut-off year as 1985, 1984, or 1983. In the six
regressions we ran (based on these six false reform years) where the dependent variable was middle
school completion, the point estimate of the reform was negative in three regressions (one being
statistically significant), and positive in the other three (one being significant). Thus, the use of
placebo reform years eliminates the true effect of the reform on educational attainment.
        We re-estimated regressions by employing the same sample of ever married women, and
by using as dependent variables the six seven marriage attributes that are significantly impacted
by the reform (Panel A of Table 3) and the two marital preferences where reform had a statistically
significant impact in Table 4 (It is OK to Marry a Blood Relative and Spouse's Education is
Important). We estimated these models six times using six placebo reform years. Of the 54
coefficients generated from this exercise, seven coefficients flipped signs (in comparison to the
results reported in Panel A of Table 3, and columns 1 and 2 of Table 4), and only 1 was statistically
significant.
        In an alternative exercise, we moved the reform years back and forth as described above,
but each time we kept the eight year window on both sides of the false reform dates. This procedure
changed the sample composition in comparison to the sample used in Tables 3 and 4. Of the 54




                                                 25
coefficients estimated, only 14 were significant, and 13 coefficients had the opposite signs than
those reported in Tables 3 and 4.
           Recall that the models contain a variable to indicate if the person speaks a second language
and its interaction with region of residence dummies. It can be argued that being able to speak a
second language is not a function of the existing local culture but a function of the education
reform. Exposure to the education reform would not impact the ability to speak Kurdish or Arabic
as a second language, but it may have impacted the ability to speak English because the middle
school curriculum (grades 6 to 8) includes English classes. To guard against the possibility of
endogeneity of this variable, we drop it from the model. The results do not change. 40 In addition
to this exclusion, dropping from the models the region of residence fixed effects as well as the
region of childhood fixed effects produced coefficient estimates that were larger in absolute value,
but the statistical significance of the impact of the reform was not altered. 41


Potential Channels
           Education expands individuals' health knowledge which can lead to a change in their
 health behavior. 43 Health complications of consanguineous marriage cannot be learned in school
 in Turkey because neither the middle school curriculum nor the high school curriculum includes
 health education. 44 On the other hand, the more educated will have better cognitive skills, and
 educational attainment may allow more efficient access to health information. The data set we
 use does not contain any information on health knowledge. Thus, we cannot test whether those
 who are exposed to the reform have better knowledge about the health effects of an action or
 behavior (consanguineous marriage, smoking, vaccination, etc.). However, that exposure to


40
  The raw means of this variable is different between the control and treatment groups for some groups
(see Table 1). However, this difference is explained by age trends, which are included in all models.
Specifically, controlling for age trends eliminates the impact of the reform on speaking a second language.
41
  For example, the coefficient of the reform in the regression to explain marriage to a first cousin (without
any covariates except for age trends) was -0.046 (se=0.022). The same coefficient in marriage to a blood
relative regression was -0.067 (se=0.033)
43
  See Grossman (2008, 1972) for the theoretical framework regarding how education can impact health
and the references cited in Altindag and Mocan (2014) for empirical applications.
44
     Although the department of education introduces it sporadically as an elective class.



                                                       26
 three additional years of education alters women's preferences but that it has no impact on men
 suggests that either (i) increased cognitive skills, due to additional schooling, is not an important
 driver of the results, or (ii) the increase in schooling at this low margin is sufficient enough to
 register a change in women's preferences and behaviors, although it is not powerful enough to
 generate an impact for men.
        Another explanation may involve being "outside of the home" during the adolescent years.
Exposure to the mandate of the reform compelled individuals to attend school when they were
between the ages of 12 to 15. This might help women create new friendship networks which
could not have been possible otherwise. 45 Attending school and being able to spend time outside
of the home during the adolescent years could have allowed females to get exposure to new ideas
and experiences other than those provided by their family and relatives. 46
        The reform had no significant effect on women's labor force participation behavior, but
it had a substantial effect on women's wages (Torun 2018, Mocan 2014). The rise in women's
wages may have increased women's bargaining power (with their parents) regarding their free
choice of a spouse. It should be noted, however, that in Turkey consanguineous marriage has its
roots in cultural traditions more than economic considerations.               Evidence supporting this
conjecture is obtained from the same household survey used in this paper. The survey includes a
question about the reasons why the respondents find consanguineous marriage acceptable.
Specifically, those who agreed with the statement that It is OK to Marry a Blood Relative, were
asked a follow-up question as to their reasons for finding such unions acceptable. The options are
i) not to divide up the wealth, ii) to preserve the family roots iii) because husband and wife get
along better if they are blood relatives iv) because the elders of the family get more respect in
blood marriages v) to preserve custom and traditions vi) other reasons.




45
   As shown elsewhere (Kirdar, Dayiolu and Koç 2018) and in Table 2 of this paper, the reform also had
a spillover effect as it increased high school education as well. This means that some females, who are
treated by the reform, were exposed to these influenced for additional years beyond the three years
mandated by the reform.
46
  When the reform law was passed in 1997, the labor force participation rate of women ages 15­24 was
32%, while the labor force participation rate for men was 63%. This difference indicates that girls and young
women had a much higher propensity to have more limited exposure to social life outside of the home,
compared to boys and young men.



                                                     27
        Table 5 present the distribution of the responses. At least 46 percent of the respondents in
each category indicate that the main reason for the acceptability of consanguineous marriage is
the preservation of the family roots. Almost 30 percent of women and about 20 percent of men
state that they approve the practice of consanguineous marriage because husbands and wives get
along better in such marriages. Only less than 0.5 percent of women and about one percent of
men state preserving wealth as the main justification for consanguineous marriage, and the rate
is less than two percent among those who are married to a cousin (columns 5 and 6). Thus, Table
5 shows that in Turkey, the protection of the family wealth is not a reason for the endorsement of
consanguineous marriage. The main reason for its acceptance is the concerns about the
preservation of customs and traditions.

Do the Results Reflect Women's Empowerment, or the Decisions of their Families on Behalf
of Women?
        It can be argued that even though women who are exposed to the education reform reduce
their propensity to marry a cousin or a blood relative, this outcome does not reflect women's own
decisions. Instead, their parents may have decided that increased educational attainment of their
daughter made it now optimal for her to marry somebody else, rather than her cousin. In this
scenario, consanguinity declines due to the reaction of women's families, and not because of
women's improved autonomy regarding their own marital decisions. Although we cannot refute
the family's influence, it is unlikely that this is the primary driver of the results. We posit that the
reform improved women's independence regarding their marital decisions, and that it changed
women's preferences regarding marital decisions. The net result is the empowerment of women.
        This is reflected by a number of observations. First, as discussed earlier, the reform made
women less likely to go along with the wishes of the family and marry somebody they don't want
to marry. That is, the reform made women more resilient in terms of resisting the pressure of the
family regarding the marriage decision. Second, the reform made women less likely to marry
somebody who they met through the network of family, relative or neighbors. Instead, exposure
to the reform made women are more likely to meet their husbands through their network of
friends, workplace colleagues, school, the internet or a dating agency. Third, the reform made
women less likely to be in a marriage arranged by a match-maker. Fourth, the reform altered
women's preferences in favor of an educated husband.



                                                   28
        Fifth, we analyzed the responses to a survey question gauging the extent to which women
agree with the statement that "Only a son can ensure the continuation of the family blood line."
As displayed at the bottom of Table 1, the proportion of women (ever-married women) who agree
with this statement is 0.226 (0.242). Appendix Figure A.4 displays this information, net of
exogenous covariates, by cohorts of ever married women and ever married men, respectively.
Table 6 displays the impact of the reform on the propensity to agree with this statement. The
results for the benchmark model with the bandwidth of eight years is displayed in the table along
with the results obtained from using other bandwidths, as was done in the robustness analyses of
Table A.2 in the Appendix. As shown in Panel A of Table 6, the reform reduced married women's
propensity to agree with the statement that only a son can ensure the continuation of the family
blood line by 7 percentage points in the benchmark model. This impact, which represents a 29
percent decline in the sentiment, is statistically significant and robust to the variations in
bandwidth. Panel B shows that the impact is smaller in magnitude in the sample of all women (4
percentage points), but it still translates to an 18 percent decline in the propensity to agree with
the statement. 47 These results, taken together suggest that the reform positively influenced
women's self-confidence and independence.



VII. Summary and Discussion
        Consanguineous marriage is a remarkably common phenomenon, especially in developing
nations. In most countries of the Middle East and North Africa the rate of consanguineous marriage
is more than 25 percent, and it is as high as 50 percent in some parts of the world. As detailed in
Section II, although such inbreeding is more prevalent in Muslim societies, it is not strictly a
function of religion. The variation in consanguinity between countries which adhere to the same
religion, and the change in the prevalence of consanguineous marriage over time indicate that the
intensity of this practice is the result of the interplay between religion, cultural norms, institutions
and economic conditions.
        In this paper, we use data from Turkey, where 20 percent of marriages is consanguineous.
The nationally-representative data set contains detailed information on individuals' marriage


47
 Panels C and D reveal that consistent with the results reported earlier, the reform does not influence
men's beliefs regarding the continuation of the family blood line as a function of the sex of the progeny.


                                                    29
attributes and marital preferences, along with their personal characteristics. We leverage an
education reform, which increased the mandatory schooling by three years for students who
completed the 4th grade or who were in lower grades in Summer 1997, but exempted older students
(those who completed the 5th grade) from the mandate of the reform. We confirm the result of
previous research that this reform generated an increase in the probability of having at least a
middle school education (which requires completion of eight years of schooling).
        We find that the reform made women less likely to find consanguineous marriage as an
acceptable practice, and that the reform lowered women's propensity to marry a first cousin or a
blood relative. It has been argued that consanguineous marriage is not a voluntary choice for
women in traditional Muslim societies (Edlund 2018). Women may be denied the right to decide
their own marriage, and they may be forced into these arrangements by their fathers, or more
generally, by their families. To the extent that women's decisions to marry a cousin or a blood
relative are under the influence of dominant males of the patriarchal family as suggested by Edlund
(2018), our results indicate that education increases women's autonomy in marriage decisions.
        It can be conjectured that although the reform led to a decrease in women's propensity for
consanguineous marriage, this reflects the modifications in the decisions that the families make on
behalf of their daughters, rather than women's improved autonomy to make their own marital
decisions. However, we provide evidence indicating that higher educational attainment, generated
by the reform, led to more independence for women. First, women who were treated by the reform
are less likely to be in an arranged marriage, and they are more likely to have met their husbands
through networks outside of their family, relatives or neighbors. Second, a unique feature of our
data set is the ability to determine whether the individuals got married to their spouses voluntarily
(by their consent) or whether they were forced into it by their family. We find that exposure to the
reform reduced women's probability of having been married against their will. 48 These findings
indicate that the reform increased women's autonomy, as exposure to the reform enhanced their
ability to make marriage decisions independent of their families.
        We also find that the reform made women less likely to agree with the idea that only a son
can ensure the continuation of the family blood line, which implies that the reform altered women's

48
   Although this point estimate is non-significant at conventional levels, arguably because of limited
variation of the variable in the sample, the effect is robust to variations in bandwidth and other variations
in model specifications.



                                                     30
beliefs and attitudes in favor of females. Taken together, these results indicate that exposure to the
education reform increased women's inclination to make marriage decisions that are consistent
with their own preferences, instead of going along with the wishes of the family, or the customs
of the society. Put differently, the reform had an empowerment effect on women. 49
        The results show that exposure to the reform made women delay their first marriage, that
the reform reduced the age difference between husbands and wives, and that it changed women's
preferences in favor of an educated husband. The reform had no significant impact on men's
preferences even though it increased men's education as well. The propensity for consanguineous
marriage for men went down because women tend to marry men who are four year older on
average, and therefore some men who missed the reform are nevertheless impacted by it indirectly,
through the change in women's behavior.
        These results are potentially important for a number of reasons. First, they contribute to
our understanding of non-pecuniary effects of educational attainment. They demonstrate that
education alters women's preferences, and that it impacts behavior in a setting where such behavior
(marrying a first cousin or a blood relative) is part of the culture of the society.
        The results also have implications for child health. The practice of consanguineous
marriage is associated with increased mortality and morbidity and serious health consequences for
the offspring. As summarized in Section II, it has been shown that the probability of a premature
birth is higher for babies of consanguineous parents. Prenatal and neonatal mortality are also
significantly higher for the newborns of such couples, and the same is true for post-neonatal
mortality, infant mortality and under-5 mortality rates for the progeny of first cousin marriages.
Infants born to consanguineous parents are lighter at birth and they suffer from a number of health
problems as children, including being stunted and having learning disabilities. The detrimental
impact of low birth weight on future outcomes (Currie 2009) can, in principle, be counterbalanced
by investment into these children after birth (Heckman 2006; Cunha and Heckman 2008). There
are, however, a number of other serious permanent health problems and disorders generated by
consanguinity, including deafness, blindness, childhood glaucoma, congenital heart defects and
cerebral palsy.

49
   Although in a different context, these findings resemble the results of Jensen and Oster (2009), who
find that exposure to the Cable TV in India reduced women's preference for sons, and increased women's
autonomy (their ability to go out without permission, ability to participate in household decision making.)



                                                    31
        Although the harmful health effects of consanguineous marriage are well-documented in
the medical literature, public policy attempts to discourage these marriages are not pursued
because such attempts are presumed to create a backlash in the target populations. 50 Along the
same lines, as summarized by Modell and Darr (2002), several experts in the medical and social
sciences argue that consanguineous marriage is engraved in the fabric of the society in many
countries, and therefore it would be inappropriate to discourage it at the population level. Thus, a
typical policy recommendation is to identify at-risk families and provide them with genetic
counseling. 51 Given this hands-off approach, policies that increase female education can be a
vehicle through which the prevalence of consanguineous unions and the related health risks can
be diminished. For example, a back-of-the-envelope calculation reveals that in Turkey about
200,000 children are born each year to parents who are blood relatives, and about half of these
children are progeny of first cousins. In the absence of the education reform, there would have
been 56,000 additional children born the parents who are blood relatives and 36,000 of these
children would be to first cousin marriages. 52 Without the reform there would have been at least
580 additional infant deaths per year. 53 Furthermore, there would be permanent birth defects and
serious congenital malformations among the more than 55,000 surviving children of
consanguineous parents each year.
        High rate of consanguinity, coupled with high fertility rate in some developing countries,
produces large cohorts of children born to consanguineous couples. For example, using 14

50
  An example of such a situation is the incident in the U.K. in February 2008, where the environment
minister Phil Woolas told the Sunday Times about the increased risk of genetic problems and birth defects
among the children of first cousin marriages. He underlined that such marriages are a cultural, not a
religious, issue. Nevertheless, these statements prompted the Muslim Public Affairs Committee to call on
the Prime Minister Gordon Brown to fire Mr. Woolas as they were interpreted as being Islamophobic.
(http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/7237663.stm)
51
  These recommendations emerged following the two meetings of experts, organized by the Regional
Office of the Eastern Mediterranean of the World Health Organization in 1994 and 1996. Modell and Darr
(2002) summarizes the discussion at these meetings and the recommendations that emerged from them.
52
  Consanguineous marriages may be associated with higher fertility rates (some of which may be due to
replacement fertility because of the infant mortality-enhancing effect of consanguineous marriage). The
reduction in fertility due to the decline in consanguinity is not accounted for in this number.
53
  This calculation makes use of the information that 20 percent of marriages are consanguineous in the
country, the infant mortality rate is 9 deaths per 1,000 live births, and that infant mortality rate is 2.5 times
higher among the offspring of consanguineous marriages.



                                                       32
countries in the Middle East and North Africa, where data on the number of births and the rate
consanguinity are available, 54 we estimate that there are 3 million children born in these nations
each year to consanguineous marriages. 55 If female educational attainment impacts marriage
preferences and decisions in most countries in the same way as it does in Turkey, education can
be a potent policy tool to improve child health.
          Finally, given the importance of human capital in economic development (Hanushek and
Woessmann 2020), the associated improvements in physical health and cognition can have non-
trivial effects on economic development. To the extent that consanguineous marriage promotes
and preserves kinship clan networks and strong bonds to extended family, it impacts institutional
structure, corruption, trust, and economic growth (Greif and Tabellini 2017, Akbari 2019, Schulz
et al. 2019). Thus, the decline in consanguinity is also expected to impact long-run economic
growth and cultural change.




54
     The data can be downloaded from https://population.un.org/wpp/Download/Standard/Fertility/
55
 These countries are Turkey, Algeria, Egypt, Libya, Morocco, Tunisia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Omar, Qatar, Sudan, and Saudi Arabia.


                                                   33
                                    Figures

  Figure 1: Proportion of All Women            Figure 2: Proportion of All Men with
with at least a Middle School Degree by         at least a Middle School Degree by
               Birth Cohort                                 Birth Cohort




Figure 3: Proportion of Ever Married           Figure 4: Proportion of Ever Married
Women with at least a Middle School              Men with at least a Middle School
      Degree by Birth Cohort                          Degree by Birth Cohort




                                          34
Figure 5: Proportion of Women Married        Figure 6: Proportion of Men Married
   to a First Cousin by Birth Cohort           to a First Cousin by Birth Cohort




  Figure 7: Proportion of Women              Figure 8: Proportion of Men Married
 Married to a Blood Relative by Birth         to a Blood Relative by Birth Cohort
               Cohort




                                        35
Figure 9: Age at First Marriage for        Figure 10: Age Difference for Women
     Women by Birth Cohort                 between Husbands and Wives by Birth
                                                         Cohort




Figure 11: Proportion of Women by            Figure 12: Proportion of Women by
Birth Cohort who are in an Arranged           Birth Cohort who are Forced into
             Marriage                                     Marriage




                                      36
Figure 13: The Proportion of Women           Figure 14: Proportion of Ever Married
by Birth Cohort who met their Spouses         Women by Birth Cohort who Declare
 through Family/Relatives/Neighbors          that it is OK to Marry a Blood Relative




Figure 15: Proportion of Ever Married         Figure 16: Proportion of Ever Married
 Women by Birth Cohort who Declare            Women who States Spouse's Religious
that Spouse's Education is Important                    Sect is Important




                                        37
Figure 17: Proportion of Ever Married
 Women who States It is Important to
 have Similar Political Views with the
               Spouse




 Figure 18: Proportion of Women and           Figure 19: Proportion of Women and
  4-year older Men Married to a First         4-year older Men Married to a Blood
        Cousin by Birth Cohort                      Relative by Birth Cohort




                                         38
              Table 1: Descriptive Statistics by Exposure to the Education Reform
                                                  Ever Married
                             All Women                Women                 All Men           Ever Married Men
                            (1)       (2)           (3)     (4)           (5)       (6)          (7)       (8)
VARIABLES                Treatment Control      Treatment Control      Treatment Control      Treatment Control
Middle School Degree       0.806     0.474        0.741    0.454         0.936     0.695        0.872     0.679
                          (0.396)   (0.499)      (0.438)  (0.498)       (0.245)   (0.461)      (0.334)   (0.467)
Second Language            0.409     0.312        0.363    0.300         0.410     0.366        0.383     0.371
                          (0.492)   (0.463)      (0.481)  (0.458)       (0.492)   (0.482)      (0.487)   (0.483)
Married to a First                                 0.08    0.091                                0.092     0.076
 Cousin                                          (0.272)  (0.287)                              (0.289)   (0.266)
Married to a Blood                                0.202    0.203                                0.196     0.184
 Relative                                        (0.401)  (0.402)                              (0.397)   (0.387)
Marriage
Characteristics
Age at First Marriage                            20.535       21.42                            23.351     25.368
                                                 (3.007)      (4.27)                           (2.490)    (3.644)
Age Difference btw                                4.653       4.004                             2.071      3.048
 Husband and Wife                                (3.854)     (4.035)                           (3.012)    (3.644)
Arranged Marriage                                  0.46       0.555                             0.365      0.457
                                                 (0.499)     (0.497)                           (0.482)    (0.498)
Forced into Marriage                              0.046       0.087                             0.033      0.039
                                                 (0.208)     (0.282)                           (0.178)    (0.195)
Met through Family/                               0.607       0.673                             0.571      0.626
 Relatives/ Neighbors                            (0.489)     (0.469)                           (0.495)    (0.484)
Marriage
Preferences
It is OK to Marry a             0.118      0.141       0.151        0.145   0.144   0.167         0.21      0.179
   Blood Relative              (0.323)    (0.348)     (0.358)      (0.352) (0.351) (0.373)      (0.407)    (0.384)
Spouse's Education              0.855      0.861       0.821        0.858   0.795   0.769        0.768      0.765
   is Important                (0.352)    (0.346)     (0.383)      (0.349) (0.404) (0.422)      (0.422)    (0.424)
Spouse's Religious              0.809      0.816       0.839        0.825   0.698   0.704        0.746      0.717
   Sect is Important           (0.393)    (0.387)     (0.368)      (0.380) (0.459) (0.456)      (0.436)    (0.450)
Similar Political Views          0.57      0.591        0.56         0.59   0.446   0.441        0.468      0.437
   are Important               (0.495)    (0.492)     (0.497)      (0.492) (0.497) (0.497)      (0.499)    (0.496)
Only a Son can Ensure           0.206      0.243       0.238        0.245   0.394   0.353        0.371      0.343
   the Continuation of         (0.405)    (0.429)     (0.426)      (0.430) (0.489) (0.478)      (0.484)    (0.475)
  the Family Blood line
Number of                    2,602         3,265       1,657        3,038   1,990   2,509         673       2,159
Observations
The data are from the 2016 Turkish Family Structure Survey. The treatment group consists of those who are born
between 1987-1994. The control group consists of those who are born between 1978-1985. 1986 cohort is excluded as
it is uncertain the extent to which this cohort is exposed to the reform.




                                                       39
Table 2: The Effect of Exposure to the Education Reform on Educational Outcomes
                      (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)
                            All Women                   Ever Married Women
                      Middle         High                    Middle        High
VARIABLES             School        School      College      School       School       College
Reform               0.139***       0.043*       0.031      0.138***     0.071***       0.024
                      (0.027)       (0.023)     (0.026)      (0.030)      (0.025)      (0.026)
                     [0.0140]      [0.0826]     [0.409]     [0.0170]     [0.0434]      [0.164]
Number of
Observations           5,867        5,867           5,867     4,695     4,695     4,695
                                  All Men                         Ever Married Men
                      Middle        High                     Middle     High
VARIABLES             School       School       College      School    School   College
Reform               0.128***     0.086***       0.037      0.143*** 0.138***     0.029
                      (0.024)      (0.031)      (0.031)      (0.033)   (0.039)   (0.036)
                     [0.0010]     [0.0066]      [0.132]     [0.0014] [0.0140] [0.0706]
Number of
Observations           4,499        4,499        4,499        2,832         2,832        2,832
The reform variable is equal to one if the respondent was born between 1987 and 1994 and
equal to zero if the respondent was born between 1978 and 1985. The 1986 cohort is excluded
from the sample as exposure to the reform is unclear for this cohort. The entries in
parentheses are standard errors of the estimated coefficients, clustered by childhood region-
by-birth cohort; * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01. P-values related to bootstrapped standard
errors, clustered by birth cohort level, are given in brackets. All regressions control for trend
in the outcome variable separately for treatment and control groups, region of current
residence and region of childhood fixed effects, an indicator if the person grew up in a
village, and the interaction between the latter two variables, an indicator if the person speaks
a second language, and the interaction of second language with region of residence fixed
effects. See the text for details.




                                               40
          Table 3: The Effect of Exposure to the Education Reform on Marriage Characteristics
                       (1)             (2)           (3)         (4)       (5)                  (6)            (7)
                                                   Panel A: Ever Married Women
                                                                                                              Met
                                                                                                            through
                     Married     Married to a       Age at                                    Forced        Family/
                    to a First     Blood             First          Age        Arranged        into        Relatives/
VARIABLES            Cousin       Relative         Marriage      Difference    Marriage      Marriage      Neighbors
Reform              -0.036**      -0.056**          0.460*        -0.439*      -0.072**       -0.020       -0.060**
                                                   (0.235)        (0.242)       (0.031)
                    (0.017)         (0.024)        {0.086}        {0.088}       {0.086}       (0.016)       (0.029)
                    {0.047}         {0.047}                                                  {0.210}        {0.086}
                    [0.024]         [0.002]         [0.066]       [0.124]       [0.107]      [0.0282]       [0.134]
Number of
Observations          4,695          4,695           4,695      4,695      4,341               4,341          4,695
                                                     Panel B: Ever Married Men
                                                                                                              Met
                                                                                                            through
                     Married     Married to a       Age at                                    Forced        Family/
                    to a First     Blood             First          Age        Arranged        into        Relatives/
VARIABLES            Cousin       Relative         Marriage      Difference    Marriage      Marriage      Neighbors
Reform                0.013        0.003            -0.343         0.073         0.029        0.003          -0.012
                     (0.022)      (0.034)          (0.214)        (0.264)       (0.040)      (0.014)        (0.045)
                     {0.927}      {0.927}          {0.547}        {0.848}      {0.848}       {0.848}        {0.848}
                     [0.393]      [0.863]          [0.309]        [0.883]       [0.217]      [0.871]        [0.805]
Number of
Observations          2,832           2,832           2,832          2,832         2,645        2,645          2,832
The Reform variable is equal to one if the respondent was born between 1987 and 1994 and equal to zero if the
respondent was born between 1978 and 1985. The 1986 cohort is excluded from the sample as exposure to the
reform is unclear for this cohort. The entries in (parentheses) are standard errors of the estimated coefficients,
clustered by childhood region-by-birth cohort; * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01. P-values, adjusted for multiple
hypothesis testing, are displayed in {curly brackets}. P-values, related to bootstrapped standard errors clustered by
birth cohort, are given in [square brackets]. All regressions control for trend in the outcome variable separately for
treatment and control groups, region of current residence and region of childhood fixed effects, an indicator if the
person grew up in a village, and the interaction between the latter two variables, an indicator if the person speaks a
second language, and the interaction of second language with region of residence fixed effects. See the text for
details.




                                                      41
Table 4: The Effect of Exposure to the Education Reform on Marriage Preferences
                            (1)             (2)              (3)        (4)
                                    Panel A: Ever Married Women
                                                                     Similar
                       It is OK to       Spouse's        Spouse's    Political
                     Marry a Blood     Education is Religious Sect  Views are
VARIABLES                Relative       Important      is Important Important
Reform                   -0.038*          0.039*            0.002     -0.003
                         (0.022)         (0.021)          (0.023)    (0.030)
                         {0.087}         {0.192}          {0.924}    {0.924}
                         [0.210]         [0.111]          [0.949]    [0.921]
Number of
Observations               4,695           4,695            4,695      4,695
                                          Panel B: All Women
                                                                     Similar
                       It is OK to       Spouse's        Spouse's    Political
                     Marry a Blood     Education is Religious Sect  Views are
VARIABLES                Relative       Important      is Important Important
Reform                   -0.032*           0.011           -0.013     -0.016
                         (0.019)         (0.019)          (0.021)    (0.027)
                         {0.097}         {0.553}          {0.553}    {0.553}

                             [0.209]            [0.465]            [0.669]           [0.481]
Number of
Observations                  5,867              5,867              5,867             5,867
The Reform variable is equal to one if the respondent was born between 1987 and 1994 and
equal to zero if the respondent was born between 1978 and 1985. The 1986 cohort is
excluded from the sample as exposure to the reform is unclear for this cohort. The entries in
(parentheses) are standard errors of the estimated coefficients, clustered by childhood region-
by-birth cohort; * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01. P-values, adjusted for multiple hypothesis
testing, are displayed in {curly brackets}. P-values, related to bootstrapped standard errors
clustered by birth cohort, are given in [square brackets]. All regressions control for trend in
the outcome variable separately for treatment and control groups, region of current residence
and region of childhood fixed effects, an indicator if the person grew up in a village, and the
interaction between the latter two variables, an indicator if the person speaks a second
language, and the interaction of second language with region of residence fixed effects. See
the text for details.




                                              42
                  Table 5: The Reason Why Consanguineous Marriage is Acceptable
                                                Ever                     Ever       Women in   Men in
 The reason given by                 All       Married      All Men     Married      Cousin    Cousin
 the respondent                     Women      Women                     Men        Marriage   Marriage
                                     (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)

 Not to divide up the wealth         0.39        0.44         1.13        1.33         0.91      1.33
 To preserve the roots of the
 family                             47.72        47.97       48.16        49.24        45.66    47.02
 Because husband and wife get
 along better if they are blood
 relatives                          29.73        29.28       20.26        19.89        30.59    17.22
 Because the elders of the family
 get more respect in blood
 marriages                           9.26        9.28        10.34        9.85         10.50    13.25
 To preserve customs and
 traditions                         10.30        10.44       15.16        14.58        10.50    17.22

 Other reasons                      2.61         2.61        4.96          5.11         1.83     3.97
The samples in each column correspond to the regression samples reported in the Tables.
The percentages in each column add up to 100.




                                                  43
        Table 6: The Effect of Exposure to the Education Reform on the Propensity to Agree
    with the Statement that "Only a Son can Ensure the Continuation of the Family Blood line"
                                 (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)                 (5)
                                                                Bandwidth
                                 10                 9                 8                7                   6
                                                    Panel A: Ever Married Women
Reform                       -0.048**          -0.053**          -0.068**          -0.071**           -0.072**
                              (0.024)           (0.025)           (0.027)           (0.029)            (0.031)
                              [0.053]           [0.054]           [0.015]           [0.043]            [0.031]
Observations                    5,589            5,148              4,695            4,188               3,661
                                                           Panel B: All Women
Reform                        -0.038*           -0.032            -0.041*          -0.051**            -0.052*
                              (0.021)           (0.022)           (0.024)           (0.026)            (0.028)
                              [0.097]           [0.127]           [0.079]           [0.093]            [0.075]
Observations                    7,201            6,506              5,867            5,134               4,398
                                                      Panel C: Ever Married Men
Reform                          0.028            0.014              0.007            0.014              -0.020
                              (0.040)           (0.041)           (0.043)           (0.044)            (0.046)
                              [0.347]           [0.701]           [0.859]           [0.734]            [0.685]
Observations                    3,417            3,141              2,832            2,491               2,173
                                                            Panel D: All Men
Reform                         -0.027           -0.028             -0.043           -0.036              -0.043
                              (0.028)           (0.028)           (0.030)           (0.033)            (0.037)
                              [0.286]           [0.282]           [0.109]           [0.148]            [0.379]
Observations                    5,516            5,013              4,499            3,910               3,342
The Reform variable is equal to one if the respondent was born between 1987 and 1994 and equal to zero if
the respondent was born between 1978 and 1985. The 1986 cohort is excluded from the sample as exposure
to the reform is unclear for this cohort. The entries in (parentheses) are standard errors of the estimated
coefficients, clustered by childhood region-by-birth cohort; * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01. P-values, related
to bootstrapped standard errors clustered by birth cohort, are given in [square brackets]. All regressions
control for trend in the outcome variable separately for treatment and control groups, region of current
residence and region of childhood fixed effects, an indicator if the person grew up in a village, and the
interaction between the latter two variables, an indicator if the person speaks a second language, and the
interaction of second language with region of residence fixed effects.




                                                     44
                                      References

Abu-Rabia, Salim, and Lateefeh Maroun. 2005. "The Effect of Consanguineous Marriage on
      Reading Disability in the Arab Community." Dyslexia 11 (1): 1-21.
Akbari, Mahsa, Duman Bahrami-Rad, and Erik O. Kimbrough. 2019. "Kinship, Fractionalization and
        Corruption." Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization. 166: 493-528.

Akyol, Pelin, Murat G. Kirdar. 2020. "Does Education Really Cause Domestic Violence? Replication and
       Reappraisal of "For Better or Worse? Education and Prevalence of Domestic violence in Turkey."
       Working Paper.

Al-Sekait, Mohammed Abdulaziz. 1989. "Maternal Influences on Birth Weight." Journal of the Royal
        Society of Health. 109(2): 69-70.
Almond, Douglas, Lena Edlund, and Mårten Palme. 2009. "Chernobyl's Subclinical Legacy:
     Prenatal Exposure to Radioactive Fallout and School Outcomes in Sweden." Quarterly
     Journal of Economics 124 (4): 1729-1772.
Altindag, Duha and Naci Mocan. 2014. "Education, Cognition, Health Knowledge and Health
        Behavior." European Journal of Health Economics. 15: 265-279.
Ambrus, Attila, Erica Field, and Maximo Torero. 2010. "Muslim Family Law, Prenuptial
     Agreements, and the Emergence of Dowry in Bangladesh." Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 125 (3): 1349-1397.
Ashraf, Nava, Natalie Bau, Nathan Nunn, and Alessandra Voena. 2020. "Bride Price and Female
       Education." Journal of Political Economy 128 (2): 591-641.
Asker, Erdal, 2020. "The Impact of Women's Education on the Prevalence of Consanguineous
       Marriage: The Case of Turkey." Unpublished manuscript, University of Connecticut.
Aydemir, Abdurrahman, Murat G. Kirdar, and Huzeyfe Torun 2020. "The Effect of Education on
      Geographic Mobility: Incidence, Timing, and Type of Migration." Working Paper.

Aydemir, Abdurrahman, and Murat G. Kirdar, 2017. "Low Wage Returns to Schooling in a
      Developing Country: Evidence from a Major Policy Reform in Turkey." Oxford Bulletin
     of Economics and Statistics. 79(6): 1046-1086.
Bahrami-Rad, Duman. 2019. Keeping It in the Family: Female Inheritance, Inmarriage, and the
      Status of Women. Working Paper.
Battistin, Erich, Agar Brugiavini, Enrico Rettore, and Guglielmo Weber. 2009. "The Retirement
        Consumption Puzzle: Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity Approach." American
        Economic Review 99 (5): 2209-2226.
Becker, Gary S., and Casey B. Mulligan. 1997. "The Endogenous Determination of Time
       Preference." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (3): 729-758.




                                                 45
Becker, Sascha O., Markus Nagler, and Ludger Woessmann. 2017. "Education and Religious
       Participation: City-level Evidence from Germany's Secularization Period 1890­1930."
       Journal of Economic Growth 22 (3): 273-311.
Bellad. M., S. Goudar, S. Edlavitch, N. Mahantshetti, V. Naik, J. Hemingway-Foday, M. Gupta,
        H. Nalina, R. D Erman, and B Kodkany. 2012. "Consanguinity, Prematurity, Birth
        Weight, and Pregnancy Loss: A Prospective Cohort Study at Four Primary Health Center
        Areas of Karnataka, India." Journal of Perinatology 32: 431-437.
Bener, Abdulbari, and Rafat Hussain. 2006. "Consanguineous Unions and Child Health in the State
       of Qatar." Paediatric and Perinatal Epidemiology 20 (5): 372-378.
Benjamini, Yoav, and Daniel Yekutieli. 2001. "The Control of the False Discovery Rate in
      Multiple Testing Under Dependency." Annals of statistics 1165-1188.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, and Sergei Severinov. 2003. "Bequests as Signals: An Explanation for the
      Equal Division Puzzle." Journal of Political Economy 111 (4): 733-764.
Bharadwaj, Prashant, Petter Lundborg, and Dan Olof Rooth. 2018. "Birth Weight in the Long run."
      Journal of Human Resources 53 (1): 189-231.
Bittles, Alan H. 1998. "Empirical Estimates of the Global Prevalence of Consanguineous Marriage
         in Contemporary Societies."
Bittles, Alan H. 2003. "Consanguineous Marriage and Childhood Health." Developmental
        Medicine & Child Neurology 45 (8): 571-576.
Bittles, Alan H., and Michael L. Black. 2010. "Consanguinity, Human Evolution, and Complex
        Diseases." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
        America 107: 1779-1786.
Botticini, Maristella, and Aloysius Siow. 2003. "Why Dowries?" American Economic Review.
        Vol. 93. no. 4. 9. 1385-1398.
Cannonier, Colin, and Naci Mocan. 2018. "The Impact of Education on Women's Preferences for
      Gender Equality: Evidence from Sierra Leone." Journal of Demographic Economics 84
      (1): 3-40.
Card, David. 2001. "Estimating the Return to Schooling: Progress on some Persistent Econometric
       Problems." Econometrica 69 (5): 1127-1160.
Card, David. 1999. The Causal Effect of Education on Earnings. Vol. 3 PART, in Handbook of
       Labor Economics, by David Card, 1801-1863.
Cavaille, Charlotte, and John Marshall. 2019. "Education and Anti-immigration Attitudes:
       Evidence from Compulsory Schooling reforms Across Western Europe." American
       Political Science 113 (1): 254-263.




                                              46
Cesur, Resul, and Naci Mocan. 2013. "Does Secular Education Impact Religiosity, Electoral
       Participation and the Propensity to Vote for Islamic Parties? Evidence from an Education
       Reform in a Muslim Country." NBER Working Paper No. 19769.
Cesur, Resul, and Naci Mocan. 2018. "Education, Religion, and Voter Preference in a Muslim
       Country." Journal of Population Economics 31 (1).
Charafeddine, Lama, Farah Ammous, Loulou Kobeissi, Timothy De Ver Dye, Maroun Matar,
       Marie-Claude Faddous Khalife, and Khalid Yunis. 2012. "In-hospital Neonatal Mortality
       and the Role of Consanguinity." Paediatric and Perinatal Epidemiology 26 (5): 398-407.
Chay, Kenneth Y., and Michael Greenstone. 2003. "The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant
      Mortality: Evidence from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a
      Recession." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (3): 1121-1167.
Chou, Shin-Yi, Jin-Tan Liu, Michael Grossman, and Ted Joyce. 2010. "Parental Education and
      Child Health: Evidence from a Natural Experiment in Taiwan." American Economic
      Journal: Applied Economics 2 (1): 33-61.
Chu, C. Y. Cyrus. 1991. "Primogeniture." Journal of Political Economy 99 (1): 78-99.
Coneus, Katja, and C. Katharina Spiess. 2012. "The Intergenerational Transmission of Health in
      Early Childhood - Evidence from the German Socio-Economic Panel Study." Economics
      and Human Biology 10 (1): 89-97.
Cunha, Flavio, and James J. Heckman. 2008. "Formulating, Identifying and Estimating the
      Technology of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation." Journal of Human Resources
      43 (4): 738-782.
Currie, Janet. 2009. "Healthy, Wealthy, and Wise: Socioeconomic Status, Poor Health in
       Childhood, and Human Capital Development." Journal of Economic Literature 47 (1): 87-
       122.
Currie, Janet, and Matthew Neidell. 2005. "Air Pollution and Infant Health: What Can We Learn
        from California's Recent Experience?" The Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (3): 1003-
        1030.
Currie, Janet, and Reed Walker. 2011. "Traffic Congestion and Infant Health: Evidence from E-
        ZPass." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3 (1): 65-90.
Currie, Janet, Lucas Davis, Michael Greenstone, and Walker Reed. 2015. "Environmental Health
        Risks and Housing Values: Evidence from 1,600 Toxic Plant Openings and Closings."
        American Economic Review 105 (2): 678-709.
Dee, Thomas S. 2004. "Are There Civic Returns to Education?" Journal of Public Economics. 88
       (9-10): 1697-1720.




                                              47
De La Croix, David, Matthias Doepke, and Joel Mokyr, 2018. "Clans, Guilds, and Markets:
      Apprenticeship Institutions and Growth in Preindustrial Economy," Quarterly Journal of
      Economics, 133(1): 1-70.
Diebolt, Claude, and Faustine Perrin. 2013. "From Stagnation to Sustained Growth: The Role of
       Female Empowerment." American Economic Review 103 (3): 545-549.
Dinçer, Mehmet Alper, Neeraj Kaushal, and Michael Grossman. 2014. "Women's Education:
       Harbinger of Another Spring? Evidence from a Natural Experiment in Turkey." World
       Development 64: 243-258.
Do, Quy Toan, Sriya Iyer, and Shareen Joshi. 2013. "The Economics of Consanguineous
      Marriages." Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (3): 904-918.
Dohmen, Thomas, Armin Falk, David Huffman, and Uwe Sunde. 2010. "Are Risk Aversion and
     Impatience Related to Cognitive Ability?" American Economic Review 100 (3): 1238-
     1260.
Dorsten, Linda Eberst, Lawrence Hotchkiss, and Terri M. King. 1999. "The effect of Inbreeding
       on Early Childhood Mortality: Twelve Generations of an Amish Settlement." Demography
       36 (2): 263-271.
Dow, Gregory K., Clyde G. Reed, and Simon Woodcock. 2016. "The Economics of Exogamous
      Marriage in Smallscale Societies." Economic Inquiry 54 (4): 1805-1823.
Duflo, Esther. 2012. "Women Empowerment and Economic Development." Journal of Economic
       Literature 50 (4): 1051-1079.
Dulger, Ilhan. 2004. "Turkey: Rapid Coverage for Compulsory Education­the 1997 Basic
       Education Program." In Scaling Up Poverty Reduction: A Global Learning Process and
       Conference. Shanghai. 25-27.
Dursun, Bahadir, Resul Cesur, and Naci Mocan. 2018. "The Impact of Education on Health
      Outcomes and Behaviors in a Middle-Income, Low-Education Country." Economics and
      Human Biology 31: 94-114.
Dursun, Bahadir, and Resul Cesur. 2016. "Transforming Lives: The Impact of Compulsory
      Schooling on Hope and Happiness." Journal of Population Economics 29 (3): 911-956.
Eapen, Valsamma, Lihadh Al-Gazali, S. Bin-Othman, and T. Pramathan. 1998. "Learning
      Disorders in School-going Children-Detection and Diagnosis." Journal of Tropical
      Pediatrics 44 (4): 192-193.
Edlund, Lena. 2018. "Cousin Marriage Is Not Choice: Muslim Marriage and Underdevelopment."
      AER Papers and Proceedings 108: 353-57.
Edlund, Lena. 1999. "Son Preference, Sex Ratios, and Marriage Patterns." Journal of Political
      Economy 107 (6 PART 1): 1275-1304.



                                             48
Erkin, Gulten, Sibel Unsal Delialioglu, Sumru Ozel, Canan Culha, and Hulya Sirzai. 2008. "Risk
       Factors and Clinical Profiles in Turkish Children with Cerebral Palsy: Analysis of 625
       Cases." International Journal of Rehabilitation Research 31 (1): 89-91.
Fenske, James. 2015. "African Polygamy: Past and Present." Journal of Development Economics
       117: 58-73.
Fernández, Raquel. 2003. "Household Formation, Inequality, and the Macroeconomy." Journal of
      the European Economic Association 1 (2-3): 683-697.
Fernandez, Raquel, and Richard Rogerson. 2001. "Sorting and Long-Run Inequality." The
      Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (4): 1305-1341.
Fernell, Elisabeth. 1998. "Aetiological Factors and Prevalence of Severe Mental Retardation in
        Children in a Swedish Municipality: the Possible Role of Consanguinity." Developmental
        Medicine & Child Neurology 40 (9): 608-611.
Fort, Margherita, Nicole Schneeweis, and Rudolf Winter-Ebmer. 2016. "Is Education Always
       Reducing Fertility? Evidence from Compulsory Schooling Reforms." The Economic
       Journal 126 (595): 1823-1855.
Friedman, Willa, Michael Kremer, Edward Miguel, and Rebecca Thornton. 2016. "Education as
      Liberation?" Economica 83 (329): 1-30.
Ghosh Arkadev, Sam Hwang, and Munir Squires, 2020, "Economic Consequences of Kinship:
      Evidence from U.S. Bans on Cousin Marriage," Unpublished manuscript, University of
      British Columbia.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Bruce I. Sacerdote. 2008. "Education and Religion." Journal of Human
       Capital 2 (2): 188-215.
Goody, Jack. 1983. The Development of the Family and Marriage in Europe. Cambridge
      University Press.
Gould, Eric D., Omer Moav, and Avi Simhon. 2008. "The Mystery of Monogamy." American
       Economic Review 98 (1): 333-357.
Greenstone, Michael, and Rema Hanna. 2014. "Environmental Regulations, Air and Water
       Pollution, and Infant Mortality in India." American Economic Review 104 (10): 3038-3072.
Greif, Avner, and Guido Tabellini, 2017." The Clana nd the Corporartion: Sustaining Cooperation
        in China dn Europe," Journal of Comparative Economics, 45: 1-35.
Greif, Avner, 2006." Family Structure, Institutions, and Growth: The origins and Implications of
        Western Corporations," American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 96(2): 308-
        312
Grépin, Karen A., and Prashant Bharadwaj. 2015. "Maternal Education and Child Mortality in
       Zimbabwe." Journal of Health Economics 44: 97-117.



                                              49
Grossman, Michael. 2008. "The Relationship between Health and Schooling." Eastern Economic
      Journal. 34: 281-292
Grossman, Michael. 2006. "Education and Nonmarket Outcomes." In Handbook of the Economics
      of Education, by Michael Grossman, 577-633. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Grossman, Michael and Theodore Joyce. 1990. "Unobservables, Pregnancy Resolutions, and
       Birth Weight Production Functions in New York City." Journal of Political Economy.
      98(5): 983-1007.
Grossman, Michael. 1972. "On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health." Journal
      of Political Economy 80 (2): 223-255.
Hamamy, Hanan. 2012. "Consanguineous Marriages Preconception Consultation in Primary
     Health Care Settings." Journal of Community Genetics 3 (3): 185-192.
Hamamy, Hanan, Stylianos E. Antonarakis, Luigi Luca Cavalli-Sforza, Samia Temtamy, Giovanni
     Romeo, Leo P.Ten Kate, Robin L. Bennett, et al. 2011. "Consanguineous Marriages, Pearls
     and Perils: Geneva International Consanguinity Workshop Report." Genetics in Medicine.
     841-847.
Hanushek, Eric A., and Ludger Woessmann. 2020. "Education, Knowledge Capital, and Economic
      Growth." In The Economics of Education, by Eric A. Hanushek and Ludger Woessmann,
      171-182. Elsevier.
Harlap, S., K. Kleinhaus, M. Perrin, R. Calderon-Margalit, O. Paltiel, L. Deutsch, O. Manor, E.
       Tiram, R. Yanetz, and Y. Friedlander. 2008. "Condanguinity and Birth Defects in the
       Jerusalem Pernatal Study Cohort." 66(3): 180-189.
Harrison, Glenn W., Morten I. Lau, and E. Elisabet Rutström. 2007. "Estimating Risk Attitudes in
       Denmark: A Field Experiment." Scandinavian Journal of Economics 109 (2): 341-368.
Heckman, James J. 2006. "Skill Formation and the Economics of Investing in Disadvantaged
     Children." Science 312 (5782): 1900-1902.
Hjalmarsson, Randi, Helena Holmlund, and Matthew J. Lindquist. 2015. "The Effect of Education
      on Criminal Convictions and Incarceration: Causal Evidence from Micro-data." The
      Economic Journal 125 (587): 1290-1326.
Hussain, R., A.H. Bittles, and S. Sullivan. 2001. "Consanguinity and Early Mortality in the
       Muslim Populations of India and Pakistan." American Journal of Human Biology. 13:
       777-787.
Imbens, Guido, and Karthik Kalyanaraman. 2012. "Optimal Bandwidth Choice for the Regression
      Discontinuity Estimator." The Review of Economic Studies 79 (3): 933-959.
Jaber, Lutfi, G.J. Halpern, and M. Shohat. 1998. "The Impact of Consanguinity Worldwide."
       Public Health Genomics. 1(1): 12-17




                                              50
Jaber, Lutfi, Paul Merlob, Reuben Gabriel, and Mordechi Shohat. 1997. "Effects of
       Consanguineous Marriage on Reproductive Outcome in an Arab Community in Israel."
       Journal of Medical Genetics. 34(12): 1000-1002.
Jensen, Robert and Emily Oster. 2009. "The Power of TV: cable Televesion and Women's Status
       in India. Quarterly Journal of Economics. 124(3): 1057-1094.

Johow, Johannes, Kai P. Willführ, and Eckart Voland. 2019. "High Consanguinity Promotes
       Intergenerational Wealth Concentration in Socioeconomically Privileged Krummhörn
       Families of the 18th and 19th Centuries." Evolution and Human Behavior 40 (2): 204-
       213.
Kaplan, Sena, Gül Pinar, Bekir Kaplan, and Filiz Aslantekin. 2016."The Prevalence of
      Consanguineous Marriages and Affecting Factors in Turkey: A National Survey."
      Journal of Biological Science. 48(5): 616-630.
Keats, Anthony. 2018. "Women's Schooling, Fertility, and Child Health Outcomes: Evidence from
       Uganda's Free Primary Education Program." Journal of Development Economics 135: 142-
       159.
Khalid, Yunis, Mumtaz Ghina, Bitar Fadi, Chamseddine Fadi, Kassar May, Rashkidi Joseph,
       Ghaith Makhoul, and Tamim Hala. 2006. "Consanguineous Marriage and Congenital Heart
       Defects: A Case-control Study in the Neonatal Period." American Journal of Medical
       Genetics, Part A 140 (14): 1524-1530.
Kirdar, Murat G., Meltem Dayiolu, and smet Koç. 2018. "The Effects of Compulsory Schooling
        Laws on Teenage Marriage and Births in Turkey." Journal of Human Capital 12 (4): 640-
        668.
Kirdar, Murat G., Meltem Dayiolu, and smet Koç. 2015. "Does Longer Compulsory Education
        Equalize Schooling by Gender and Rural/Urban Residence? " The World Bank Economic
        Review 30(3): 549-579.
Kottelenberg, Michael J., and Steven F. Lehrer. 2017. "Targeted or Universal Coverage? Assessing
       Heterogeneity in the Effects of Universal Child Care." Journal of Labor Economics 35 (3):
       609-653.
Kuper, Adam. 2002. "Incest, Cousin Marriage, and the Origin of the Human Sciences in
      Nineteenth-century England." Past & present 174: 158-183.
La Ferrara, Eliana. 2007. "Descent Rules and Strategic Transfers. Evidence from Matrilineal
       Groups in Ghana." Journal of Development Economics 83 (2): 280-301.
Lleras-Muney, Adriana. 2005. "The Relationship Between Education and Adult Mortality in the
       United States." Review of Economic Studies 72 (1): 189-221.
Machin, Stephen, Olivier Marie, and Suncica Vuji. 2011. "The Crime Reducing Effect of
      Education." The Economic Journal 121 (552): 463-484.



                                              51
Magnus, P. K. Berg, and T. Bjerkedal. 1985. "Association of Parental Consanguinity with
     Decreased Birth Weight and Increased rate of Death and Congenital Malformations."
     Clinical Genetics. 28(4): 335-342.
Makate, Marshall, and Clifton Makate. 2016. "The Causal Effect of Increased Primary Schooling
      on Child Mortality in Malawi: Universal Primary Education as a Natural Experiment."
      Social Science & Medicine 168: 72-83.
Meghir, Costas, and Steven Rivkin. 2011. "Econometric Methods for Research in Education."
      Handbook of the Economics of Education 3: 1-87.
Mete, Cem, Laurent Bossavie, John Giles, and Harold Alderman. 2020. "Is Consanguinity an
      Impediment to Child Development?" Population Studies 1-21.
Milligan, Kevin, Enrico Moretti, and Philip Oreopoulos. 2004. "Does Education Improve
       Citizenship? Evidence from the United States and the United Kingdom." Journal of Public
       Economics 88 (9-10): 1667-1695.
Ministry of National Education (MONE). 2001. "Formal Education Statistics." Ankara.
Mobarak, Ahmed Mushfiq, Randall Kuhn, and Christina Peters. 2013. "Consanguinity and Other
      Marriage Market Effects of a Wealth Shock in Bangladesh." Demography 50 (5): 1845-
      1871.
Mocan, Leyla. 2014. "The Impact of Education on Wages: Analysis of an Education Reform in
      Turkey." Koc University-TUSIAD Economic Research Forum Working Paper No: 1424.
Mocan, Naci, and Luiza Pogorelova. 2017. "Compulsory Schooling Laws and Formation of
      Beliefs: Education, Religion and Superstition." Journal of Economic Behavior &
      Organization 142: 509-539.
Modell, Bernadette, and Aamra Darr. 2002. "Genetic Counselling and Customary Consanguineous
      Marriage." Nature Reviews Genetics 3 (3): 225-229.
Mumtaz, Ghina, Hala Tamim, Mona Kanaan, Marwan Khawaja, Mustafa Khogali, Gerard Wakim,
     and Khalid A. Yunis. 2007. "Effect of Consanguinity on Birth Weight for Gestational Age
     in a Developing Country." American Journal of Epidemiology 165 (7): 742-752.
Naderi, Shahrokh. 1979. "Congenital Abnormalities in Newborns of Consanguineous and
       Nonconsanguineous Parents." Obstetrics and Gynecology 53 (2): 195-199.
Newson, Roger B. 2010. "Frequentist q-values for Multiple-test Procedures." Stata Journal 10 (4):
     568-584.
Oniya, Olubunmi, Karen Neves, Badreldeen Ahmed, and Justin C. Konje. 2019. "A Review of the
       Reproductive Consequences of Consanguinity." European Journal of Obstetrics and
       Gynecology and Reproductive Biology 232: 87-96.
Oreopoulos, Philip. 2007. "Do Dropouts Drop out too Soon? Wealth, Health and Happiness from
      Compulsory Schooling." Journal of Public Economics 91 (11-12): 2213-2229.


                                               52
Osili, Una Okonkwo, and Bridget Terry Long. 2008. "Does Female Schooling Reduce Fertility?
        Evidence from Nigeria." Journal of Development Economics 87 (1): 57-75.
Pedersen, J. 2002. "The Influence of Consanguineous Marriage on Infant and Child Mortality
       among Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria." Public
       Health Genomics. 5: 178-181.
Perez-Arce, Francisco. 2017. "The Effect of Education on Time Preferences." Economics of
       Education Review 56: 52-64.
Romeo, Giovanni, and Alan H. Bittles. 2014. "Consanguinity in the Contemporary World."
     Human Heredity. Vol. 77. no. 1-4. 6-9.
Rosenzweig, Mark R, and T Paul Schultz. 1982. "The Behavior of Mothers as Inputs to Child
      Health: the Determinants of Birth Weight, Gestation, and Rate of Fetal Growth." In
      Economic aspects of health, by Mark R Rosenzweig and T Paul Schultz, 53-92. University
      of Chicago Press.
Sabean, David Warren, Simon Teuscher, and Jon Mathieu. 2007. Kinship in Europe: Approaches
      to Long-term Development (1300-1900). Berghahn Books.
Sanders, Nicholas J. 2012. "What doesn't Kill You Makes You Weaker: Prenatal Pollution
       Exposure and Educational Outcomes." Journal of Human Resources 47 (3): 826-850.
Schulz, Jonathan F., Duman Bahrami-Rad, Jonathan P. Beauchamp, and Joseph Henrich, 2019.
       "The Church, Intensive Kinship, and Global Psychological Variation," Science, 366
       (707):1-12
Schulz, Jonathan F. 2020." Kin Networks and Institutional Development." Unpublished
       manuscript, George Mason University.
Sexton, Mary, and Richard Hebel. "A Clinical Trial of Change in Maternal Smoking and Its
         Effect on Birth Weight." Journal of the American Medical Association 251(7): 911-
         915.
Simes, R. John. 1986. "An Improved Bonferroni Procedure for Multiple Tests of Significance."
       Biometrika 73 (3): 751-754.
Sinha, Gyan, Peter Corry, D. Subesinghe, J. Wild, and Malcolm I. Levene. 1997. "Prevalence and
       Type of Cerebral Palsy in a British Ethnic Community: The Role of Consanguinity."
       Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology 39 (4): 259-262.
Stoltenberg, Camilla, P. Magnus, A.Skrondal, and R. T. Lie. 1999a. "Consanguinity and
       Reoccurrence Risk of Stillbirth and Infant Death." American Journal of Public Health
       89(4): 517-523.
Stoltenberg, Camilla, P. Magnus, A.Skrondal, and R. T. Lie. 1999b. "Consanguinity and
       Reoccurrence Risk of Birth Defects: A Population-based Study." American Journal of
       Medical Genetics. 82(5): 423-428.



                                              53
Stoltenberg, Camilla, Per Magnus, Rolv Terje Lie, Anne Kjersti Daltveit,, and Lorents M. Irgens.
       1998. "Influence of Consanguinity and Maternal Education on Risk of Stillbirth and
       Infant Death in Norway, 1967-1993." American Journal of Epidemiology. 148(5): 452-
       459.

Tadmouri, Ghazi, Pratibha Nair, Tasneem Obeid, Mahmoud Tal Ali, Najib Al Khaja, and Hanan
      Hamamy. 2009. "Consanguinity and Reproductive Health among Arabs." Reproductive
     Health. 6(17): 1-9.
Torun, Huzeyfe. 2018. "Compulsory Schooling and Early Labor Market Outcomes in a Middle-
       Income Country." Journal of Labor Research 39 (3): 277-305.
Tunçbilek, Ergül, and smet Koç. 1994. "Consanguineous Marriage in Turkey and its Impact on
       Fertility and Mortality." Annals of Human Genetics 58 (4): 321-329.
World Bank. 2005. "Turkey­Education Sector Study: Sustainable Pathways to an Effective,
      Equitable, and Efficient Education System for Preschool Through Secondary School
      Education."




                                              54
                       APPENDIX
Figure A.1: Proportion of Individuals with Second Language




Figure A.2: Marriage Characteristics of Men by Birth Cohort




                            55
                Figure A.3: Marriage Preferences of All Women by Birth Cohort




Figure A.4: Proportion of Ever Married Women and Men who Agree with the Statement that "Only a
                    Son can Ensure the Continuation of the Family Blood line"




                                             56
 Table A.1: The Effect of Exposure to the Education Reform on Marriage Preferences for Men
                           (1)                 (2)                (3)              (4)
                                            Panel A: Ever Married Men
                                            Spouse's           Spouse's         Spouse's
                   It is OK to Marry      Education is     Religious Sect    Political View
VARIABLES          a Blood Relative        Important         is Important     is Important
Reform                    0.007               0.020              0.004            0.004
                         (0.031)             (0.036)            (0.039)          (0.042)
                         [0.751]             [0.535]            [0.875]          [0.948]
Number of
Observations                 2,832                 2,832                 2,832                   2,832
                                                       Panel A: All Men
                                                  Spouse's            Spouse's                 Spouse's
                       It is OK to Marry        Education is      Religious Sect            Political View
VARIABLES              a Blood Relative          Important          is Important             is Important
Reform                        0.000                0.023                -0.001                   0.009
                             (0.022)              (0.028)              (0.030)                  (0.031)
                             [0.995]              [0.392]              [0.952]                  [0.865]
Number of
Observations                   4,499                  4,499                  4,499                  4,499
The Reform variable is equal to one if the respondent was born between 1987 and 1994 and equal to zero if
the respondent was born between 1978 and 1985. The 1986 cohort is excluded from the sample as exposure
to the reform is unclear for this cohort. The entries in (parentheses) are standard errors of the estimated
coefficients, clustered by childhood region-by-birth cohort; * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01. P-values,
related to bootstrapped standard errors clustered by birth cohort, are given in [square brackets]. All
regressions control for trend in the outcome variable separately for treatment and control groups, region of
current residence and region of childhood fixed effects, an indicator if the person grew up in a village, and
the interaction between the latter two variables, an indicator if the person speaks a second language, and the
interaction of second language with region of residence fixed effects. See the text for details.




                                                     57
   Table A.2: The Effect of Exposure to the Education Reform on Marriage
      Characteristics and Marital Preferences for Ever Married Women
                                                    Bandwidth
                                 10              9              7             6
                                         Panel A: Married to a Cousin
Reform                       -0.032**        -0.033**      -0.040**        -0.025
                              (0.015)         (0.016)       (0.018)       (0.020)
                              [0.036]         [0.016]       [0.026]       [0.152]
Number of Observations          5,589          5,148          4,188        3,661
                                      Panel B: Married to a Blood Relative
Reform                       -0.048**        -0.051**       -0.042*        -0.040
                              (0.021)         (0.022)       (0.025)       (0.026)
                              [0.007]         [0.001]       [0.023]       [0.107]
Number of Observations          5,589          5,148          4,188        3,661
                                            Panel C: Marriage Age
Reform                         0.372*         0.429*         0.472*       0.472*
                              (0.208)         (0.222)       (0.253)       (0.268)
                              [0.142]         [0.069]       [0.063]       [0.162]
Number of Observations          5,589          5,148          4,188        3,661
                                Panel D: Age Difference btw Husband and Wife
Reform                         -0.339        -0.465**       -0.458*      -0.537**
                              (0.218)         (0.229)       (0.257)       (0.267)
                              [0.190]        [0.0814]       [0.122]       [0.111]
Number of Observations          5,589          5,148          4,188        3,661
                                         Panel E: Arranged Marriage
Reform                      -0.080***       -0.081***     -0.091***     -0.100***
                              (0.028)         (0.030)       (0.033)       (0.035)
                              [0.037]         [0.040]       [0.026]       [0.032]
Number of Observations          5,158          4,757          3,879        3,398
                                        Panel F: Forced into Marriage
Reform                        -0.024*         -0.023         -0.018        -0.022
                              (0.014)         (0.015)       (0.017)       (0.018)
                              [0.024]         [0.008]       [0.017]       [0.012]
Number of Observations          5,158          4,757          3,879        3,398
                             Panel G: Met through Family/Relatives/ Neighbors
Reform                       -0.053**        -0.059**      -0.070**      -0.084**
                              (0.027)         (0.028)       (0.032)       (0.034)
                              [0.126]         [0.097]       [0.080]       [0.125]
Number of Observations          5,589          5,148          4,188        3,661
                                  Panel H: It is OK to Marry a Blood Relative
Reform                         -0.030        -0.042**        -0.026        -0.018
                              (0.019)         (0.021)       (0.023)       (0.026)
                              [0.312]         [0.126]       [0.304]       [0.480]
Number of Observations          5,589          5,148          4,188        3,661
                                   Panel I: Spouse's Education is Important
Reform                          0.022          0.029        0.050**       0.041*
                              (0.019)         (0.020)       (0.023)       (0.024)
                              [0.326]         [0.146]       [0.019]       [0.037]
Number of Observations          5,589          5,148          4,188        3,661
See Notes to Table A.1.


                                       58
