                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




EFFICIENT PROGRAMS TO SUPPORT BUSINESSES DURING AND AFTER LOCKDOWNS

                                      Thomas Philippon

                                      Working Paper 28211
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28211


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2020




This paper is based on the keynote RCFS address during the 2020 SFS Cavalcade. I am grateful
to Olivier Blanchard, Jean Pisani Ferry, Andrew Ellul, Isil Erel, and Uday Rajan for their
comments. Send correspondence to Thomas Philippon, tphilipp@stern.nyu.edu. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Thomas Philippon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Efficient Programs to Support Businesses During and After Lockdowns
Thomas Philippon
NBER Working Paper No. 28211
December 2020
JEL No. D24,G33,G38,H12

                                           ABSTRACT

I analyze efficient government interventions to mitigate financial distress during a severe
macroeconomic downturn. At the macroeconomic level, the key variable is the gap between the
real wage and the shadow cost of labor. This gap is large when unemployment is high. At the
micro level, laissez-faire leads to excessive liquidation of businesses but an indiscriminate bailout
prevents efficient reallocations and implies a large transfer from taxpayers to existing private
creditors. I show that a cost-efficient intervention can be achieved with a continuation premium,
whereby the government agrees to reduce its claims by the same haircut as private creditors plus
a fixed premium.


Thomas Philippon
New York University
Stern School of Business
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
tphilipp@stern.nyu.edu
        Efficient Programs to Support Businesses During and After
                                                  Lockdowns*
                       Thomas Philippon, New York University, CEPR, and NBER

                                                  December 2020




                                                       Abstract

       I analyze efficient government interventions to mitigate financial distress during a severe macroeconomic
       downturn. At the macroeconomic level, the key variable is the gap between the real wage and the
       shadow cost of labor. This gap is large when unemployment is high. At the micro level, laissez-faire
       leads to excessive liquidation of businesses but an indiscriminate bailout prevents efficient reallocations
       and implies a large transfer from taxpayers to existing private creditors. I show that a cost-efficient
       intervention can be achieved with a continuation premium, whereby the government agrees to reduce its
       claims by the same haircut as private creditors plus a fixed premium. (D24, G33, G38, H12)


Governments responded to the COVID-19 crisis with a lockdown of nonessential industries, together with
measures to protect firms and households. European countries used a combination of tax deferrals, guar-
anteed loans, and equity injections. The United States relied on extended unemployment insurance and a
program of bank loans to small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs), which can be partially or totally turned
into government-financed grants as a function of the proportion of workers kept by the firm. The scale of
the interventions is large. For instance, the German stabilization fund totals C600 billion ( C400 billion for
liquidity guarantees, C100 billion for subsidized loans, and C100 billion for equity injections). By the end
of May 2020, the French government had granted loan guarantees to more than 400,000 businesses.
    As firms accumulate debt, the risk of a large wave of insolvencies increases. The question then becomes:
will there be excessive liquidation? When the bankruptcy system is efficient, creditors and firms reach a
privately optimal allocation. In times of high unemployment, however, I argue that business failures are
likely to be inefficiently high and I characterized optimal mitigation policies.
    The reason for excess liquidation is involuntary unemployment at the prevailing wage. The wage is the
cost of labor perceived by the firms. When wages are rigid, a gap appears between the cost of labor and the

   * Thispaper is based on the keynote RCFS address during the 2020 SFS Cavalcade. I am grateful to Olivier Blanchard,
Jean Pisani Ferry, Andrew Ellul, Isil Erel, and Uday Rajan for their comments. Send correspondence to Thomas Philippon,
tphilipp@stern.nyu.edu .


                                                           1
shadow value of unemployment. This gap creates inefficient liquidations from a macroeconomic perspective
even when there are no bankruptcy costs and even when debt restructuring is privately efficient.
    The key result of the paper is that it is optimal for the government to offer a continuation premium in
order to induce efficient restructuring, liquidation and continuation. I show that laissez-faire liquidations are
socially excessive when unemployment is high. On the other hand it is not efficient to prevent all liquida-
tions as some businesses are not viable and should be closed. The optimal policy is then to nudge private
incentives towards continuation by offering a continuation premium to the firm and its claim-holders. The
difficult issue is to calibrate and target the continuation premium to the right set of firms. I characterize full
information interventions as well as wage subsidy schemes. Wage subsidy schemes can achieve efficiency
but are typically quite costly for tax-payers.
    The most important result of the paper relates to optimal interventions when the government has limited
information about the quality of each firm. This issue is particularly relevant in the case of the COVID-
19 crisis since the number of loans guaranteed by governments is orders of magnitude larger than in any
previous recessions. I show that the government can use the behavior of private creditors to reach the
efficient outcome even when it does not observe firm quality, and thus cannot by itself decide which firm
should be saved and which one should be liquidated. Theorem 2 shows that the efficient outcome is achieved
by indexing the haircut on government loans on the haircut of private creditors plus a continuation premium.
A key feature is that the premium is conditional on the existence of a private workout.
    The paper relates to the literature on the mitigation of financial distress. Several recent contributions
were motivated by the 2009 crisis. For example, Philippon and Skreta (2012) study optimal mitigation poli-
cies against adverse selection when credit markets freeze, and Philippon and Schnabl (2013) study optimal
interventions in a banking system subject to debt overhang. These papers also contain discussion of the ear-
lier literature. Glode and Opp (2020) study renegotiations when agents are both debtors and creditors, and
their willingness to renegotiate their claims depends on how they expect their own debts to be renegotiated
by others.
    This paper also relates to recent work on the macroeconomic impact of COVID-19. On the macroe-
conomic side, Eichenbaum et al. (2020), Alvarez et al. (2020), and Jones et al. (2020) build DSGE models
with contagion risk to study the joint dynamics of employment and infections. Guerrieri et al. (2020) study
how a supply shock in one sector (e.g., a lockdown) can create demand shortages in other, unaffected sectors.
    On the policy side, Hanson et al. (2020) study how the Federal Reserve and the Treasury responded to
the pandemic. Blanchard et al. (2020) discuss the rationale for subsidies to wages and debt restructuring.
Brunnermeier and Krishnamurthy (2020) argue that the Federal Reserve should act to directly support the
bond market, and, with the help of the Treasury, to subsidize loans to SMEs.
    On the empirical side, several papers attempt to estimate the impact of COVID-19 on firms' cash flows.
Gourinchas et al. (2020) estimate the impact of the COVID-19 crisis on business failures among SMEs
in 17 countries. Absent government support, they predict a 9 percentage points increase in the failure
rate of SMEs. The impact is most severe in Accommodation & Food Services, Arts, Entertainment &
Recreation, Education, and Other Services. The fiscal cost of an intervention that narrowly targets at risk
firms is around 0.5% of gross national product (GDP), while non-targeted subsidies can be substantially


                                                        2
more expensive (1.82% of GDP). Carletti et al. (2020) study the drop in profits and the equity shortfall in
Italy during the COVID-19 lockdown. They estimate that a 3-month lockdown generates a drop in profits
of about 10% of GDP, and that 17% of the firms become financially distressed. Also, in the context of
COVID-19, Schivardi et al. (2020) argue that the existing literature has overestimated the risks of propping
up zombie firms.
   The contribution of this paper is to propose an explicit model of excessive liquidation and to derive the
optimal policy response when the government has limited information.


1 Baseline Model
1.1 Technology and preferences
I consider a one period model. The economy has a unit mass of firms and a unit mass of households. The
representative household has quasi-linear preferences over consumption C and labor N :

                                             U = C -  (N ) ,

where  is increasing, strictly convex and such that   (0) = 0.
   Firm i  [0, 1] can produce output yi using labor ni according to the function


                                            yi = zi min (ni , 1)

where productivity zi is the only parameter that varies across firms, so from now on we index each firm
by its z . The cumulative distribution (pre-COVID-19) is F0 (z ) defined over (0, ) with limits such that
F0 (0) = 0 and F0 () = 1. Instead of hiring labor for production, a firm can be liquidated to yield  < 1
units of output. Thus, some firms will be active and some firms will be liquidated. Let  be the set of
liquidated firms. Firms hire labor at the beginning of the period and labor market clearing requires

                                        N=           n (z ) f0 (z ) dz,                                  (1)
                                                z/

and aggregate welfare is

                    U {; n (.)} =         zn (z ) f0 (z ) dz +            f0 (z ) dz -  (N ) .           (2)
                                     z/                            z 


1.2 Pre-COVID-19 planner allocation and competitive equilibrium
1.2.1   Planner's problem

It is clear that n = 1 for all active firms. To see why, consider two firms with the same z and suppose that
n = 0.5: this would produce z , but it would be dominated by n = 1 for one firm and liquidation for the
other, which would produce z + . The planner thus only needs to choose a cutoff z  above which firms are
active at maximum employment and below which they are liquidated:  = [0, z  ] for some z  . The labor


                                                      3
                                             Figure 1: Efficient equilibria




market clearing condition is then simply

                                                  1
                                        N=            f0 (z ) dz = 1 - F0 (z  )
                                                 z

The planner solves
                                        1                                    z
                               max          zf0 (z ) dz -  (N ) +                f0 (z ) dz
                                     z                                   0

The first-order condition is
                                                  z  =  +   (N )                                          (3)

At the social optimum, the productivity of the marginal firm must equal the opportunity cost of non-
liquidation plus the shadow cost of labor. Since   (0) = 0 and  < 1, we have the following result.
                                                            =  +   (1 - F (z  )).
Lemma 1. There exists a unique optimal cutoff that solves z0             0 0

    Figure 1 depicts the equilibrium.

1.2.2   Competitive equilibrium

To solve the competitive equilibrium, we need to find the equilibrium (real) wage w. The profits of an active
firm are
                                                        = z - w.

                                                            4
The marginal firm in the competitive equilibrium is indifferent between production and liquidation

                                                  (z c ) = ,

which implies
                                                z c = w + .                                                (4)

From the household's optimal labor supply, we have

                                                 w =   (N )

Therefore, z c =  +   (N ), which is the same condition as in the planner's problem, and, therefore, z c = z  .

Lemma 2. The competitive equilibrium is efficient.


1.3 COVID-19 shock with flexible wages
I model the COVID-19 shock as a negative change in the distribution of productivity. This captures the
idea that some businesses are unaffected by lockdowns ­ or even benefit from it as in the case of Amazon
or Zoom ­ while some businesses are severely affected. Formally, let F0 (.) denote the pre-COVID-19
distribution of project quality, and let F1 (.) be the post-COVID-19 distribution. F0 (.) dominates F1 (.) in
the first-order stochastic dominance sense: F0 (z )  F1 (z ) for all z . Let z0
                                                                               and N  be the pre-COVID-19
                                                                                    0
liquidation cutoff and employment.
                                                                                     = +  (1 - F (z  )).
Lemma 3. The efficient allocation in the post-COVID-19 economy is characterized by z1              1
                                                                       < w  , and N  < N  . The
Wages and employment are lower than in the pre-COVID-19 equilibrium: w1   0        1    0
                              < z  , but the liquidation rate is higher: F (z  ) > F (z  ).
liquidation cutoff is lower z1   0                                        1 1       0 0

Proof. Consider the labor market equilibrium conditions in the (N, z ) space. Demand N = 1 - F (z )
describes a downward slopping curve. Supply   (N ) = z -  describes an upward slopping curve. The
                                                      < z  and w  < w  since w  = z  - . The fact that
results follows from F0 (.) < F1 (.). This leads to z1   0      1    0
                 ) follows from the fact that   (N ) = z -  is upward sloping.
F1 (z  ) > F0 (z0

    COVID-19 lowers firm quality, output, and employment, as shown in Figure 1. In an efficient labor
market this decreases the real wage, which helps limit the negative impact of the COVID-19 shock on firms'
                                                        =  + w  , which is less than z  . In equilibrium there
profits. The productivity of the marginal firm is now z1      1                       0
are fewer firms, lower wages, and lower employment. In the following sections, I study excess liquidation,
which is defined as liquidation above and beyond the efficient level thus defined.


1.4 COVID-19 shock with downward rigid wages
Suppose that wages are downward rigid, so w = w0 after the COVID-19 shock. Let z
                                                                               ^1 be the liquidation
cutoff. The marginal firm is such that z
                                       ^1 =  + w. With rigid wages we have z             .
                                                                           ^1 =  + w0 = z0



                                                      5
                                             Figure 2: Rigid wages




Proposition 1. With downward rigid wages we have excess liquidation,z      > z  , and excess unem-
                                                                    ^1 = z0   1
                             ).
ployment F1 ( + w0 ) - F1 (z1

    In the efficient economy, the COVID-19 recession lowers the real wage, which mitigates the downturn.
When wages are rigid, z
                      ^1 cannot adjust and remains at z0
                                                        . This increases liquidation above and beyond the

efficient level. Figure 2 depicts the equilibrium.
    The figure captures the features of a Keynesian recession. As shown by Guerrieri et al. (2020), a supply
shock in one sector that creates demand deficiency in an another can generate a recession. The reason
for excess liquidation is involuntary unemployment at the prevailing wage. The wage is the cost of labor
perceived by the firms. The shadow value of labor, however, is   N  ^ . When wages are downward rigid,
               ^ .
we have w0 >   N


2 Analysis of Government Interventions
We have seen that laissez-faire leads to excessive liquidation and unemployment when wages are rigid. This
gap creates some scope for policy interventions. Let us now describe various interventions, starting with a
full-information benchmark.




                                                      6
2.1 Efficient Continuation Subsidy under Full Information
Suppose for now that the government can observe the quality z of each firm. To implement the efficient
                                                                                      and z
allocation the government needs to offer a continuation subsidy to all firm between z1    ^1 so as to make
continuation privately optimal. Let m be the subsidy granted to firms conditional on continuation.
                                                                                     ,  + w ] and m = 0
Proposition 2. The conditional continuation subsidy m (z ) = w0 +  - z for all z  [z1      0
                                                 , N  ) at a cost T cs =        w 0 +
otherwise implements the efficient allocation (z1   1                           
                                                                               z1     m (z ) f1 (z ) dz .   This subsidy
is the cost-minimizing intervention among all interventions that respect the principle that no creditor should
be worse off than in liquidation.

    The idea is simple, as shown in Figure 2. Notice first that since m = 0 for z         ^), the mitigation
                                                                                  / (z  , z
policy does not affect strong firms. For firms with z < z  the subsidy is zero therefore they are liquidated.
We can thus focus on firms where z  [z1 ^1 ]. Liquidation yields . Continuation yields z - w + m. All
                                      , z

firms in [z1 ^1 ] therefore (weakly) prefer to continue. The full information mitigation has the following
           , z

properties:

    · it implements the efficient allocation;

    · only socially viable firms are subsidized;

    · it is the least costly intervention among the ones that only employ subsidies.

The full information case is not realistic, however, since governments cannot observe z directly. One possi-
ble implementation is via a profit compensation scheme. For a given wage, firm profits  = z - w reveal the
level of productivity, so the subsidy also could be written as m (z ) =  -  for all   [ + w1
                                                                                            - w , ].
                                                                                               0
    In practice, however, profits are not observable in real time, and they can be manipulated. Therefore, the
assumption that the government can recover z from  is not realistic. In the following sections, we study
limited information interventions.


2.2 Uniform wage subsidy
The optimal allocation above requires a lot of granular information that the government is unlikely to have.
In particular, it requires the government to estimate the liquidation value as well as the going-concern value
of each firm.
    A wage subsidy can restore efficiency even when the government does not observe z . Suppose that the
                                                                               ^ =  + (1 - sw ) w0 , and the
state pays a fraction s of the wage bill. The marginal firm is then defined by z
                                                                                       
                                                                                w 0 -w 1
subsidy can be adjusted to achieve z      = w  +  by choosing sw =
                                   ^1 = z1   1                                     w0 .    In that case, the profits of
an active firm are  = z - (1 -      sw ) w   =z-      ,
                                                     w1   which is exactly what they would be under the efficient
equilibrium.
                                                
                                         w 0 -w 1
Proposition 3. A wage subsidy sw =          w0      financed by lump-sum taxes restores efficiency, z      , but at
                                                                                                    ^1 = z1
a cost T ws > T cs .



                                                           7
    The issue with such a subsidy is that it does not keep firms at their indifference point. The only firm
that stays at its outside option is the marginal one z1
                                                       . For this firm,  (z  ) = . For all other active firms,
                                                                           1
however,  > . The firms that would have closed receive more than is required to keep them open, and
the ones would have continued even under rigid wages get a rent. This is why the program is costly. The
fiscal cost is in fact proportional to the aggregate post-COVID-19 wage bill, which is typically very large:
T ws = sw w0 (1 - F (z1
                       )).

    To limit the costs of wage subsidy programs, they can be made available only to those sectors of the
economy, such as hotels and restaurants, where we have reason to expect the COVID-19 shock to be partic-
ularly large.


2.3 Liquidation tax
The final way to implement efficient allocation is to tax liquidations. Suppose that, in case of liquidation, the
government taxes the liquidation proceeds at rate  . The marginal firm is then defined by z
                                                                                          ^ = (1 -  ) +w0 .
As before, we aim for z     so we need (1 -  )  + w =  + w  .
                      ^ = z1                       0      1
                                    
                             w 0 -w 1
Proposition 4. A tax  =                 on liquidation restores efficiency.

    A couple of key ideas emerge here. The first is that the tax is mostly an out-of-equilibrium threat. Firms
that are induced to continue do not in fact pay the tax. The tax is only paid by firms that liquidate. All
infra-marginal firms with z >  + w0 are unaffected. Firms in the [z  , z
                                                                       ^] range are affected but do not pay
the tax in equilibrium. The tax is only paid by F (z1
                                                     ) - F (z  ) firms.
                                                          0 0
    These appear to be very valuable features, and yet we do not see such taxes in reality. The main reason
is probably that it would be a punishment for the owners of liquidated businesses. In the case of large firms
the cost would be shared among diversified shareholders and creditors. In the case of small private firms,
however, this would be a regressive tax on entrepreneurs who presumably lost much of the savings they had
invested in their business in the first place.
    A pure liquidation tax is therefore unlikely to be feasible, but the idea of discouraging liquidation, is, as
we shall see, a robust insight.


3 Efficient Debt Restructuring
Let us now introduce a more realistic financial structure where firms have outstanding debts. At this point,
it is important to separate macroeconomic and microeconomic inefficiencies.
    In this section, I assume privately efficient restructuring, that is, I assume that renegotiations between the
firm and its creditors are constrained efficient. This implies that creditors do not liquidate privately viable
firms and it rules out, in particular, the classic debt overhang issue à la Myers (1977). Of course, a rich
literature in corporate finance focuses on these precise issues, and I will discuss them in the next section.




                                                            8
3.1 Private debt restructuring (D )
Firms carry legacy debt D   and at least a fraction of that debt must be rolled over during COVID-19, so
creditors have a say in the continuation of firms. I consider three cases:

   1. If z - w > D , the firm is solvent;

   2. If D > z - w > , the firm is insolvent but viable as a going concern;

   3. If  > z - w, the firm is not privately viable.

No further action is needed in case 1. In case 2, the debt is restructured and the firm continues as a going
concern. In case 3, creditors always force liquidation. The marginal firm is therefore still defined by z
                                                                                                        ^=
 + w.

Proposition 5. The existence of private debt with efficient renegotiation does not change the post-COVID-19
                                                                                      = +  (1 - F (z  )).
equilibrium. With flexible wages we have the efficient equilibrium characterized by z1           1 1
With downward rigid wages we have z                                                      ).
                                  ^1 =  + w0 and excess unemployment F1 ( + w0 ) - F1 (z1

    For firms that are viable but insolvent the creditors agree to reduce their claims from D to D  = z - w.
The haircut is therefore
                                                           z-w
                                               h=1-                                                         (5)
                                                            D
for all z  [ + w, D + w].

3.2 Private debt and passive government loans, (L)
As discussed in the introduction, governments implemented large-scale liquidity support during the lock-
down. Some of this support took the form of direct wage subsidy, that is, grants to firms. The remainder
took the form of loans, usually administered by commercial banks and guaranteed by governments (Baudino,
2020). In the simple model discussed here, a direct loan from the government and a loan guaranteed by the
government are not conceptually different. We can thus think of L as direct loans. These loans are usually
pari passu with private debt.
                                                                           D
    Under liquidation and pari passu loans, private creditors recover     D +L    while the government recovers
 L
D + L .   Under continuation with a passive government policy that simply follows private restructuring
                                                            D
agreements (if any), the private creditors can expect      D +L   (z - w). The marginal firm is therefore still
defined by z
           ^ = w + .

Lemma 4. Under passive government policy, the equilibrium is the same as under private debt.

    As a corollary, this implies that the full information mitigation described earlier is unchanged.

3.3 Optimal mitigation under limited information and rigid wages
Here, I assume that private lenders observe z , but the government does not. With COVID-19 emergency
loans ranging in the hundreds of thousands, it is clearly not feasible for governments to monitor all the
borrowers.

                                                       9
      This implies that the government needs the help of banks to implement the efficient triage. However,
letting the banks make privately optimal decisions would lead to excessive closures. Formally, I assume that
the government does not observe firm-specific variables but can observe actions taken by private creditors.

          Assumption. The information set of the government includes (a) whether or not a private
          restructuring agreement has been reached; (b) the haircut agreed on private debt; and (c) the
          state of the labor market.

We can now state our main result.

Theorem 1. Continuation premium. The following policy implements the efficient allocation. Under liqui-
dation, the government claims all its rights as a creditor. Under continuation, the government automatically
agrees to a haircut (H ) equals to the one granted by private creditors (h) plus a continuation premium:
H (z ) = h (z ) +   , with
                                                                  
                                                            w0 - w1
                                                                    .                                           (6)
                                                               L
Proof. Let D  and L be the new claims under continuation. If private creditors liquidate they recover
 D                                                                                                         D
D + L .    If they restructure and continue they get D  < D . They are indifferent if and only if D  =    D +L    or
               
1-h=         D +L .   The pledgeability constraint imposes   D    +   L   = z - w. Combining these two condition we
                          D
get   L   =z-w-          D + L .   We evaluate at the efficient allocation z  =  +   (N  ) to get

                                                                 D
                                            L =  +   ( N  ) - w -  
                                                               D+L
                                            L           (N  ) - w
                                              =     +
                                            L   D+L       L

or
                                                            w -   (N  )
                                                  H =h+
                                                                L
This shows that private creditors are indifferent between liquidating and continuing for a firm of quality z  .
Any firm z > z  strictly prefers to continue, since they only need to set a haircut h such that

                                             (1 - h) (D + L) = z - w + L
                                                                 = z -   (N  )
                                                                 = z - z  + ,

which shows that (1 - h (z )) (D + L) >  for all z > z  . QED.
                                                                                
    The key point is that the continuation premium   w0 -    L
                                                               (N )
                                                                    does not depend on the individual
value of z or on . The scheme is therefore implementable by a government with limited microeconomic
information. The term w0 -   (N  ) captures excessive unemployment. It measures the gap between the
wage and the shadow cost of labor. If wages were fully flexible and the labor market fully efficient and
competitive, we would have w =   (N ) and the gap would be zero.



                                                            10
    Implementing the optimal allocation is costly. Because the government does not observe z , it needs to
pay information rents to creditors. These rents are zero only for the marginal firms (z  ). They are strictly
positive for all insolvent firms above z  . This means that mitigation under limited information is costlier
than full information mitigation.

Corollary 1. Limited information mitigation is costlier than full information mitigation.

    If taxes are distortionary it may not optimal to implement the first best allocation. In that case, the
government can rely on a limited mitigation. The key point here is that it is still optimal to use a continuation
premium because it leverages private sector information.

Corollary 2. When taxes are distortionary, mitigation below the first best can be obtained by a continuation
premium  <   .

    This last case also applies if the government is unsure about the value of w1
                                                                                 or has a different goal for

employment, say Ng instead of N1
                                . Suppose the government sets a continuation premium  . If private cred-

                                   D
itors liquidate they recover      D + L .   If they restructure and continue they get D  < D . They are indifferent
                           D                        
if and only if D  =       D +L     or 1 - h =     D +L .   The pledgeability constraint imposes D  + L = z - w.
Combining these two condition we get (1 - h) D + (1 - h -  ) L = z - w or

                                                   z ( ) = w +  - L                                              (7)

                                                                          g            g          g
Corollary 3. The continuation premium  g implements the employment level N1 = 1 - F1 (z1 ) where z1
solves (7).

    Note that the government needs an estimate of the average value of  to predict the aggregate level of
employment it will generate. It does not need to know the value of  at the micro level, however.


4 Pledgeability Constraints and Private Inefficiencies
In the previous section, we assumed that debt restructuring is privately efficient. This assumption is clearly
not true in the real world. We can think of two private inefficiencies. The first is simply a deadweight loss in
bankruptcy. It is not clear, however, that this creates the need for specific interventions. In fact, neither the
                       w 0 -w                                         w0 -  (N  )
labor subsidy s =         w0     nor the continuation premium             L         depend on . Private agents take 
into account when deciding to liquidate or restructure a business. A lower value of  makes liquidation more
costly, but this is internalized by private agents. The externality only arises if bankruptcy by one firm lowers
the recovery values of other firms, for instance, because bankruptcy courts are overwhelmed with cases.
Even in this case, however, the direction of the bias is unclear, since we have seen that a tax on liquidation
is typically useful.
    A more interesting private inefficiency is that of credit constraints, broadly defined to encompass debt
overhang and pledgeability constraints. Debt overhang is a consequence of inefficient private bargaining
as senior creditors refuse to renegotiate their debt D . Philippon and Schnabl (2013) have explored the
consequences of debt overhang so we refer the reader to that paper for more details.

                                                             11
    My model can easily accommodate credit constraints. The key feature in this case is a lack of transfer-
ability of utility. Formally, suppose that total firm value is z - w but insiders must retain inside equity e, so
pledgeable income is only z - w - e. As is well-known in corporate finance theory, pledgeability constraints
can arise because of moral hazard or adverse selection, and can take the form of leverage constraints, credit
risk constraints, or inside equity constraints (Tirole, 2006). The results below do not depend on the exact
nature of the constraint. The important point is the existence of a gap between the total private value of the
firm and its pledgeable value. The value e accrues to the entrepreneur, but creditors do not care about it, and
the entrepreneur cannot pledge it to keep her business open.


4.1 Private and social continuation values
The three cases are now

   1. If D < z - w - e, the firm is solvent;

   2. If  < z - w - e < D, the firm is insolvent but privately viable as a going concern;

   3. If z - w - e <  < z - w, the firm is socially viable, but not privately viable.

   4. If z - w < , the firm is not socially viable.

The marginal firm is then defined by
                                                z
                                                ^=w+e+

Proposition 6. Pledgeability constraints increase liquidation and unemployment. With flexible wages the
                                ^ =  + e +   (1 - F (^
equilibrium is characterized by z                             ^ > z  . With downward rigid wages, we
                                                     z )) and z
have z                                        z ) - F (p ).
     ^ =  + w0 + e and excess unemployment F (^

    For firms that are viable but insolvent, creditors agree to reduce their claims from D down to D  =
z - w - e. The haircut is therefore
                                                           z-w-e
                                            h (z ) = 1 -
                                                             D
for all z  [ + w + e, D + w + e]. We can introduce debt owed to the government as we did earlier. The
equilibrium under passive government policy is the same as under private debt.
    The full information mitigation is also similar, but the efficient subsidy takes into account the welfare of
the business owner.

Lemma 5. The mitigation policy where the government offers m (z ) =  + w + e - z for all z  (z  , z
                                                                                                  ^)
and m = 0 otherwise implements the efficient allocation (z  , N  ).


4.2 Optimal mitigation
Mitigation under imperfect information works in a similar way as before.




                                                       12
Theorem 2. Continuation premium with pledgeability constraint. The following policy implements the ef-
ficient allocation. Under liquidation, the government claims all its rights as a creditor. Under continuation,
the government automatically agrees to a haircut (H) equals to the one granted by private creditors (h) plus
a continuation premium: H = h +   , with

                                                w0 -   (N  ) + e
                                           =                     .
                                                      L

    The continuation premium now includes a second component that captures the nonpledgeable equity of
business owners that would be destroyed under liquidation.


4.3 Robustness
An important point is that the scheme in Theorem 2 is robust to manipulation of valuations by creditors
because the government's efforts are conditional on the haircut of private creditors.
    In theory, the scheme can be vulnerable to collusion between creditors and entrepreneurs. Creditors
could propose a high haircut in order to induce a high haircut from the government. This would benefit the
firm, not the creditors, but if private side payments are feasible, the entrepreneur could secretly share the
windfall with the creditors. However, how such a payment could be enforced is unclear, so the creditors
would be taking a risk. They would also have to recognize large losses. It seems unlikely that banks would
engage in such a scheme.


5 Conclusion
The results derived above shed light on the various approaches used by governments to limit the economic
cost of the pandemic. Governments have reacted to the risk of excessive liquidation and unemployment
by launching guarantee programs to support SMEs (Prop 1). Various forms of wage subsidies have been
enacted everywhere, but their costs have led many governments to restrict their availability to a subset of
firms and industries (Prop. 3).
    Even as the pandemic recedes, firms will be left with large amounts of debt and the question of how
to allocate the restructuring costs will become crucial. An important difference with previous recessions is
that governments will be major creditors to millions of SMEs. In this context, Theorems 1 and 2 establish a
scheme that supports efficient continuation and restructuring while minimizing the cost to taxpayers.
    An important avenue for future research is to understand the political economy of loss sharing. The
scheme proposed in this paper is robust to manipulations at the micro level. At the macro level, however,
groups of creditors might lobby governments to convince them to unconditionally abandon their claims,
which would be both inefficient and costly.




                                                     13
References
Alvarez, F., D. Argente, and F. Lippi (2020, March). A simple planning problem for covid-19 lockdown.
  Working Paper.

Baudino, P. (2020, April). Public guarantees for bank lending in response to the covid-19 pandemic. FSI
  Briefs.

Blanchard, O., T. Philippon, and J. Pisani-Ferry (2020). A new policy toolkit is needed as countries exit
  covid-19 lockdowns. PIEE.

Brunnermeier, M. and A. Krishnamurthy (2020, June). Corporate debt overhang and credit policy. Brook-
  ings.

Carletti, E., T. Oliviero, M. Pagano, L. Pelizzon, and M. G. Subrahmanyam (2020, 08). The covid-19 shock
  and equity shortfall: Firm-level evidence from italy. The Review of Corporate Finance Studies 9(3),
  534­568.

Eichenbaum, M., S. Rebelo, and M. Trabandt (2020, March). The macroeconomics of epidemics. Working
  Paper NWU.

Glode, V. and C. Opp (2020). Renegotiation in debt chains. NBER WP 27883.

Gourinchas, P.-O., S
                   . . Kalemli-Özcan, V. Penciakova, and N. Sander (2020). Covid-19 and sme failures.
  NBER WP 27877.

Guerrieri, V., G. Lorenzoni, L. Straub, and I. Werning (2020, April). Macroeconomic implications of covid-
  19: Can negative supply shocks cause demand shortages? NBER Working Paper No. 26918.

Hanson, S., J. Stein, A. Sunderam, and E. Zwick (2020). Business credit programs in the pandemic era.
  Brookings.

Jones, C., T. Philippon, and V. Venkateswaran (2020, April). Optimal mitigation policies in a pandemic:
  Social distancing and working from home. NBER Working Paper 26984.

Myers, S. C. (1977). Determinants of corporate borrowing. Journal of Financial Economics 5, 147­175.

Philippon, T. and P. Schnabl (2013, February). Efficient recapitalization. Journal of Finance 68(1), 1­42.

Philippon, T. and V. Skreta (2012, February). Optimal interventions in markets with adverse selection.
  American Economic Review.

Schivardi, F., E. Sette, and G. Tabellini (2020, 07). Identifying the real effects of zombie lending. The
  Review of Corporate Finance Studies 9(3), 569­592.

Tirole, J. (2006). The Theory of Corporate Finance. Princeton University Press.



                                                    14
