                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        POLLUTING PUBLIC FUNDS:
     THE EFFECT OF ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION ON MUNICIPAL BONDS.

                                        Akshaya Jha
                                     Stephen A. Karolyi
                                     Nicholas Z. Muller

                                     Working Paper 28210
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28210


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2020




This paper has benefited greatly from the feedback provided by Pat Akey, Dave Evans, Ludovica
Gazze, Harrison Hong, Ivan Ivanov, Brian Kovak, Edson Severnini, Lowell Taylor as well as
seminar participants at the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the 2019 Annual
Meeting of the Urban Economics Association, the 2020 Annual Conference for the Association
of Environmental and Resource Economists, Carnegie Mellon's Heinz Informal Lunch Seminar
and the Technology, Sustainability, and Business Forum at Carnegie Mellon. Any remaining
errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Akshaya Jha, Stephen A. Karolyi, and Nicholas Z. Muller. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Polluting Public Funds: The Effect of Environmental Regulation on Municipal Bonds.
Akshaya Jha, Stephen A. Karolyi, and Nicholas Z. Muller
NBER Working Paper No. 28210
December 2020
JEL No. G12,G14,Q52,Q53,Q58,R51

                                         ABSTRACT

We present three findings on the effects of environmental regulation on the municipal bond
market. First, yields increase (decrease) after a new standard is proposed (finalized), consistent
with the resolution of regulatory uncertainty. Second, around annual compliance announcements,
yields fall for counties that remain in compliance but increase for newly noncompliant counties.
Third, yields are substantially higher for bonds from counties just above the pollution threshold
relative to counties just below the threshold. Our findings suggest that increases in regulatory
stringency or uncertainty over future environmental policy increase the cost of municipal debt
raised to fund critical infrastructure.

Akshaya Jha                                     Nicholas Z. Muller
Carnegie Mellon University                      Department of Engineering, and Public Policy
Hamburg Hall Office 2218                        Tepper School of Business
4800 Forbes Avenue                              Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15232                            4215 Tepper Quad
Website: http://www.akshayajha.com              5000 Forbes Avenue
akshayaj@andrew.cmu.edu                         Pittsburgh, PA 15213
                                                and NBER
Stephen A. Karolyi                              nicholas.muller74@gmail.com
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
sakarolyi@gmail.com
1         Introduction

There is a growing literature demonstrating that financial markets internalize climate risk
(Bakkensen and Barrage, 2017; Gibson, Mullins and Hill, 2017; Barrage and Furst, 2019;
Painter, 2019; Baker et al., 2018a; Goldsmith-Pinkham et al., 2019; Baldauf, Garlappi
and Yannelis, 2020; Giglio, Kelly and Stroebel, 2020). However, there is very little work
on how environmental policy impacts financial markets. We fill this gap by examining
whether local air pollution policy affects the municipal bond market in the United States.

        We focus on the municipal bond market for several reasons. First, the U.S. municipal
bond market is quite large. State and local governments had over 3 trillion dollars in
debt outstanding as of the third quarter of 2017 (Driessen, 2018). Second, securities
issued in this market fund critical infrastructure such as schools, roads, and hospitals.1
Implications of environmental policies in this market may thus have far reaching social
consequences. Third, unlike corporate bonds, issuers of municipal bonds are tied to a
specific geographic location. This allows us to assess how municipal bond yields respond
to both spatial and temporal variation in the stringency of environmental policy. Fourth,
our work may provide insights to investors in municipal bonds. Systematic differences in
yields for bonds issued in locations subject to varying degrees of regulatory stringency
potentially suggest trading or investment opportunities.

        In terms of environmental policy, we concentrate on the Clean Air Act (CAA). The
CAA is one of the most significant federal interventions into markets in the postwar pe-
riod (Greenstone, 2002b). In 2010, the annual pollution control expenditures required
to comply with the CAA were roughly 3 billion dollars; the annual benefits of the CAA
are over 200 billion dollars (EPA, 1999).2 The National Ambient Air Quality Standards
(NAAQS) are a central component of the CAA. Through the NAAQS, the federal United
States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) sets maximum allowable ambient con-
centrations of local air pollutants. Establishing the NAAQS occurs in two phases. First,
the USEPA announces a proposed rule. Then following a period for public comment,
the final NAAQS is announced. Counties with pollution levels above the final NAAQS
in a given year are deemed to be in nonattainment. While the federal USEPA sets the
    1
     State and local governments accounted for nearly 75% of public infrastructure spending in the United
States in 2004.
   2
     Both dollar magnitudes are in 2019 USD.



                                                   2
NAAQS, state and local governments are responsible for establishing plans to ensure
compliance with the standards. Often, NAAQS compliance mandates that polluting
firms within local jurisdictions take costly actions to reduce emissions levels.

       We hypothesize that the NAAQS impact the price and yields of municipal bonds
traded in the secondary market in two ways. First, since corporate profits and labor
income comprise an important source of the municipal tax base, and because such revenue
services municipal debt, investors perceive counties out of attainment with the NAAQS
as being more likely to default on their bonds. Consequently, investors require a higher
return in order to hold bonds issued in noncompliant counties. Second, the proposed rule
announcement increases uncertainty over bond default risk while the declaration of the
final standard resolves uncertainty. Canonical models of investor behavior predict that
increased uncertainty corresponds to increases in the returns required to hold the bond
(Markowitz (1952); Sharpe (1994)).

       To test these hypotheses, we collect secondary market data on municipal bonds from
the Electronic Municipal Market Access (EMMA) database. This database is managed
by the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board. These data comprise the universe of
secondary market trades in the U.S. municipal bond market. The data include more
than 140 million trades from 2005-2019. For each bond trade, this database includes
information on the yield, the security identifier, and a description of the security.3 We link
municipal bonds to counties using the security description, keeping only trades associated
with bonds that can be linked to one county.

       Though there are specific NAAQS for each of several local air pollutants, we focus
on ground-level ozone for the following reasons. First, a large body of prior research
indicates that the bulk of the benefits from the CAA stem from reductions in premature
mortality due to decreased exposure to two pollutants: fine particulate matter and ozone
(EPA, 1999, 2010; Muller, Mendelsohn and Nordhaus, 2011). Second, there is only one
NAAQS for ozone while there are multiple different standards governing fine particulate
matter. The existence of more than one standard may obfuscate the effect of changes
in any one NAAQS on financial markets. Third, progress in reducing ambient levels of
ozone over the sample period has been more limited than for other local pollutants such
   3
    Specifically, we observe "yield-to-worst", which is the expected return from holding a bond until
maturity given its current price, coupon payments, and face value for options embedded in the bond
contract.


                                                 3
as fine particulate matter. As a result, the number of counties out of compliance with
the ozone standard is far higher than the number of counties out of compliance with
the standards associated with any other pollutant. Finally, the standard for ozone was
revised twice during our sample period.

   This study employs three empirical strategies to explore the link between environmen-
tal policy and municipal bond markets. We utilize an event study framework to compare
yields before and after the announcement of a new ozone standard. The proposed rule
announcement signals to stakeholders that a regulatory change is imminent, without
clearly conveying how stringent the new standard will ultimately be. Intuitively, we find
that the announcement of a proposed rule increases yields by about 2% (p < 0.01) in the
two weeks after the announcement relative to the two weeks before the announcement.
This provides evidence that investors must be compensated with additional returns in
order to take on the additional risk associated with impending changes in environmental
regulation. In contrast, we find that yields fall by 0.3%, (p < 0.01) on average after the
announcement of the final standard. The announcement of the final rule resolves the un-
certainty induced by the rule-making process. We also detect a significant uptick in the
likelihood that bonds are traded just after the proposed and final rule announcements.
These findings indicate that the announcement of a new NAAQS pollutant standard
provides important information to municipal bond market investors.

   We also estimate an event study model that focuses on the annual announcements of
county-level design values. The USEPA, which calculates the design values, uses these
air quality summary statistics to determine each county's compliance with the NAAQS
in each year. On average, after the new design values are announced, we find a 0.6%
reduction in yields (p < 0.01) for securities issued in counties that were in compliance
under both the old and new design values. This effect reflects the resolution of residual
uncertainty regarding whether the county will remain in compliance. However, relative
to these consistently compliant counties, securities issued in counties that move from
attainment to nonattainment experience a 1.4% increase in yields (p < 0.01). This
incremental effect reflects the increase in perceived default risk associated with the county
being noncompliant.

   A novel feature of this setting is that investors can observe the monitored daily pol-
lution levels used to construct the annual design values. This means that attentive bond


                                             4
market investors may be able to anticipate compliance status, particularly in the weeks
leading up to the announcement of the design values. We find that yields for bonds
issued in newly non-compliant counties start rising relative to yields for bonds issued in
consistently compliant counties up to two weeks before the design value announcement.
This suggests that investors trade in anticipation of a potential change in compliance
status. As further evidence that compliance status is an important component of munic-
ipal bond traders' strategies, we find significant increases in the average likelihood that
a bond is traded in the two weeks after the announcements of new design values.

   Finally, we implement a sharp regression discontinuity (RD) design that compares
yields on securities issues in counties with design values just above versus just below the
current ozone standard. Our preferred specification controls for a local quadratic func-
tion in the difference between design values and the standard and we pick the optimal
bandwidth using the method described in Calonico, Cattaneo and Titiunik (2014). Our
results indicate that counties just out of compliance with the relevant standard for ozone
face a 30% increase in bond yields (p < 0.05) relative to counties just in compliance with
the standard. The average yield in our sample is 2.1%, so our RD estimate amounts to
a change of about 65 bps. This suggests that a noncompliant county must offer substan-
tially higher yields in order to entice investors to hold their bonds. This increases the
municipality's cost of raising public funds, potentially impacting the level of investment
in local public goods such as hospitals or schools.

   State and local government officials know the current NAAQS and they often manage
the collection of local ambient monitoring data. It is therefore possible that officials
may try to manipulate measured ambient pollution levels to comply with the NAAQS.
Importantly, we fail to reject the null hypothesis that counties are unable to manipulate
their ozone levels to be just below the standard (Cattaneo, Jansson and Ma, 2019). This
test serves as an important check of the assumption required of RD designs that there
are no unobserved differences across counties just below versus just above the relevant
cut-off.

   Our analysis contributes to prior work studying the economic costs of environmental
regulation. In particular, a previous literature documents that stricter environmental
regulation adversely impacts employment, capital investment, and output across a variety
of different sectors in the United States, including oil refineries, pulp and paper mills, and


                                              5
steel mills (Gray and Shadbegian (1998); Shadbegian and Gray (2005); Gray et al. (2014))
as well as the manufacturing sector more broadly (Greenstone (2002a); List et al. (2003)).
Earlier work demonstrates that environmental policy impacts firm location decisions as
well (Bartik (1985); McConnell and Schwab (1990); Levinson (1996)). Combined, this
prior research supports our hypothesis that environmental regulations impose a variety
of different costs on polluting firms. This in turn may impact municipal tax revenue
streams. To our knowledge, we provide the first empirical evidence that environmental
policy affects municipal bond yields, and thus, the cost of raising funds for essential local
public goods provision such as hospitals, schools, and roads.

    This paper also contributes to a small but growing literature linking environmental
outcomes to financial markets (Giglio, Kelly and Stroebel (2020)). To date, the majority
of this literature has focused on the impacts of climate change. For example, previ-
ous work has demonstrated that housing prices are impacted by beliefs over flood risk
(Bakkensen and Barrage (2017); Gibson, Mullins and Hill (2017)) and climate change
(Baldauf, Garlappi and Yannelis (2020); Barrage and Furst (2019)). In a recent paper,
Jerch, Kahn and Lin (2020) demonstrate that hurricanes adversely affect municipal fi-
nance systems, noting that climate change increases both the likelihood and intensity of
hurricanes. Most closely related to our work, Painter (2019) demonstrates that counties
that are likely to be impacted by climate change are forced to increase the yield they offer
when issuing municipal bonds.4 In contrast to this literature, we focus on the impact of
environmental regulation rather than changes to the environment. The results from this
paper can inform policymakers of the increased cost of public funds associated with both
existing air quality regulations and proposed regulations aimed at reducing greenhouse
gas emissions.

    This paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes our data and provides further
details on air quality regulations in the United States. Section 3 presents the event study
and RD frameworks while Section 4 reports the results. Finally, we conclude and discuss
the policy implications of our findings in Section 5.
   4
     Also related to our analysis, Baker et al. (2018b) provides empirical evidence that people are willing
to pay a premium for "green" bonds whose proceeds are used for environmentally sensitive purposes.




                                                    6
2         Background and Data

This section describes the primary sources of data used in the paper as well as background
information on municipal bonds, air pollution, and air quality regulations in the United
States. Summary statistics are relegated to Appendix Table A.1.


2.1         Municipal Bonds

The Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board (MSRB), established in 1975, oversees the
municipal securities market. Between 2010 and 2016, over 3 trillion dollars of debt was
issued in this market (MSRB (2017)). The proceeds from municipal bonds are used
by states and local municipalities to fund critical infrastructure such as roads, public
education, and healthcare. Indeed, state and local governments accounted for nearly
75% of public infrastructure spending in the United States in 2004.

        We collect secondary market data on municipal bonds from the Electronic Municipal
Market Access (EMMA) database managed by the MSRB. This database provides in-
formation on trade prices and yields for "virtually every municipal security bought and
sold".5 Our data span 2005-2019: 2005 is the first year that municipal bond trades were
tracked by the platform. This data-set contains roughly 141 million trades associated
with roughly 2.6 million 9-digit CUSIP codes (i.e.: security identifiers).

        Our analysis requires linking municipal bonds to the county of issuance. To do this, we
use a combination of string matching and manual inspection to match counties to security
descriptions. See Appendix Section C.2 for more details. Some bonds are issued by
institutions in multiple counties while some bonds are issued by state or federal agencies.
Our analysis examines how environmental policy enforced at the county level impacts
municipal bonds. As such, we keep only security descriptions linked to a single county.
After this sample restriction is imposed, we are still left with over 81 million trades
corresponding to roughly 1.9 million 9-digit CUSIP codes and 3,000 counties.

        The trade-level data-set includes the price of the bond, the settlement date, the
maturity date, the par value to be paid to the bond holder at the maturity date, and "yield
to worst". "Yield-to-worst" measures the expected return from holding a bond until
    5
        See https://emma.msrb.org/ for more information.



                                                    7
maturity given its current price, coupon payments, and face value for options embedded
in the bond contract. Since "yield-to-worst" does not reflect the potential return an
investor can receive from trading the bond, this measure is typically seen as a lower
bound on the bond's expected return. Since prices and yields are inversely related,
increases in yields are good for investors but bad for issuers. Specifically, if the issuer
must provide a higher yield for traders to hold its bond, the issuer faces a higher cost of
raising capital.

   We calculate the remaining years to maturity for each trade as the difference between
the year the bond comes to maturity and the year the trade was made. For ease of
exposition, we refer to each CUSIP/remaining years-to-maturity combination as a "bond"
for the remainder of the paper. We aggregate the trade-level data-set to the bond/week-
of-sample level as follows. First, "final yield" and "final price" are defined to be the yield
and price associated with the final trade in the week-of-sample for the bond. For weeks
with no trades, the final yield and price are taken from the last week with a trade. We
also take the sum over par value of the trades in the week for each bond; weeks without
trades for the bond have zero total value for that week. Similarly, we calculate the total
number of trades of the bond in a week, with zeros for the weeks with no trades.


2.2     Pollution and Environmental Regulations

The CAA is the overarching legislative framework governing air quality regulations in the
United States. The CAA embodies a strong federalist orientation. The federal USEPA
is charged with setting air quality standards, but states and counties are responsible for
implementing rules and regulations to meet these standards. Specifically, Title I, Section
109, of the CAA established the National Ambient Air Quality Standards (42 U.S.C.
§7409 2013). The NAAQS impose pollutant-specific limits on the maximum concentra-
tions of pollution allowed in the county in the year. Primary standards are calibrated to
provide protection of human health based on available scientific evidence. The earliest
NAAQS were implemented in 1972 (Clay et al., 2020). Periodic review of the scientific
basis for the NAAQS, and concomitant updates to the NAAQS, are required under sec-
tion 7408 of Title I (42 U.S.C. §7408 2013). Our event study framework, discussed below,
focuses on announcements of proposed changes to the standards as well as announcements
of the final rule.

                                              8
       Each year, the USEPA, together with state and local jurisdictions, make a determi-
nation as to whether each county in the United States is in attainment with the NAAQS
for each pollutant. The ozone standard during our sample period is the three-year rolling
average of the fourth-highest daily ozone value in the year. Attainment determinations
rely on daily and hourly readings from monitoring stations across the United States
(USEPA (2018)). Specifically, to assess compliance for each pollutant, USEPA calculates
an annual summary statistic using monitor readings. This annual county-level summary
statistic is a design value. Essentially, counties with design values above the relevant
standard are out of attainment with the standard while counties below the standard are
in attainment. However, the USEPA has substantial latitude in determining which mon-
itor and hour-of-sample observations are included or excluded when calculating design
values for different counties. The USEPA publishes design values for a given year roughly
one year after the fact (USEPA (2016)).

       As noted above, we focus on ground-level ozone for four reasons. First, prior work
finds that the largest benefits from the CAA result from reductions in ozone and fine
particulates (EPA, 1999, 2010; Muller, Mendelsohn and Nordhaus, 2011). Second, the
NAAQS specifies only one standard for ozone. In contrast, the NAAQS specifies both an
annual and a daily standard for fine particulates. It is difficult to identify the impact of
changes in any one standard on bond yields in the presence of multiple standards. Third,
the majority of counties out of attainment with the NAAQS are in nonattainment due
to the ozone standard (see Figure A.1). This is because it has proven costlier to reduce
ozone levels relative to fine particulate levels.6 Finally, the ozone standard was changed
twice during our sample period, in 2008 and 2015, allowing us to identify precise effects
using an event study specification.

       Violations of the NAAQS trigger a joint process between states and the USEPA
designed to rectify exceedances. The USEPA posts a list of areas deemed to be in non-
compliance with the NAAQS in the Federal Register. Subsequent to such designations,
states must submit an implementation plan to USEPA, proposing measures to achieve
compliance with the standard. Such measures often involve installation of "reasonably
available" pollution control technologies (RACT) at large stationary sources (70 FR
71701, Nov. 29, 2005, as amended at 72 FR 31749, June 8, 2007). Such mandated
   6
    Appendix Figure A.2 plots the annual average design values for ozone versus fine particulate from
2000-2019.


                                                 9
investments are costly. In addition, jurisdictions in areas that are out of attainment or
have recently achieved attainment must demonstrate that proposed new projects will not
exacerbate existing violations or cause new violations. This "conforming projects" re-
quirement most often applies to transportation infrastructure. Ensuring that a proposed
transportation project will not adversely affect NAAQS compliance may result in with-
holding funding and delays in implementation (CRS, 2015). Summarizing, county-level
noncompliance with the NAAQS adversely affects economic activity in at least two ways
(RACT and transportation conformity).

    We argue that there are strong incentives for attainment counties to keep their pol-
lution design values below the threshold. Counties classified as nonattainment cannot
simply come back into attainment by bringing pollution design values below the threshold
for one year. To be re-classified as "in-attainment", a county must show that "reduc-
tions in the area's emissions are permanent and enforceable" (42 U.S.C. §7407 2013).
Moreover, the USEPA classifies ozone offenders into bins defined by the severity of the
violations. Counties deemed to be more severe offenders have longer to come back into
attainment but must impose greater constraints on polluters within their jurisdiction.
Nonattainment counties also have strong incentives to consistently maintain pollution
levels below the threshold, both to be re-classified as in attainment and to avoid being
classified as a more severe offender.



3     Empirical Methods

This section discusses the empirical strategies utilized in the paper. First, we assess the
impacts of proposed and final rule announcements on yields using an event study frame-
work (MacKinlay (1997); Eckbo (2008)). This framework is also used to test whether
announcements of design values affect yields. Finally, we use a regression discontinuity
design to estimate the effect of nonattainment on yields. As discussed in Section 2.1, we
aggregate the trade-level data set provided by MSRB to the CUSIP/remaining years-to-
maturity/week-of-sample level, noting that we refer to a CUSIP with a given remaining
years-to-maturity as a "bond".




                                            10
   Our basic event study specification is:


                          Yi,r,c,t = c + r + Et +  1[t > Et ] +     i,r,c,t            (1)


where i indexes CUSIP, r indexes remaining years-to-maturity, c indexes county of issuer,
and t indexes week-of-sample. In our primary specifications, Yi,r,c,t denotes the natural
log of yields. Event time Et is the week of the event. An "event" in this setting is
always an announcement, either of a new pollutant standard or the design values used
to determine attainment status with the NAAQS. The independent variable of interest
1[t > Et ] is equal to one if the week-of-sample is after the announcement. This variable
captures the impact of the announcement on the outcome variable.

   Our primary specifications include fixed effects by county, remaining years-to-
maturity, and for each event. We estimate our primary specification using data from
the two weeks before and after an event. That being said, we show that our estimates
are robust to a host of alternative specifications, such as including CUSIP fixed effects,
state-by year fixed effects, or including only observations corresponding to the week be-
fore and after an event. In all cases, standard errors are clustered by county.

   We consider two additional specifications based on the announcement of annual
county-level design values. Recall that a critical determinant of whether a county is
designated as nonattainment in a year is if the design value for that year is above the
pollution threshold specified by the standard. Based on this, we estimate how yields
change with the announcement of new design values separately for counties that fall into
the following designations: (1) in nonattainment under the old design values but attain-
ment under the new design values (NAA), (2) in attainment under the old design values
but nonattainment under the new design values (ANA), and (3) in nonattainment both
under the old and new design values (NANA). The omitted category is counties that
were, and remain in, attainment with the NAAQS (AA).

   We estimate the following specification:


                                Yi,r,c,t = c + Et + r +   i,r,c,t
                   2
                          NAA NAA    ANA ANA    NANA NANA
              +          [   Dc,t, +    Dc,t, +     Dc,t, ]                            (2)
                   =-2

                       +1[A  NA]1 + 1[NA  A]2 + 1[NA  NA]3

                                              11
where we include fixed effects by county, event, and remaining years-to-maturity. This
specification also includes indicators for whether the county in the year switches from
attainment to nonattainment, switches from nonattainment to attainment, or remains in
nonattainment. Standard errors are clustered by county.
                                  NAA     ANA         NANA    NAA
   The variables of interest are Dc,t, , Dc,t, , and Dc,t, . Dc,t, captures the
impact of the announcement being  weeks away for counties that were in nonattainment
under the old design values but attainment under the new design values. Similarly,
 ANA       NANA
Dc,t, and Dc,t, capture the effects of being  weeks away from the event for counties
that switch from attainment to nonattainment and remain in nonattainment under both
the new and old design values, respectively. Providing further detail,   t - Et is the
                                                                       NAA    ANA
difference between the week-of-sample and the event week. We normalize  =-1 ,  =-1 ,
    NANA                                   ANA
and  =-1 to be equal to one. Consequently,  =-2 , for example, captures the impact

of being two weeks before the announcement of the design values relative to one week
before the announcement for counties that are in attainment under the old design values
but nonattainment under the new design values.

   The design value event study explores the effect on yields of newly revealed informa-
tion about compliance status. We use regression discontinuity (RD) to directly assess the
impact of nonattainment on yields. The intuition underlying the RD estimate is simple.
Being classified as nonattainment triggers costly actions to reduce pollution levels within
their boundaries. Having a design value above the NAAQS is a critical factor affecting
compliance status. Thus, counties have a strong incentive to keep pollution levels below
the threshold.

   Based on this, one concern with the RD approach is that counties just above the
threshold might try to manipulate their monitored pollution levels in order to be right
below the threshold. Using a density break test (Cattaneo, Jansson and Ma, 2019), we
fail to reject the null hypothesis that counties are unable to manipulate their pollution
levels in order to be right below the threshold specified by the standard (the relevant
p-value is p= 0.829). Appendix Figure A.3 presents graphical evidence consistent with
the assertion that there's no break in density around the cut-off.

   We estimate the following RD specification:


                       Yi,c,m,t =  +  1[Rc,t > 0] + f (Rc,t ) +   i,c,m,t              (3)


                                             12
        where Rc,t is the difference between the design value calculated for ozone in county
c and the ozone standard, associated with bond issue i that has remaining years-to-
maturity r in week-of-sample t (i.e.: Rc,t  Design Valuec,t - NAAQSt ). In RD parlance,
Rc,t is the running variable. Our primary specifications control for local quadratic poly-
nomials in the running variable using Epanechnikov kernel functions (i.e.: f (Rc,t )). The
optimal bandwidth is chosen using the common coverage error rate method (Calonico,
Cattaneo and Titiunik, 2014).7 We estimate the primary specification using data from
the two weeks before and after the announcement of design values in each year. We
consider a host of sensitivity analyses, including residualizing the outcome variable by
different sets of fixed effects before estimating the RD specification, considering only data
from the week before and after the announcement of design values, and controlling for
local cubic polynomials rather than local quadratic polynomials in the running variable.
Finally, we cluster standard errors by county.



4         Empirical Results

This section is split into four subsections. We present the estimated impacts on yields
of the announcements of the proposed and final ozone standards in the first and second
subsections respectively. The third subsection discusses the results from the event study
regressions focusing on the annual announcements of the design values. In the final
subsection, we estimate the effect of being out of attainment with the ozone standard on
yields using the regression discontinuity design.


4.1        Proposed Rule Announcements and Bond Yields

Table 1 reports estimates from the event study regressions focusing on the announcement
of proposed rule changes to the ozone NAAQS. The central result is that yields increase
in the two weeks following the announcement of the proposed rule changes. The increases
are small but precisely estimated.

        The specification considered in Column (1) includes fixed effects for the county as-
sociated with the issuer, year of the announcement, and remaining years to maturity.
    7
     Observations are included in an RD specification if the absolute difference between the design value
for that observation and the cut-off is less than the bandwidth.

                                                   13
Table 1: Estimated Impact of the Announcement of the Proposed Ozone Rule on Yields


                                Dependent Variable: Log Final Yield
                                                 (1)       (2)      (3)                     (4)

                            Post                     0.019      0.008        0.018       0.019
                                                     (0.002)    (0.001)      (0.002)     (0.002)

               Bandwidth (Weeks)                        2           2           2           1
                   County FE                           Yes         No          Yes         Yes
                    CUSIP FE                           No          Yes         No          No
             State-by-Event-Year FE                    No          No          Yes         No
                  Event Year FE                        Yes         Yes         No          Yes
           Remaining Yrs-to-Maturity FE                Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
                       R2                             0.537       0.917       0.541       0.530
                Mean of Dep. Var.                     1.144       1.168       1.144       1.163
                 Number of Obs.                      499,469     470,032     499,469     291,635
                Number of Bonds                      136,730     107,293     136,730     113,925
      Notes: This table presents the impact of the announcement of a proposed new standard for ozone on
      yields. The unit of observation underlying the regressions in this table is CUSIP/remaining years-to-
      maturity/week-of-sample. We hereafter refer to a CUSIP/remaining years-to-maturity combination
      as a "bond". Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered by county for all specifications.
      The dependent variable considered in all columns is the log of final yields. We calculate final yields
      as the yield recorded for the last trade of the bond in the week. We use the final yield from the
      prior week for weeks in which the bond is not traded. The independent variable of interest, "Post",
      is an indicator variable that is equal to one only if the week-of-sample is on or after the week that
      a proposed new standard was announced. We consider the two weeks before and after the relevant
      announcement for all columns except Column 4; in Column 4, we consider only the week before and
      after the announcement. All of the regressions listed in this table include fixed effects for remaining
      years to maturity. The regressions presented in Columns 1 and 4 additionally include county fixed
      effects and announcement year fixed effects, the regression listed in Column 2 additionally includes
      CUSIP fixed effects and announcement year fixed effects, and the regression considered in Column
      3 additionally includes county fixed effects and state by announcement year fixed effects.


The results from this specification suggest that yields increase by about 6 basis points
(p < 0.01)8 . As a point of reference, average yields in our sample were roughly 300 basis
points. The estimated impact of the announcement is similar if we include state-by-
announcement year fixed effects instead of announcement year fixed effects or narrow the
window of observations considered to one week around the event (see Columns 3 and 4
of Table 1.

      However, inclusion of CUSIP fixed effects diminishes this effect by about one-half,
as shown in Column (2). This specification only utilizes empirical variation generated
by repeated trades of the same bond within the two week window before and after the
proposed rule was announced. Consequently, bonds traded only once in the window
  8
      exp(1.144) x 0.019 = 0.06 or 6 basis points.


                                                      14
would be part of the identifying variation used for the effect estimated in Columns (1),
(3) and (4) but not (2). The fact that the estimated effect is twice as large when using
county fixed effects rather than CUSIP fixed effects suggests a change in the composition
of bonds traded before versus after the announcement.

   To explore this hypothesis, Appendix Table B.1 presents models that estimate the
impact of the announcement of the proposed rule on the likelihood of a trade and counts
of trades. The top panel of this table reports the results from a linear probability model.
The outcome variable is coded 0/1 denoting whether (1) or not (0) each bond is traded
in a given week. The bottom panel of Table B.1 employs Poisson regression to assess
whether the count of trades changes before and after the proposed rule announcement
event. Standard errors are clustered by county. In addition, we consider the same sets
of fixed effects and event windows as utilized in Columns 1-4 of Table 1.

   These models show that trading activity increased after the proposed rule announce-
ment. Specifically, the top panel of Appendix Table B.1 reports that, on average, one-
third of all bonds trade in a week. In the week following the proposed rule announcement,
the likelihood of bonds being traded increases by between 5 and 9 percentage points. The
bottom panel of Appendix Table B.1 demonstrates that, on average, bonds trade just
over once per week, implying that some bonds trade numerous times within a week. Af-
ter the proposed rule announcement, the count of trades increases by between 10 and 15
percent.

   The estimated increase in yields and trading activity after the announcement of the
proposed rule suggests an infusion of uncertainty into municipal bond markets. The
proposed rule change does not resolve uncertainty regarding the eventual standard. Nor
does it clearly convey what costly compliance measures will be necessary to meet the
final standard. Rather, the proposed rule demonstrates to market participants that some
regulatory change is imminent without specifying with certainty what the final rule will
be. Consequently, investors must be compensated with higher returns in order to bear
the added uncertainty resulting from the proposed rule being announcement.




                                            15
4.2    Final Rule Announcements and Bond Yields

Table 2 reports the results from the event study models focusing on the announcement of
the final rule change to the ozone NAAQS. Unlike the proposed rule event studies, Table
2 demonstrates that yields fall following the announcement. The estimated effects are
small, about 0.7 basis points (p < 0.10) in Columns (1), (3), and (4). The specification
considered in Column 1 includes fixed effects for county of issuer, year of the announce-
ment, and remaining years to maturity on the bonds. The estimated reduction in yields
after the announcement increases from 0.7 basis points to 2.6 basis points (p <0.01) if
we include CUSIP fixed effects instead of county fixed effects (see Column 2). Inclusion
of CUSIP fixed effects limits the identifying variation to trades of the same bond before
and after the final rule is announced. Consequently, as noted above, the difference in the
estimated effect when including CUSIP fixed effects versus county fixed effects suggests
that the composition of bonds traded before versus after the announcement plays an
important role.

   This reduction in yields suggests that the announcement of the final rule resolves
policy uncertainty. As discussed above, the proposed rule communicates to market par-
ticipants that a regulatory change is imminent without specifying exactly what the change
will be. The results presented in the previous section suggest that investors require a
higher return due to the resulting increase in uncertainty. The final rule, which neces-
sarily follows the proposed rule chronologically, removes the veil of uncertainty caused
by the proposal. With the final rule known, firms and local regulators can move forward
with plans for compliance. Uncertainty over future default risk falls. Investors are thus
willing to take a lower return to hold the bond.

   What theory predicts regarding how the announcement of the final rule impacts trad-
ing activity is less clear. On the one hand, investors' expectations over future default
risk could become more uniform, leading to less trades after the announcement. On the
other hand, the final rule provides information on the future compliance status of differ-
ent counties. An information shock would be expected to increase trading activity. To
explore these seemingly rival hypotheses, Appendix Table B.2 presents estimates of the
changes in the likelihood of trade and counts of trades following the announcement of
the final rule. The top panel of this table reports the results from a linear probability
model while we employ a Poisson regression for the bottom panel. The top panel of

                                           16
         Table 2: Impact of Announcement of Final Ozone Rule on Yields


                          Dependent Variable: Log Final Yield
                                         (1)        (2)       (3)                      (4)

                   Post                     -0.003       -0.010       -0.003       -0.003
                                             (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)

       Bandwidth (Weeks)                       2             2            2            1
           County FE                          Yes           No           Yes          Yes
            CUSIP FE                          No            Yes          No           No
     State-by-Event-Year FE                   No            No           Yes          No
          Event Year FE                       Yes           Yes          No           Yes
   Remaining Yrs-to-Maturity FE               Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
               R2                            0.535         0.933        0.540        0.536
        Mean of Dep. Var.                    0.863         0.864        0.863        0.860
         Number of Obs.                     616,373       595,837      616,373      371,186
        Number of Bonds                     145,719       125,183      145,719      132,797
Notes: This table presents the impact of the announcement of the finalized ozone standard on yields.
The unit of observation for the regressions in this table is CUSIP/remaining years-to-maturity/week-
of-sample. We hereafter refer to a CUSIP/remaining years-to-maturity combination as a "bond".
Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered by county for all specifications. The depen-
dent variable considered in all columns is the log of final yields. We calculate final yields as the
yield recorded for the last trade of the bond in the week. We use the final yield from the prior
week for weeks in which the bond is not traded. The independent variable of interest, "Post", is an
indicator variable that is equal to one only if the week-of-sample is on or after the week that a new
standard was announced. We consider the two weeks before and after the relevant announcement
for all columns except Column 4; in Column 4, we consider only the week before and after the
announcement. All of the regressions listed in this table include fixed effects for remaining years to
maturity. The regressions presented in Columns 1 and 4 additionally include county fixed effects and
announcement year fixed effects, the regression listed in Column 2 additionally includes CUSIP fixed
effects and announcement year fixed effects, and the regression considered in Column 3 additionally
includes county fixed effects and state by announcement year fixed effects.




                                               17
Appendix Table B.2 reports that the likelihood of bonds being traded increases by under
one percentage point after the announcement. Conversely, the bottom panel of Appendix
Table B.2 demonstrates that the count of trades decreases by between 5 and 20 percent
after the final rule announcement. These results suggest that a greater variety of bonds
are traded at least once after the announcement. This implies that the announcement
provides information on future default risk. However, each particular bond is traded less
frequently after the announcement. This may occur because the announcement resolves
uncertainty and reduces differences in expectations across investors.


4.3    Design Value Announcements and Bond Yields

Table 3 presents the results from the event study models focusing on the USEPA's an-
nual announcements of each county's design value. Counties with design values above the
relevant ozone standard are very likely to be out of compliance with the NAAQS. The
announcement of the design values may have heterogeneous effects depending on cur-
rent and implied future compliance status. Consequently, the models include interaction
terms between indicators denoting the attainment status based on the current and new
design values and the indicator for weeks after the event. Specifically, we include interac-
tion terms between indicators for counties that move from nonattainment-to-attainment
(NA  A), attainment-to-nonattainment (A  NA), and those that began and remain
in nonattainment (NA  NA) and the "Post" indicator. This implies that the "Post"
coefficient estimate reflects changes in yields for counties that are in attainment both
under the old and new design values. Finally, each of the attainment status indicators
are also included as main effects (without the interaction with the "Post" indicator).

   As in Tables 1 and 2, the four columns reflect different combinations of fixed effects
and bandwidths. Column (4) uses a one-week bandwidth, whereas Columns (1) through
(3) employ a two-week bandwidth. Across these specifications, we observe a small (0.8 to
1.3 basis points) but precisely estimated reduction in yields following the announcement.
This reduction is largest in absolute value when controlling for CUSIP fixed effects (1.7
basis points, p < 0.01).

   Similarly, Table 3 reports negative coefficients for counties that move from nonat-
tainment to attainment (NAA). This suggests that yields fall because the new design



                                            18
       Table 3: Impact of Announcement of Ozone Design Values on Yields


                           Dependent Variable: Log Final Yields
                                    (1)         (2)        (3)                      (4)

           A  NA × Post              0.014          0.014          0.014         0.009
                                     (0.005)        (0.005)        (0.005)       (0.002)

           NA  A × Post               -0.003        -0.004          -0.003         -0.001
                                      (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)

          NA  NA × Post              0.003          0.003          0.003          0.002
                                     (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)

                   Post              -0.006        -0.008         -0.006         -0.004
                                      (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)

                 R2           0.467                  0.811          0.479         0.467
          Mean of Dep. Var.   0.748                  0.749          0.748         0.749
           Number of Obs.   5,220,372              5,155,715      5,220,372     3,135,579
          Number of Bonds    488,747                424,090        488,747       452,512
Notes: This table presents the impact on final yields of the announcement of the design values
used to determine compliance with the National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) for
ozone. The unit of observation underlying the regressions in this table is CUSIP/remaining years-to-
maturity/week-of-sample. We hereafter refer to a CUSIP/remaining years-to-maturity combination
as a "bond". Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered by county for all specifications.
The dependent variable considered in all columns is the log of final yields. We calculate final yields
as the yield recorded for the last trade of the bond in the week. We use the final yield from the prior
week for weeks in which the bond was not traded. The independent variable of interest, "Post", is
an indicator variable that is equal to one only if the week-of-sample is on or after the week that the
design values were announced. We also include three indicators for whether the county was: (1) in
nonattainment under the old design values but attainment under the new design values (NAA), (2)
in attainment under the old design values but nonattainment under the new design values (ANA),
or (3) in nonattainment under both the old and new design values (NANA); we also include the
interactions between these three indicators and the Post indicator. The regressions listed in all
columns except Column 4 are based on trades made in the two weeks before and after the relevant
announcement; in Column 4, we consider only the week before and after the announcement. The
regressions listed in this table all include fixed effects for remaining years to maturity. The regressions
presented in Columns 1 and 4 additionally include county fixed effects and announcement year fixed
effects, the regression listed in Column 2 additionally includes CUSIP fixed effects and announcement
year fixed effects, and the regression considered in Column 3 additionally includes county fixed effects
and state by announcement year fixed effects.




                                                 19
values indicate future compliance. The effect size is similar to that for the counties that
are always in attainment, though the statistical significance varies across specifications.
Again, the estimated reduction in yields is largest in absolute value for the model that
controls for CUSIP fixed effects (0.9 basis points, p < 0.05). Future attainment does
not mean that firms can stop existing compliance actions. Rather, future attainment
signals that the compliance plan currently in place is sufficient to reach attainment. The
negative effect of the announcement on yields for NAA counties thus suggests that in-
vestors' concerns that the county will be forced to incur additional compliance costs are
mitigated because the new design value suggests such counties will move to attainment
status.

   In contrast, yields increase by between 0.4-0.6 basis points more on average for coun-
ties that remain in noncompliance under both the old and new design values relative to
counties that remain in compliance. This increase is statistically significant across speci-
fications. This finding is intuitive. The county will have to take additional steps to bring
ozone levels down below the standard. This could manifest at the intensive margin: more
effort (and costs) may be required by firms already reducing emissions. Alternatively, it
could manifest at the extensive margin: more polluting firms may be required to abate
emissions. In either case, it is likely that investors' valuations incorporate the increase
in default risk associated with the additional compliance measures required by continued
nonattainment, noting that precisely which measures will be taken would not be known
by any party at the time of the design value announcement.

   Finally, Table 3 indicates that bonds issued in counties that switch from compliance
to noncompliance incur a relatively large increase in yields after the announcement. The
estimated effect size ranges from 2-3 basis points (p < 0.01). The increase is between
three to five times greater than the effect on securities issued by counties that are out of
compliance under both the old and new design values. This striking result is also intuitive.
Absent a history of nonattainment, which firms or facilities are likely to be subject to
emission controls, and what techniques such firms will use to abate emissions, are less
well known than in counties that were previously in noncompliance. Therefore, investors
are less able to predict the impacts of noncompliance on corporate tax revenues, labor
income, and municipal debt service. Our results suggest that investors require higher
returns to hold bonds issued by ANA counties due to this additional uncertainty in



                                            20
future streams of municipal income.

   Figure 1 depicts the relative effects on yields of the design value announcements for
counties that move from nonattainment to attainment and from attainment to nonat-
tainment; these estimated impacts are relative to counties that are in attainment under
both the old and new design values. The figure indicates a slight decrease in yields over
the window for the NAA counties, though these effects are not statistically signifi-
cant at the 5% level. In contrast, bonds issued in ANA counties trade at increasingly
higher yields after the announcement. Interestingly, Figure 1 shows a pre-trend in yields
for securities issued in counties moving into nonattainment. This suggests that market
participants anticipate the change in compliance status. This effect is plausible because
design values are a function of publicly available air quality monitoring data. It is thus
possible to predict whether each county's new design value will be above versus below
the standard and trade accordingly.

   Finally, Appendix Table B.3 presents results pertaining to the incidence and counts
of trades in the event study framework specified in Equation (2). The top panel of
this table reports the results from a linear probability model while we employ a Poisson
regression for the bottom panel. Both panels indicate that trading activity decreases in
the week following the announcement of the design values. These results may indicate
that investors' expectations over future default risk converge after the announcement,
leading to less overall trading of more frequently traded bonds.


4.4    Nonattainment and Bond Yields

The event study specifications discussed in the previous subsections probe the market's
response to new information regarding counties' future compliance status. In contrast,
the estimates from the RD specifications presented in this subsection reflect the difference
in default risk perceived by investors due to being out of compliance with the NAAQS. As
discussed in Section 3, we move forward with this regression discontinuity design because
of the results from the density break test. We fail to reject the null hypothesis that
counties just above the ozone standard are unable to manipulate their pollution levels to
reach attainment status.

   Before presenting estimates from the RD regression, Figure 2 displays local polynomi-


                                            21
Figure 1: Event Study Impacts of Announcement of Ozone Design Values on Yields
Estimated Effect of Announcement on Returns
-.02      -.01        0      .01        .02




                                              -2   -1              0                 1                     2
                                                         Week Minus Event Week

                                                        A -> NA                   NA -> A
                                                        95% Confidence Interval


          Notes: This figure presents the impact on final yields of the announcement of the design values
          used to determine compliance with the National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) for
          ozone. The unit of observation underlying the regressions in this table is CUSIP/remaining years-to-
          maturity/week-of-sample. We hereafter refer to a CUSIP/remaining years-to-maturity combination
          as a "bond". Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered by county. The dependent
          variable considered is the log of final yields. We calculate final yields as the yield recorded for the
          last trade of the bond in the week. We use the final yield from the prior week for weeks in which
          the bond was not traded. The indicator variable "Post" is equal to one only if the week-of-sample
          is on or after the week that the design values were announced. We also include three indicators for
          whether the county was: (1) in nonattainment under the old design values but attainment under the
          new design values (NAA), (2) in attainment under the old design values but nonattainment under
          the new design values (ANA), and (3) in nonattainment under both the old and new design values
          (NANA); we also include the interactions between these three indicators and the Post indicator.
          The event study regression focuses only on trades made in the two weeks before and after the relevant
          announcement. This regression includes county fixed effects, announcement year fixed effects as well
          as fixed effects for remaining years to maturity.




                                                                 22
                            Figure 2: Municipal Bond Yields Around Ozone Attainment Status Thresholds
                                      2.8
Final Yields (in percentage points)

                                      2.6
                                      2.4
                                      2.2




                                            -.01       -.005             0                 .005                .01
                                                   Centered Ozone Design Values (in parts per million)

                                                          Below Standard               Above Standard


                 Notes: This figure presents local polynomials relating centered design values to final yields (i.e.:
                 LOWESS smoothing) The x-axis plots centered design values: the difference between the design
                 value and the relevant ozone NAAQS. The blue curve is based on a regression of a local quadratic
                 polynomial in centered design values using the Epanechnikov kernel function on final yields for bonds
                 issued in counties with design values below the standard. Similarly, the green curve is based on a
                 regression of a local quadratic polynomial in centered design values using the Epan kernel function
                 on final yields for bonds issued in counties with design values above the standard.




                                                                       23
            Table 4: Municipal Bond Yields Around the Pollutant Standards


                                   Dependent Variable: Log Final Yields
                                        (1)        (2)         (3)           (4)          (5)         (6)

     1[Nonattainment: Ozone]          0.312       0.303       0.269        0.199       0.304       0.343
                                      (0.104)      (0.099)     (0.071)      (0.076)     (0.103)     (0.101)

 Residualize by Years-to-Maturity?       N            Y           Y           N           N            N
      Residualize by County?             N            N           Y           N           N            N
            Kernel Type                Epan         Epan        Epan        Epan        Epan          Tri
        Mean of Dep. Var.              0.740        -0.005      0.009       0.749       0.736        0.739
        Optimal Bandwidth              0.008        0.008       0.007       0.004       0.015        0.008
       Degree of Polynomial              2             2          2           1           3            2
     Effective Number of Obs.        3,209,264    3,209,262   2,936,054   2,344,727   4,152,644    3,123,436
        Number of Counties              651          651         616         509         744          651

   Notes: This table presents regression discontinuity estimates of average final yields for counties
   just above versus just below the relevant standard for ozone. The regressions are estimated choosing
   separate bandwidths in centered pollution design values for observations to the left versus right
   of the threshold; these bandwidths are chosen optimally based on mean-squared error (MSE) as
   specified in Calonico, Cattaneo and Titiunik (2014). Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are
   clustered by county and are bias-corrected as discussed in Calonico, Cattaneo and Titiunik (2014).
   ***, **, and * correspond to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
   The regressions in Columns 1-3 control for local quadratic polynomials in centered design values
   using Epanechnikov kernel functions. In Column 4, we instead control for local cubic polynomials in
   the centered design values while we use the triangular kernel function to control for local quadratic
   polynomials in Column 5. The dependent variable considered in Columns 1, 4, and 5 of this table
   is the log of final yields. The dependent variable in Column 2 is the residual of a regression of log
   yields on remaining-year-to-maturity fixed effects, and the dependent variable in Column 3 is the
   residual of a regression of log yields on year-to-maturity fixed effects and county fixed effects.


als relating centered design values to final yields. The x-axis plots the difference between
the design value and the relevant ozone NAAQS. We estimate separate local polynomials
relating centered design values and final yields for bonds issued in counties above versus
below the standard. Figure 2 presents clear evidence that yields are higher on average
for municipalities that exceed the standard.

   Table 4 presents the estimates from the RD specification in Equation (3). This table
clearly demonstrates that securities issued by counties just above the ozone standard
exhibit statistically and economically significantly higher yields than counties just below
the standard. The effect size ranges between 40 and 75 basis points (p < 0.01). These
estimates suggest that securities issued in counties that are out of attainment have sig-
nificantly higher default risk than comparable securities issued in counties in attainment.

   Our primary specification controls for a second order local polynomial in centered
design values using the Epanechnikov kernel and includes only observations within 8



                                                  24
parts per billion of the relevant standard (see Column 1).9 However, the estimates are
robust to numerous permutations to the regression model. For example, the estimated
effects remain similar if we residualize log final yields before estimating the RD model.
Specifically, Columns (2), (3), and (4) consider the residuals from a regression of log final
yields on remaining years-to-maturity fixed effects, county fixed effects, and both remain-
ing years to maturity fixed effects and county fixed effects respectively. The estimated
effects also remain similar in magnitude if we control for a linear or a cubic local polyno-
mial in the running variable rather than a quadratic local polynomial. (see Columns 4
and 5). Finally, estimating these local polynomials using a triangular kernel rather than
the Epanechnikov kernel also has very little effect on the coefficient of interest.

        Investors require higher yields for bonds issued in noncompliant counties because
polluting firms located in these counties must take costly actions in order to reduce
pollution levels. Such actions include reducing output, utilizing inputs that result in less
pollution emissions, or investing in pollution abatement technology such as a particulate
filter installed in a factory's smokestack. The compliance costs incurred by polluting
firms likely implies lower profits and thus less tax revenue for the municipality. Moreover,
polluting firms may fire employees, which again would likely have detrimental impacts to
municipal budgets. Consequently, investors likely perceive that nonattainment counties
have a higher probability of defaulting on their bonds than attainment counties. This
likely drives our estimated increase in bond yields for counties just above the threshold
relative to those just below the threshold.



5         Conclusions and Policy Implications

This paper examines how the National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) affect
municipal bond prices and yields from 2005 to 2019. We present three sets of results.
First, we use event studies to test whether proposed and final ozone NAAQS rule changes
affect yields. The results of this analysis indicate that yields increase in response to the
announcement of the proposed rule but decrease after the announcement of the final
standard. This suggests that investors require higher returns to be compensated for
the uncertainty induced by the announcement of the proposed rule. This uncertainty
    9
        Centered design values are simply the design value minus the relevant standard.



                                                     25
is resolved with the announcement of the final rule, lowering the returns necessary for
investors to hold the bond.

   We also estimate event study regressions focusing on the annual announcements of
county-level design values. The announcement results in a decrease in yields for counties
in attainment under both the old and new design values. The announcement resolves
uncertainty over compliance status for these counties. However, we find a large increase
in yields for counties that switch from attainment under the old design values to nonat-
tainment under the new design values relative to counties in attainment under both sets
of design values. Yields also increase for counties that are out of compliance under both
sets of design values, again relative to the yields for counties in attainment both before
and after the announcement. Combined, our findings suggest that investors perceive that
municipalities facing nonattainment have a higher default risk.

   Finally, we employ regression discontinuity models to directly test whether compliance
status affects yields. We find that counties with design values just above the relevant
ozone standard incur large (between 40 and 60 basis points) increases in yields relative
to counties just below the standard. We attribute this to the increased risk of default
associated with the costly measures required to lower pollution levels in order to comply
with the ozone standard.

   Our results have three primary implications for policy. First, previous studies have
likely significantly underestimated the costs associated with the CAA (EPA (1999, 2010)).
Specifically, the municipal bond market comprises a large reservoir of capital. Munici-
palities in, or at risk of, nonattainment are among the largest in the contiguous United
States. The costs associated with the large distortion in expected yields we report in a
market of this size are likely to be substantial.

   Second, a growing body of literature has documented that climate risk has been
priced into financial markets (Bakkensen and Barrage, 2017; Gibson, Mullins and Hill,
2017; Barrage and Furst, 2019; Painter, 2019; Baker et al., 2018a; Goldsmith-Pinkham
et al., 2019; Baldauf, Garlappi and Yannelis, 2020; Giglio, Kelly and Stroebel, 2020).
There is currently no federal regulation aimed at mitigating the global pollutants that
contribute to climate change. Our results for local air pollution regulations suggest that
any cost-benefit analysis of new climate policy must take into account the impacts on
financial markets of both extreme weather events and the costs associated with complying


                                             26
the new policy.

   Finally, municipal bonds are a vehicle to finance the provision of local public goods.
Distortions to municipal bond yields might jeopardize local governments' ability to raise
capital. Because of the central role these securities play in funding schools, infrastructure,
and health care facilities, the effects of local air pollution regulations on municipal bond
yields may have large non-pecuniary impacts operating through the foregone benefits
from public good provision. An important extension of our work is studying these knock-
on effects. Our results speak to a provocative policy debate regarding the trade-offs
inherent to providing local public goods and federal-level environmental regulations.




                                             27
References
Baker, Malcolm, Daniel Bergstresser, George Serafeim, and Jeffrey Wurgler.
  2018a. "Financing the Response to Climate Change: The Pricing and Ownership of
  U.S. Green Bonds."

Baker, Malcolm, Daniel Bergstresser, George Serafeim, and Jeffrey Wurgler.
  2018b. "Financing the response to climate change: The pricing and ownership of US
  green bonds." National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bakkensen, Laura A, and Lint Barrage. 2017. "Flood Risk Belief Heterogeneity and
  Coastal Home Price Dynamics: Going Under Water?" National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Baldauf, Markus, Lorenzo Garlappi, and Constantine Yannelis. 2020. "Does
  climate change affect real estate prices? Only if you believe in it." The Review of
  Financial Studies, 33(3): 1256­1295.

Barrage, Lint, and Jacob Furst. 2019. "Housing investment, sea level rise, and climate
  change beliefs." Economics letters, 177: 105­108.

Bartik, Timothy J. 1985. "Business location decisions in the United States: Estimates
  of the effects of unionization, taxes, and other characteristics of states." Journal of
  Business & Economic Statistics, 3(1): 14­22.

Board, Municipal Securities Rulemaking. 2017. "Municipal Securities: Financing
  the Nation's Infrastructure." http://www.msrb.org/ /media/Files/Resources/MSRB-
  Infrastructure-Primer.ashx.

Calonico, Sebastian, Matias D Cattaneo, and Rocio Titiunik. 2014. "Robust
  nonparametric confidence intervals for regression-discontinuity designs." Econometrica,
  82(6): 2295­2326.

Cattaneo, Matias D, Michael Jansson, and Xinwei Ma. 2019. "Simple local poly-
  nomial density estimators." Journal of the American Statistical Association.

Clay, Karen, Akshaya Jha, Joshua Lewis, and Edson Severnini. 2020. "Margins
  of Adjustment to the Clean Air Act: Evidence from the U.S. Power Sector from 1938-
  1994."

                                           28
CRS. 2015. "Transportation COnformity Under the Clean Air Act." Congressional Re-
  search Service, Congressional Research Service in Washington, DC.

Driessen, Grant A. 2018. "Tax-Exempt Bonds: A Description of State and Local
  Government Debt."

Eckbo, B Espen. 2008. Handbook of empirical corporate finance set. Elsevier.

EPA. 2010. "The Benefits and Costs of the Clean Air Act 1990 to 2020: EPA Report to
  Congress." United States Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Air and Radia-
  tion: Office of Policy in Washington, DC.

EPA, S. 1999. "The Benefits and Costs of the Clean Air Act: 1990 to 2010." EPA-410-
  R99-001. Washington, DC: US Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Air and
  Radiation.

Gibson, Matthew, Jamie T Mullins, and Alison Hill. 2017. "Climate change, flood
  risk, and property values: Evidence from New York City."

Giglio, Stefano, Bryan T. Kelly, and Johannes Stroebel. 2020. "Climate Finance."
  Social Science Research Network, 1­31.

Goldsmith-Pinkham, Paul S., Matthew Gustafson, Ryan Lewis, and Michael
  Schwert. 2019. "Sea Level Rise Exposure and Municipal Bond Yields ." Social Science
  Research Network, 1­47.

Gray, Wayne B, and Ronald J Shadbegian. 1998. "Environmental regulation,
  investment timing, and technology choice." The Journal of Industrial Economics,
  46(2): 235­256.

Gray, Wayne B, Ronald J Shadbegian, Chunbei Wang, and Merve Meral.
  2014. "Do EPA regulations affect labor demand? Evidence from the pulp and paper
  industry." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 68(1): 188­202.

Greenstone, Michael. 2002a. "The impacts of environmental regulations on industrial
  activity: Evidence from the 1970 and 1977 clean air act amendments and the census
  of manufacturers." Journal of political economy, 110(6): 1175­1219.




                                           29
Greenstone, Michael. 2002b. "The Impacts of Environmental Regulations on Industrial
  Activity: Evidence from the 1970 and 1977 Clean Air Act Amendments and the Census
  of Manufacturers." Journal of Political Economy, 110(6): 1175­1219.

Jerch, Rhiannon, Matthew E. Kahn, and Gary C. Lin. 2020. "Local Public
  Finance Dynamics and Hurricane Shocks."

Levinson, Arik. 1996. "Environmental regulations and manufacturers' location choices:
  Evidence from the Census of Manufactures." Journal of public Economics, 62(1-2): 5­
  29.

List, John A, Daniel L Millimet, Per G Fredriksson, and W Warren McHone.
  2003. "Effects of environmental regulations on manufacturing plant births: evidence
  from a propensity score matching estimator." Review of Economics and Statistics,
  85(4): 944­952.

MacKinlay, A Craig. 1997. "Event studies in economics and finance." Journal of
  economic literature, 35(1): 13­39.

Markowitz, Harry. 1952. "Portfolio Selection." The Journal of Finance, 7(1): 77­91.

McConnell, Virginia D, and Robert M Schwab. 1990. "The impact of environ-
  mental regulation on industry location." Land Economics, 66(1): 67.

Muller, Nicholas Z, Robert Mendelsohn, and William Nordhaus. 2011. "En-
  vironmental accounting for pollution in the United States economy." The American
  Economic Review, 101(5): 1649­1675.

Painter, Marcus. 2019. "An inconvenient cost: the effects of climate change on munic-
  ipal bonds." Journal of Financial Economics.

Shadbegian, Ronald J, and Wayne B Gray. 2005. "Pollution abatement expendi-
  tures and plant-level productivity: a production function approach." Ecological Eco-
  nomics, 54(2-3): 196­208.

Sharpe, William F. 1994. "The Sharpe Ratio." The Journal of Portfolio Management,
  21(1): 49­58.




                                         30
United States Environmental Protection Agency.         2016.    "Air   Quality   De-
 sign Values." https://19january2017snapshot.epa.gov/air-trends/air-quality-design-
 values .html.

United States Environmental Protection Agency. 2018. "AQS Data Mart."
 https://aqs.epa.gov/aqsweb/documents/data mart welcome.html.




                                       31
List of Figures
  1   Event Study Impacts of Announcement of Ozone Design Values on Yields               22
  2   Municipal Bond Yields Around Ozone Attainment Status Thresholds . .                23


List of Tables
  1   Estimated Impact of the Announcement of the Proposed Ozone Rule on
      Yields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   14
  2   Impact of Announcement of Final Ozone Rule on Yields . . . . . . . . .             17
  3   Impact of Announcement of Ozone Design Values on Yields            . . . . . . .   19
  4   Municipal Bond Yields Around the Pollutant Standards . . . . . . . . . .           24




                                           32
List of Appendix Figures
 A.1 Annual Number of Counties Out of Attainment with each Pollutant Standard 35
 A.2 Annual Trends in PM2.5 and Ozone Levels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        37
 A.3 Density Break Test: Number of Counties Around Ozone Threshold . . .              38


List of Appendix Tables
 A.1 Summary Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   36
 B.1 Impact of Announcement of Proposed Rule on Trades . . . . . . . . . . .          40
 B.2 Impact of Announcement of Final Rule on Trades . . . . . . . . . . . . .         42
 B.3 Impact of DV Announcement on Trades . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          44




                                         33
A      Additional Tables and Figures

This Appendix section presents additional tables and figures. The first subsection per-
tains to summary statistics while the second subsection focuses on the regression discon-
tinuity framework discussed in Section 3.


A.1      Summary Statistics

Appendix Table A.1 lists the mean, standard deviation, 25th percentile, median, and 75th
percentile of the variables relevant to our analysis. The unit of observation for the data-set
used to calculate these summary statistics is CUSIP/remaining years-to-maturity/week-
of-sample; we refer to each CUSIP/remaining years-to-maturity combination as a "bond".
We aggregate the trade-level data provided by the MSRB to the bond/week-of-sample
level as discussed in Appendix Section C.1.

    Both the mean and median of final yields is 2.7; this suggests that the yield data are
not skewed. In contrast, the median value traded and number of trades in our data-set
is equal to zero. This highlights that municipal bonds are traded relatively infrequently.

    Appendix Figure A.1 plots the annual number of counties that are out of attainment
with each of the pollutant standards associated with the National Ambient Air Quality
Standards (NAAQS). The top left panel focuses on the standards for ozone, the top right
panel considered the standards for fine particulate matter, the bottom left panel focuses
on the standards associated with nitrogen oxide and sulfur dioxide, and the bottom right
panel considers the standards for lead.10 This figure documents that the number of
counties out of attainment with the relevant standard for ozone is far higher than the
number of counties out of attainment with the standards associated with any of the other
pollutants considered as part of the NAAQS. Moreover, the number of counties out of
attainment with the ozone standard has not decreased much over time. This highlights
that the actions polluting firms must take to reduce ozone levels have far higher cost
than actions required to decrease the levels of other pollutants such as fine particulates.

    Finally, the left and right panels of Appendix Figure A.2 plot annual summary statis-
tics relevant for compliance with the NAAQS for ozone and fine particulates respectively.
  10
     The data underlying this figure are provided by the United States Environmental Protection Agency
and are available at: https://www3.epa.gov/airquality/greenbook/downld/phistory.xls.


                                                 34
Figure A.1: Annual Number of Counties Out of Attainment with each Pollutant
                                Standard




Notes: This figure plots the annual number of counties that are out of attainment with each of
the pollutant standards associated with the National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS).
The top left panel focuses on the standards for ozone, the top right panel considered the standards
for fine particulate matter, the bottom left panel focuses on the standards associated with nitrogen
oxide and sulfur dioxide, and the bottom right panel considers the standards for lead. The data
underlying this figure are provided by the United States Environmental Protection Agency and are
available at: https://www3.epa.gov/airquality/greenbook/downld/phistory.xls.




                                              35
                                 Table A.1: Summary Statistics


                         Var.                     Mean        SD        P25      P50      P75
               Final Yield (%)                     2.7         2.7      1.6      2.7      3.8
              Final Price (USD)                   103.6       11.6     100.4    103.9    108.7
       Dollar Value Traded (1000 USD)             338.0     4,771.7     0.0      0.0     20.0
              Number of Trades                     1.1         4.8      0.0      0.0      1.0
   Notes: This table presents summary statistics for the data-set used to estimate the models discussed
   in Section 3. The unit of observation for the data-set used to calculate these summary statistics is
   CUSIP/remaining years-to-maturity/week-of-sample; there are 73,315,416 observations in this data-
   set. We refer to each CUSIP/remaining years-to-maturity combination as a "bond". We keep only
   trades associated with bonds with security descriptions linked to only one county. We aggregate
   the trade-level data-set to the bond/week-of-sample level as follows. First, "final yield" and "final
   price" are defined to be the yield and price associated with the final trade in the week-of-sample for
   the bond. For weeks with no trades, the final yield and price are taken from the last week with a
   trade. We also take the sum over par value of the trades in the week for each bond; weeks without
   trades for the bond have zero total value for that week. Similarly, we calculate the total number of
   trades of the bond in a week, with zeros for the weeks with no trades.



Focusing on the left panel pertaining to ozone, a county is out of compliance with the
NAAQS if the following "design value" is greater than the ozone standard: the annual
fourth maximum of the daily maximum of ozone values averaged over any 8-hour period
in the day. The blue band plots the middle 80th percentile of this design value over
775 monitoring stations; the white line represents the average design value of the 775
monitors. The current national standard for ozone of 0.07 ppm is plotted as a horizontal
dashed line in black. The left panel of Appendix Figure A.2 documents that: (1) average
ozone levels have not fell much from 2000 to 2019 and (2) the readings at many monitors
across the U.S. would indicate noncompliance with the NAAQS. This suggests that it
is especially costly to reduce ozone levels, an assertion that's further evidence by the
large number of counties in nonattainment with the ozone standard even as of 2019 (see
Appendix Figure A.1).

   The right panel of Appendix Figure A.2 plots the seasonally-weighted annual average
of fine particulates (i.e.: PM2.5 ) for the 2000-2019 sample period. The blue band consists
of the area between the 10th and 90th percentiles of this seasonal average over 406
monitoring stations; the white line represents the national average over the 406 monitors.
A county is out of compliance with the current annual standard for fine particulates if the
average over three years of their annual average PM2.5 levels is larger than 12 micrograms
per cubic meter. This 12 micrograms per cubic meter standard is plotted as a horizontal


                                                  36
                  Figure A.2: Annual Trends in PM2.5 and Ozone Levels




   Notes: Focusing on the left panel pertaining to ozone, a county is out of compliance with the NAAQS
   if the following "design value" is greater than the ozone standard: the annual fourth maximum of the
   daily maximum of ozone values averaged over any 8-hour period in the day. The blue band consists of
   the area between the 10th and 90th percentiles of this design value over 775 monitoring stations; the
   white line represents the national average design value over the 775 monitors. The current national
   standard for ozone of 0.07 ppm is plotted as a horizontal dashed line in black. The right panel plots
   the seasonally-weighted annual average of fine particulates (i.e.: PM2.5 ) for the 2000-2019 sample
   period. The blue band consists of the area between the 10th and 90th percentiles of this seasonal
   average over 406 monitoring stations; the white line represents the national average over the 406
   monitors. A county is out of compliance with the current annual standard for fine particulates if the
   average over three years of their annual average PM2.5 levels is larger than 12 micrograms per cubic
   meter. Consequently, this 12 micrograms per cubic meter standard is plotted as a horizontal dashed
   black line. Both panels are taken from the USEPA website: https://www.epa.gov/air-trends/.


dashed black line. In contrast with the panel for ozone, the right panel documents
substantial declines in fine particulate levels over the 2000-2019 sample period. Even the
seasonal averages for the 90th percentile monitor are well below the annual standard in
2019. This suggests that the cost associated with reducing fine particulates levels is far
lower than the compliance costs associated with ozone. This intuition is borne out by
Appendix Figure A.1, which shows a marked decline from 1990-2019 in the number of
counties out of compliance with the standards for fine particulates.


A.2     Additional Tables and Figures: RD Specifications

In Table 4, we present estimates from a regression discontinuity framework of the differ-
ence in final yields for bonds issued in counties with pollution levels just above versus
just below the pollution standard. In order to interpret these estimates as causal, we
must assume that counties cannot manipulate their pollution levels to be just below
the standard. In support of this assumption, Appendix Figure A.3 plots the density of
observations by the distance to ozone attainment status thresholds. The unit of observa-


                                                  37
                   Figure A.3: Density Break Test: Number of Counties Around Ozone Threshold




                           80
                           60
  Number of Observations

                           40
                           20
                           0




                                -.01   0            .01         .02                     .03              .04
                                               Centered Ozone Design Values

                                           Number of Observations                         95% C.I.


            Notes: This figure presents the density of observations by the distance to ozone attainment status
            thresholds. The unit of observation underlying the estimation of this density is county/year, consid-
            ering only counties associated with bonds in our data-set in the year. The vertical red lines indicate
            the standard cutoff for attainment status for ozone, the solid black lines represent the local density,
            and the dashed black lines represent the corresponding 95% confidence interval bounds. The 95%
            confidence interval is calculated using the plug-in estimator proposed by Cattaneo, Jansson and Ma
            (2019). We fail to reject the null hypothesis that there's no break in density around the cut-off, with
            a p-value of 0.829.


tion underlying the estimation of this density is county/year, considering only counties
associated with bonds in our data-set in the year. The vertical red lines indicate the
standard cutoff for attainment status for ozone, the solid black lines represent the local
density, and the dashed black lines represent the corresponding 95% confidence interval
bounds. The 95% confidence interval is calculated using the plug-in estimator proposed
by Cattaneo, Jansson and Ma (2019). We fail to reject the null hypothesis that there's
no break in density around the cut-off, with a p-value of 0.829.




                                                            38
B     Impacts on Number of Trades

This Appendix section present estimates of the impact of announcements on the inci-
dence and count of trades. The first subsection present specifications focusing on the
announcements of the proposed and final ozone standards. We explore how trading
activity responds to the annual announcements of design values in the third subsection.


B.1     Announcement of New Standards

In this subsection, we utilize a very similar framework to one specified in Equation 1
in Section 3. Specifically, we estimate the following event study regression to study the
announcements of the proposed change in rule and the final new standard:


                       Yi,r,c,t = c + r + Et +  1[t > Et ] +   i,r,c,t



where i indexes CUSIP, r indexes remaining years-to-maturity, c indexes county of is-
suer, and t indexes week-of-sample. Event time Et is the week of the event, either the
announcement of a proposed or new standard. The independent variable of interest
1[t > Et ] is equal to one if the week-of-sample is after the announcement. This variable
captures the impact of the announcement on the outcome variable. Standard errors are
clustered by county.

    We consider two outcome variables. The first is an indicator variable that is equal
to one if and only if the bond traded at least once in the week-of-sample. Recall that a
"bond" in our terminology denotes a CUSIP/remaining years-maturity combination. The
second outcome variable is the count of trades in the week-of-sample. We use ordinary
least squares to estimate the specifications based on the indicator of any trade but use
Poisson regression to estimate the specifications based on the count of trades.

    Appendix Table B.1 presents models that estimate the impact of the announcement of
the proposed rule on the likelihood of a trade and counts of trades. The top panel of this
table reports the results considering the indicator for any trade as the dependent variable
while the bottom panel considers the count of trades. We consider the same sets of fixed
effects and event windows as utilized in Columns 1-4 of Table 1. Our primary specification
based on a two week window around the event, county fixed effects, remaining years to


                                            39
         Table B.1: Impact of Announcement of Proposed Rule on Trades

                           Dep. Var: 1[Any Trade in the Week]
                                            (1)       (2)     (3)                       (4)

                      Post                     0.083        0.057       0.083        0.069
                                               (0.006)      (0.004)     (0.006)      (0.005)

         Bandwidth (Weeks)            2                        2           2            1
             County FE               Yes                      No          Yes          Yes
              CUSIP FE               No                       Yes         No           No
       State-by-Event-Year FE        No                       No          Yes          No
            Event Year FE            Yes                      Yes         No           Yes
     Remaining Yrs-to-Maturity FE    Yes                      Yes         Yes          Yes
                 R2                 0.204                    0.515       0.204        0.233
          Mean of Dep. Var.         0.351                    0.313       0.351        0.344
           Number of Obs.          543,539                  513,508     543,539      317,879
          Number of Bonds          146,152                  116,122     146,152      122,803
                        Dep. Var: Number of                 Trades
                                     (1)                      (2)          (3)          (4)

                      Post                     0.150         0.009      0.150       0.102
                                               (0.010)      (0.013)     (0.010)     (0.015)

          Bandwidth (Weeks)                       2            2           2            1
              County FE                          Yes          No          Yes          Yes
               CUSIP FE                          No           Yes         No           No
        State-by-Event-Year FE                   No           No          Yes          No
             Event Year FE                       Yes          Yes         No           Yes
      Remaining Yrs-to-Maturity FE               Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
           Mean of Dep. Var.                    1.293        1.895       1.293        1.258
            Number of Obs.                     543,484      321,937     543,484      317,801
           Number of Bonds                     146,141      77,819      146,141      122,777
Notes: This table presents the impact of the announcement of the proposed ozone standard on
an indicator for any trade in the week (top panel) and number of trades (bottom panel). The unit
of observation underlying the regressions in this table is CUSIP/remaining years-to-maturity/week-
of-sample. We hereafter refer to a CUSIP/remaining years-to-maturity combination as a "bond".
Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered by county for all specifications. The depen-
dent variable considered in the top panel is an indicator variable that's equal to one if and only if the
bond was traded in the week; the dependent variable considered in the bottom panel is the number
of trades of the bond in the week. The independent variable of interest, "Post", is an indicator
variable that's equal to one only if the week-of-sample is on or after the week that a new standard
was announced. The top panel is based on simple ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions while we
utilize Poisson regressions for the bottom panel. The coefficient estimates in the bottom panel should
thus be interpreted as the change in the ratio of rates after relative to before the announcement. We
consider the two weeks before and after the relevant announcement for all columns except Column 4;
in Column 4, we consider only the week before and after the announcement. The regressions listed
in this table all include fixed effects for remaining years to maturity. The regressions presented
in Columns 1 and 4 of both panels additionally include county fixed effects and announcement
year fixed effects, the regression listed in Column 2 additionally includes CUSIP fixed effects and
announcement year fixed effects, and the regression considered in Column 3 additionally includes
county fixed effects and state by announcement year fixed effects.

                                                40
maturity fixed effects, and event fixed effects are presented in Column 1 of each panel.

   The results demonstrate that trading activity increased after the proposed rule an-
nouncement. Specifically, the top panel of Appendix Table B.1 reports that, on average,
one-third of all bonds trade in a week. In the week following the proposed rule announce-
ment, the likelihood of bonds being traded increases by between 5 and 9 percentage
points. The bottom panel of Appendix Table B.1 demonstrates that, on average, bonds
trade just over once per week, implying that some bonds trade numerous times within a
week. After the proposed rule announcement, the count of trades increases by between
10 and 15 percent.

   The estimates remain similar in magnitude if we include state-by-event fixed effects
rather than event fixed effects (see Column 3) or consider a one-week window around the
event rather than two-week window (see Column 4). However, the estimated magnitudes
are smaller (and statistically insignificant in the bottom panel) if we include CUSIP fixed
effects rather than county fixed effects. This suggests that much of increased trading
activity is associated with increases in the number of bonds traded rather than more
trades of the same bond.

   Appendix Table B.2 presents estimates of the changes in the likelihood of trade and
counts of trades following the announcement of the final rule. As with Appendix B.1,
the top panel of this table reports the results from a linear probability model while we
employ a Poisson regression for the bottom panel. The top panel of Appendix Table
B.2 reports that the likelihood of bonds being traded increases by under one percentage
point after the announcement. Conversely, the bottom panel of Appendix Table B.2
demonstrates that the count of trades decreases by between 5 and 20 percent after the
final rule announcement. These results suggest that a greater variety of bonds are traded
at least once after the announcement. However, each particular bond is traded less
frequently after the announcement. This intuition is confirmed by the fact that the effect
size increases in absolute value when we include CUSIP fixed effects rather than county
fixed effect (see Column 4 of the bottom panel).

   This combination of results may occur because the announcement resolves uncertainty
and reduces differences in expectations across investors. Specifically, on the one hand,
the final rule provides information on the future compliance status of different counties.
An information shock would be expected to increase trading activity. On the other hand,


                                            41
            Table B.2: Impact of Announcement of Final Rule on Trades

                            Dep. Var: 1[Any Trade in the Week]
                                             (1)       (2)     (3)                      (4)

                      Post                     0.004        0.004       0.004       0.008
                                               (0.002)      (0.001)     (0.002)     (0.002)

          Bandwidth (Weeks)            2                       2           2            1
              County FE               Yes                     No          Yes          Yes
               CUSIP FE               No                      Yes         No           No
        State-by-Event-Year FE        No                      No          Yes          No
             Event Year FE            Yes                     Yes         No           Yes
      Remaining Yrs-to-Maturity FE    Yes                     Yes         Yes          Yes
                  R2                 0.017                   0.415       0.017        0.020
           Mean of Dep. Var.         0.275                   0.251       0.275        0.280
            Number of Obs.          669,151                 647,949     669,151      402,851
           Number of Bonds          156,325                 135,123     156,325      142,788
                         Dep. Var: Number of                Trades
                                     (1)                      (2)           (3)          (4)

                     Post                     -0.046       -0.164        -0.046         0.002
                                               (0.018)      (0.018)       (0.018)      (0.021)

        Bandwidth (Weeks)                        2             2            2            1
            County FE                           Yes           No           Yes          Yes
             CUSIP FE                           No            Yes          No           No
      State-by-Event-Year FE                    No            No           Yes          No
           Event Year FE                        Yes           Yes          No           Yes
    Remaining Yrs-to-Maturity FE                Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
         Mean of Dep. Var.                     1.194         1.867        1.194        1.237
          Number of Obs.                      669,051       391,339      669,051      402,731
         Number of Bonds                      156,305       84,789       156,305      142,749
Notes: This table presents the impact of the announcement of the finalized ozone standard on an
indicator for any trade in the week (top panel) and number of trades (bottom panel). The unit
of observation underlying the regressions in this table is CUSIP/remaining years-to-maturity/week-
of-sample. We hereafter refer to a CUSIP/remaining years-to-maturity combination as a "bond".
Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered by county for all specifications. The depen-
dent variable considered in the top panel is an indicator variable that's equal to one if and only if the
bond was traded in the week; the dependent variable considered in the bottom panel is the number
of trades of the bond in the week. The independent variable of interest, "Post", is an indicator
variable that's equal to one only if the week-of-sample is on or after the week that a new standard
was announced. The top panel is based on simple ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions while we
utilize Poisson regressions for the bottom panel. The coefficient estimates in the bottom panel should
thus be interpreted as the ratio of rates after relative to before the announcement. We consider the
two weeks before and after the relevant announcement for all columns except Column 4; in Column
4, we consider only the week before and after the announcement. The regressions listed in this table
all include fixed effects for remaining years to maturity. The regressions presented in Columns 1
and 4 of both panels additionally include county fixed effects and announcement year fixed effects,
the regression listed in Column 2 additionally includes CUSIP fixed effects and announcement year
fixed effects, and the regression considered in Column 3 additionally includes county fixed effects
and state by announcement year fixed effects.

                                                42
investors' expectations over future default risk could become more uniform, leading to
less trades after the announcement


B.2     Announcement of Design Values

In this subsection, we utilize a very similar framework to one specified in Equation 2 in
Section 3. In particular, we estimate the following regression model to study the impacts
of the annual announcements of the design values used to determine compliance with the
ozone standard:


                               Yi,r,c,t = c + Et + r +   i,r,c,t
                    2
                           NAA NAA    ANA ANA    NANA NANA
               +          [   Dc,t, +    Dc,t, +     Dc,t, ]
                    =-2

                        +1[A  NA]1 + 1[NA  A]2 + 1[NA  NA]3


where we include fixed effects by county, event, and remaining years-to-maturity. This
specification also includes indicators for whether the county in the year switches from
attainment to nonattainment, switches from nonattainment to attainment, or remains
in nonattainment. The independent variables of interest are these variables interacted
with indicators denoting event time. For example,   t - Et = -2 denotes observations
corresponding to two weeks before an announcement of new design values. Standard
errors are clustered by county.

   Appendix Table B.3 presents the results pertaining to the incidence and counts of
trades in the event study framework specified in Equation (2). The top panel of this table
reports the results from a linear probability model while we employ a Poisson regression
for the bottom panel. As before, we consider a range of different sets of fixed effects as
well as a one-week (rather than two-week) window around the announcement. Across
specifications and dependent variables, the results indicate that trading activity decreases
in the week following the announcement of the design values. The estimates do not differ
across bonds issued in counties that switch attainment status versus remain either in or
out of attainment under both the old and new design values. These findings may indicate
that investors' expectations over future default risk converge after the announcement,
leading to less overall trading of more frequently traded bonds.

                                            43
                 Table B.3: Impact of DV Announcement on Trades

                             Dep. Var: 1[Any Trade in the Week]
                                      (1)       (2)         (3)            (4)

               A  NA × Post           -0.003      -0.002      -0.003      -0.003
                                     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)

               NA  A × Post           -0.002      -0.004      -0.002      -0.002
                                     (0.004)     (0.003)     (0.004)     (0.003)

              NA  NA × Post           -0.001      -0.001      -0.001      -0.000
                                     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.002)

                     Post           -0.010      -0.007      -0.011      -0.010
                                     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)

                     R2               0.017       0.217       0.018       0.018
              Mean of Dep. Var.       0.226       0.216       0.226       0.224
               Number of Obs.       5,464,346   5,397,811   5,464,346   3,282,100
              Number of Bonds        504,772     438,237     504,772     467,373
                                  Dep. Var: Number of Trades
                                       (1)       (2)         (3)           (4)

               A  NA × Post           0.010       0.008       0.010       -0.002
                                     (0.024)     (0.025)     (0.024)     (0.020)

               NA  A × Post           -0.014      -0.021      -0.014      -0.021
                                     (0.028)     (0.028)     (0.028)     (0.028)

              NA  NA × Post           -0.006      -0.007      -0.005      0.003
                                     (0.016)     (0.017)     (0.016)     (0.019)

                     Post           -0.050      -0.065      -0.050      -0.059
                                     (0.010)     (0.011)     (0.010)     (0.013)

              Mean of Dep. Var.       0.898       1.030       0.898       0.890
               Number of Obs.       5,464,281   4,574,425   5,464,281   3,281,965
              Number of Bonds        504,764     322,403     504,764     467,346

Notes: This table presents the impact on the indicator variable for any trade in the week and
number of trades of the announcement of the design values used to determine compliance with the
National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) for ozone. The unit of observation underlying
the regressions in this table is CUSIP/remaining years-to-maturity/week-of-sample. We hereafter
refer to a CUSIP/remaining years-to-maturity combination as a "bond". Standard errors, reported
in parentheses, are clustered by county for all specifications. The dependent variable considered
in the top panel is an indicator variable that's equal to one if and only if the bond was traded in
the week; the dependent variable considered in the bottom panel is the number of trades of the
bond in the week. The top panel is based on simple ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions while
we utilize Poisson regressions for the bottom panel. The coefficient estimates in the bottom panel
should thus be interpreted as the ratio of rates. The independent variable of interest, "Post", is
an indicator variable that's equal to one only if the week-of-sample is on or after the week that
the design values were announced. We also include three indicators for whether the county was:
(1) in nonattainment under the old design values but attainment under the new design values
(NAA), (2) in attainment under the old design values but nonattainment under the new design
values (ANA), and (3) in nonattainment both under the old and new design values (NANA);
we also include the interactions between each of these three indicators and the Post indicator. The
regressions listed in all columns except Column 4 are based on trades made in the two weeks before
and after the relevant announcement; in Column 4, we consider only the week before and after the
announcement. The regressions listed in this table all include fixed effects for remaining years to
maturity. The regressions presented in Columns 1 and 4 additionally include county fixed effects and
announcement year fixed effects, the regression listed in Column 2 additionally includes CUSIP fixed
effects and announcement year fixed effects, and
                                               44the regression considered in Column 3 additionally
includes county fixed effects and state by announcement year fixed effects.
C         Data Appendix

This Appendix Section discusses the data sources and data construction process.


C.1         Municipal Bond Data

We collect secondary market data on municipal bonds from the Electronic Municipal
Market Access (EMMA) database managed by the MSRB. This database provides in-
formation on trade prices and yields for "virtually every municipal security bought and
sold".11 Our data span 2005-2019, noting that 2005 is the first year that municipal bond
trades were tracked by the platform. This data-set contains roughly 141 million trades
associated with roughly 2.6 million 9-digit CUSIP codes (i.e.: security identifiers). Our
analysis requires us to link municipal bonds to the county of issuance. To do this, we use
a combination of string matching and manual inspection to match counties to security
descriptions; this matching procedure is discussed in the next subsection. Some bonds
are issued by institutions in multiple counties while some bonds are issued by state or
federal agencies. Our analysis examines how county-level changes in the stringency of
environmental regulation impact municipal bonds associated with the county. For this
reason, we keep only security descriptions linked to a single county. After this sample re-
striction is imposed, we are still left with over 81 million trades corresponding to roughly
1.9 million 9-digit CUSIP codes and 3,000 counties.

       The trade-level data-set includes the price of the bond, the settlement date, the
maturity date, the par value to be paid to the bond holder at the maturity date, and
"yield to worst". "Yield-to-worst" is a construct that adjusts the expected return from
holding a bond until maturity given its current price, coupon payments, and face value
for options embedded in the bond contract (e.g., the reported yield is the lowest return
a bond investor would expect given the set of option terms). This measure of bond
expected returns is favored (and reported) by the MSRB, and because it reflect expected
bond returns to investors, an increase in yield corresponds to an increase in the cost of
capital for the issuer.

       We calculate the remaining years to maturity for each trade as the difference between
the year of maturity and the year of settlement. For ease of exposition, we refer to each
  11
       See for more information.

                                              45
CUSIP/remaining years-to-maturity combination as a "bond" for the remainder of the
paper. We aggregate the trade-level data-set to the bond/week-of-sample level as follows.
First, "final yield" and "final price" are defined to be the yield and price associated with
the final trade in the week-of-sample for the bond. For weeks with no trades, the final
yield and price are taken from the last week with a trade. We also take the sum over par
value of the trades in the week for each bond; weeks without trades for the bond have
zero total value for that week. Similarly, we calculate the total number of trades of the
bond in a week, with zeros for the weeks with no trades.


C.2        Matching Security Descriptions to Counties

We match security descriptions in the bond trade data-set to FIPS county codes using
a combination of string matching and manual inspection. The string matching consists
of the following steps. First, we obtain the set of unique security descriptions in the
trade-level data from 2005-2019. These descriptions often include the county name as
part of the string. Consequently, we match a security description to a county if both the
state abbreviation and county are listed in the description.12 The security descriptions
often list abbreviations such as "PENN" or "PA" for Pennsylvania; we standardize all
references to a state to the default abbreviations used by the United States Postal Service
prior to matching. A match is dropped from our final data-set if more than one county
name is listed in the security description.

      We turn next to matching by school district. The list of school districts in each state
can be found at . A security description is matched to a school district only if both the
state abbreviation and school district name are included in the description. We drop
school districts associated with multiple counties from our final data-set. Finally, we
match by city name and state. As before, matches associated with multiple counties are
dropped from the final data-set.

      We supplement this automated matching process using manual inspection. Specif-
ically, multiple research assistants as well as the authors manually looked for county
names, city names, or school districts in the security description and matched to the
relevant counties. There are very few cases where the matches generated from the auto-
 12
      The list of county names in each state is from



                                                       46
mated procedure differ from the matches due to manual inspection. We thus append the
manual inspection matches to those generated using automated matching, again dropping
those descriptions matched to multiple counties.

   Finally, we merge our matched security descriptions back into the trade-level data-set
in order to construct the final CUSIP/remaining years-to-maturity/week-of-sample level
data-set used in the analysis.


C.3      Announcement Dates and Design Values

The United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) provides extensive doc-
umentation for each of the changes to the ozone standard. This documentation includes
the announcement dates for each proposed change to the ozone standard as well as the
final rule associated with this proposal. The websites for each of the ozone standards
are:


   · The 2008 standard:          https://www.epa.gov/ground-level-ozone-pollution/2008-
       national-ambient-air-quality-standards-naaqs-ozone

   · The 2015 standard: https://www.epa.gov/naaqs/ozone-o3-air-quality-standards-
       documents-review-completed-2015


   Recall that the USEPA calculates design values for each county in each year. These
design values are used to determine compliance with the each of the standards associ-
ated with the National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS). These design values,
along with the dates they were announced, can be found at https://www.epa.gov/air-
trends/air-quality-design-values.




                                            47
