                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             ECONOMIC ANALYSIS AND INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT

                                        Edward L. Glaeser
                                        James M. Poterba

                                       Working Paper 28215
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28215


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020




This paper introduces the findings of a research project supported by the Smith-Richardson
Foundation (grant 2017-1528). The authors thank Hilary Gelfond for excellent research
assistance, and Cecile Gaubert, Robert Inman, Nancy Rose, Clifford Winston, and an anonymous
reviewer for helpful comments. In addition to his MIT and NBER affiliations, Poterba is a trustee
of CREF and the TIAA-CREF mutual funds, which sometimes invest in securities related to
infrastructure projects. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Edward L. Glaeser and James M. Poterba. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Economic Analysis and Infrastructure Investment
Edward L. Glaeser and James M. Poterba
NBER Working Paper No. 28215
December 2020
JEL No. H44,H76,R42,R53

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper summarizes economic research on investment in public infrastructure and introduces
the findings of several new studies on this topic. It begins with a review of several potential
justifications for the public sector's involvement in building, financing, and operating
infrastructure, including limitations of private capital markets, externalities, and the control of
natural monopolies. It then describes the conditions that characterize an optimal infrastructure
investment program, emphasizing the need to extend project-based microeconomic cost-benefit
analysis to incorporate the value of economy-wide macroeconomic and other externalities. It
notes the importance of efficient use of infrastructure capital, and discusses three areas ­
procurement, project management, and expenditure on externality mitigation ­ where further
research could identify paths to efficiency improvement. It concludes by identifying several
trends that have emerged since outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic that may have long-term
effects on the role of both physical and digital infrastructure in the U.S. economy.


Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu

James M. Poterba
Department of Economics, E52-444
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
poterba@nber.org
       In 2017, according to the Congressional Budget Office (2018), the federal government
spent $98 billion on transportation and water infrastructure. State and local governments spent
another $342 billion ­ a total of $440 billion, or about 2.3 percent of GDP. Although substantial,
as a share of GDP this outlay it is lower than at any time since President Eisenhower launched
the interstate highway program in 1956. Diverse voices clamor for raising spending. Early in
his term, President Trump proposed increasing infrastructure spending by $1.5 trillion, in
substantial part using private funding. Advocates of the Green New Deal, which includes a plan
to overhaul the transportation system, call for spending more than $10 trillion over an extended
period. The American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) has a long tradition of assigning weak
grades to the state of US infrastructure and claiming that additional spending on infrastructure
will yield substantial economic benefits.
       In contrast to these calls, transportation economists are likely to call for better use of
existing infrastructure before advocating greater spending overall. Pigou (1920) and Vickrey
(1952) proposed congestion pricing, which could allow road traffic to flow more quickly during
peak periods by requiring travelers to recognize the time-varying congestion externality that they
impose on others. Meyer, Kain and Wohl (1965) emphasized the economic advantages of buses
over urban rail for passenger travel. Winston (2010, 2020) identified substantial costs associated
with inefficient highway policies and urged experimentation with private roads along with
expedited adoption of autonomous vehicles, which use highway capacity more efficiently than
driver-driven cars.
       This essay frames the economic issues associated with infrastructure investment, and
introduces a collection of studies that offer new economic insights on this investment. The first
section discusses of three reasons ­ limited private capital markets, externalities, and potential
natural monopolies ­ that have drawn the public sector into the ownership and operation
infrastructure projects. While some of the historic rationales for public investment in
infrastructure have diminished over time, many remain, including the presence of externalities
related to public health and macroeconomic conditions, and the fear of monopoly power.
The next section considers the forces that determine optimal spending on infrastructure,
recognizing that there are both macroeconomic and microeconomic approaches to this question.
The microeconomic approach emphasizes the direct benefits to users and a careful consideration
of optimal spending mix across modes and infrastructure types. The macroeconomic approach

                                                  1
focuses on interest rates, the alleged counter-recessionary benefits of infrastructure spending, and
the role that infrastructure capital plays in contributing to economic growth. While Ramey's
contribution to this volume casts doubt on the efficacy of infrastructure as a stimulus for growth,
there is a need for a unified approach that better integrates the microeconomic and
macroeconomic approaches to optimal infrastructure spending. The natural way forward is to
quantify the macroeconomic externalities that come from various forms of infrastructure and to
incorporate them into standard microeconomic cost-benefit analysis.
       Following this discussion of optimality conditions, we turn to the management and
funding of infrastructure. The two issues are linked because, as Engel, Fischer and Galetovic's
chapter emphasizes, some of the incentive problems that arise in private public partnerships can
be attenuated when infrastructure is paid for with user fees that roughly cover its average cost.
Funding infrastructure in this way can avoid debates over redistribution and helps anchor project
selection. There is less risk of "white elephants" when infrastructure projects are only funded
when they are expected to generate revenues that will cover their costs. Such user charges create
inefficiencies, however, if the average cost of the infrastructure is far above its marginal cost.
This is likely to be the case for many projects, and in this setting, funding mechanisms that rely
on other revenue sources to cover part or all of the fixed cost can lead to more efficient
outcomes. One particularly interesting funding approach is to exploit revenue tools that capture
part of the increase in local property values that flows from infrastructure provision, such as
through so-called "tax increment financing. Gupta, van Nieuwerburgh, and Kontokosta (2020)
provide an illustration of the potential revenue yield of such instruments in the context of New
York City's recent Second Avenue subway project. Revenue instruments like this can get closer
to an efficient two-part tariff than average-cost user charges.
       While the privatization of infrastructure is currently attracting substantial attention, for
the U.S., the intergovernmental allocation of responsibility for infrastructure is at least as
important.   Since the 1950s, the federal government has been responsible for paying for
highways, but the allocation of funds is largely done at the state level. Public transit authorities
are typically governmental agencies, but even those that work within a single locality typically
answer to the state government as well. The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey,
which is among the largest governmental infrastructure authorities in the world, answers to two
state governors. What level of government should provide and control infrastructure, and

                                                  2
whether the infrastructure should be controlled directly by the executive branch of government
or through an independent public authority, are therefore important questions. The usual fiscal
federalism argument suggests that higher levels of government are better able to internalize
externalities, while local governments are more accountable. But the move towards federal
funding is particularly driven by the federal government's greater comfort with large scale
borrowing, especially during a recession. At their best, independent public authorities have more
flexibility and are free from short-term political concerns. At their worst, these authorities
operate with little oversight and less accountability than an elected executive.
       The next section asks whether infrastructure spending and utilization could be made more
efficient in three areas: procurement, management, and mitigation spending. With regard to
procurement, a growing literature, exemplified by Bajari, Houghton, and Tadelis (2014) and
Bolotny and Vasserman (2019), estimates structural auction models using data on infrastructure
procurement. This research can address, for example, the choice between fixed-price and cost-
plus contracts, and it may ultimately provide lessons on how to raise the cost-effectiveness of
infrastructure procurement. With regard to management, many of the most expensive
infrastructure investments in the U.S., including Boston's Big Dig and New York's Second
Avenue Subway, cost a multiple of their original estimates because new events led to
renegotiations with contractors during the construction process. When cancellation of the project
is not an option, contractors have a strong position in the negotiations. Even when the original
bid process is a competitive auction, renegotiation is often a one-on-one bargaining process that
may put governments at a disadvantage. Since renegotiation is likely to be a constant in future
large infrastructure projects as well, we discuss the ways management affects project outcomes
and underscore the potential returns to making renegotiation less expensive. Brooks and
Liscow's essay in this volume suggests that mitigation spending, which in the highway context
includes sound walls, the curving of roads, and related features, accounts for a significant part of
the increase in the cost of highways between the 1950s and 1980s. Whether a more stringent
cost-benefit criterion should be applied to these outlays is an open question.
       The next section summarizes each paper in this volume and explains the interconnections
that knit the papers into a single, coherent volume. A final section considers how the COVID-19
pandemic and its aftermath could impact the demand for infrastructure services and the
government's role in providing them. There is a brief conclusion.

                                                  3
1. Why Have Governments Invested in Infrastructure? Perspectives from U.S. History
       This section reviews three standard arguments for public provision of infrastructure, and
illustrates each with an episode from U.S. history. Broadly speaking, the public sector has built
and managed infrastructure when: (i) the scale of investment was thought to be too large for
private investors, (ii) the infrastructure generated positive externalities including health benefits,
nation-building benefits, or counter-recessionary macroeconomic benefits that would not be
considered by private investors; and (iii) the infrastructure capital could be used by a
monopolistic owner to exploit those who need its services. The relative importance of these
arguments today helps to shape our discussion of the later questions. For example, if public
spending on infrastructure is motivated primarily by the inability to secure sufficient private
sector credit, public-private partnerships may be attractive and should be considered when user-
fee financing is appropriate. If the public sector's engagement with infrastructure reflects a large
gap between average cost and marginal cost of infrastructure services, which will occur when
infrastructure is a natural monopoly, then charging user fees dictated by average costs is less
appropriate.
1.1 The Erie Canal and the Limits of Private Funding
       Before George Washington became President of the United States, he served as president
of the Patowmack Canal Company. Limited financing slowed the canal's construction. The
company tried to build a connection to the Ohio river, but engineering and financial difficulties
led it to embrace a far narrower vision. The link between the eastern seaboard and the western
waterways would be achieved far to the north through the publicly funded Erie Canal.
New York Governor DeWitt Clinton was aware of the difficulties of securing enough private
funding to create a massive infrastructure project. He therefore established the Erie Canal
Commission which used public funds and public borrowing power to link the Hudson to the
Great Lakes. The Commission was an early example of an independent public entity
overseeing an infrastructure project that relied on public financing. The most famous 19th
century canals, such the Erie, the Erie and Ohio, and the Illinois and Michigan, were funded by
states, not the federal government. Although Congress passed an act to provide federal support
for the Erie Canal, it was vetoed by President Madison.
       The Erie Canal was enormously successful and user fees quickly funded its costs.         The
Canal remains synonymous with infrastructure spending at its best, and it surely yielded benefits

                                                  4
that went beyond the value paid for by its direct users. Yet the public sector was involved
largely because private capital markets were underdeveloped in 1810, and the public sector was
the only plausible source of so much funding. Cutler and Miller (2005) document a strong link
between public borrowing capacity and the construction of urban water and sewerage
infrastructure during the late 19th century. America's cities and towns were spending as much
on water at the start of the 20th century as the federal government was spending on everything
except the Post Office and the Army. The ability of cities and towns to borrow large sums
enabled these massive sanitary investments.
       This American story contrasts with pre-1800 English canal-building which involved
smaller, flatter distances and private funds. For example, the original Mersey and Irwell
navigation linking Manchester and the Irish sea was funded and built privately in 1734. When
Great Britain dug the much larger Caledonian Canal in 1804, public funding was used, but by the
end of the 19th century, financial markets were sufficiently well developed so that the
Manchester Ship Canal was a private enterprise.
       Some recent calls for infrastructure spending have envisioned a small public subsidy that
could encourage a much larger volume of private investment. Such calls assume that global
financial markets are robust enough to fund almost any feasible piece of infrastructure that can
be reasonably expected to pay for itself at the appropriate discount rate. Whether that vision is
correct is an open issue. Andonov, Kraussl, and Rauh (2019) report that investment funds that
focus on infrastructure projects have cash flow and distribution profiles similar to venture capital
funds, seeking to exit investments in five to ten years, rather than in the decades that correspond
to the lifespan of many infrastructure projects.
1.2 Local Externalities and Public Ownership: The Case of Water Supply
       In 1793, refugees from the Haitian revolution brought yellow fever to the port of
Philadelphia. Dr. Benjamin Rush saw the symptoms and tried to impose a quarantine on ships
arriving from the tropics, but limited state capacity made enforcing the regulation impossible.
Thousands died from the disease in Philadelphia and throughout America's eastern seaboard.
Yellow fever returned to Philadelphia in 1797, 1798 and 1799. While yellow fever is actually
carried by mosquitoes, many at the time suspected unclean water, which was indeed responsible
for spreading many other diseases. Philadelphia formed a "Watering Committee," which
commissioned Benjamin Latrobe to design a water works. The system was finally completed in

                                                   5
1815. Cutler and Miller (2005) find that the creation of public water systems, like
Philadelphia's, during the nineteenth century led to dramatic decreases in mortality across
America's cities.
       Cholera became an even deadlier scourge of America's cities after 1830, and its
epidemiology was discovered by Dr. John Snow in London. Snow's geographic investigation of
the 1854 Bond Street Cholera epidemic found that a poisoned water pump was at the center of
the outbreak. Gradually, the medical profession came to argue that investing in water
infrastructure was necessary to prevent the spread of disease. New York City followed a
different path after the Yellow Fever epidemics of the 1790s. Instead of a public water works,
the city established the Manhattan Water Company to provide clean water for its residents. It was
subsidized with a franchise to run a bank, a rare privilege at the time. It transpired that the
company earned far higher returns by banking than by pumping water, and it eventually evolved
into J.P. Morgan Chase, along the way passing through the Chase Manhattan Bank which
descended from the Bank of the Manhattan Water Company.
       There were two key market failures related to water production during the 19th century.
First, an individual who consumed of dirty water did not internalize the health consequences to
his neighbors of becoming infected with a water-borne disease. Second, consumers could not
directly observe whether privately-sold water was clean or dirty. Both factors limited the
demand for the Manhattan Company's water. After New York City's 1832 cholera epidemic,
the city embraced investing in clean public water. The city's leaders chose created an
independent public authority as a way to limit municipal corruption. Work on the Croton
Aqueduct began in 1837 and water began to flow in 1842.        While the aqueduct provided free
hydrants, most users were expected to pay for water connections, and many low-income New
Yorkers thought that the price of a water connection exceeded the private benefit of access to
clean water. Poorer parts of the city continued to rely on shallow wells and cholera continued to
kill. In 1866, a Metropolitan Board of Health was established; it could fine tenement owners
who did not connect to the water and sewer system. This pre-Pigou Pigouvian tax seems to
have mattered; after 1866 water-borne disease death tolls in New York City began to decline.
       If anything, public sewerage has an even higher ratio of public benefits to private benefits
than public water supply. If sewage is dumped on a neighbor's property, then it is the neighbor
that pays most of the cost, making the need for public subsidies with sewerage is even more

                                                  6
extreme than with water. Alsan and Goldin (2019) find that early 20th century investments in
sewers in greater Boston complemented the earlier provision of clean water to reduce death rates.
The saga of the Manhattan Water Company provides a warning against private provision of
health-related infrastructure, at least without a robust testing technology that enables consumer
quality verification. Troesken's (2004) work on later 19th century water systems finds that the
death rates of African-Americans declined substantially when cities switched from private to
public water provision, which is consistent with the view that private companies skewed their
service towards wealthier customers who could pay more. Despite this skew, even the rich were
at risk from cholera epidemics that began in poorer neighborhoods.
       Local externalities are still a potent justification for public investment in water
infrastructure, yet we may question whether financially strapped communities are doing enough
to maintain old water systems. Flint, Michigan, famously cut its water spending for budgetary
reasons, and the city's emergency manager overruled the City Council's vote to pay for cleaner,
more expensive water. The poor quality of Flint water expressed itself both in highly elevated
lead levels and in the spread of Legionnaire's Disease, with associated reductions in the health
status of residents. Yet the Flint story is a shocking aberration rather than a sign that
communities are seriously debating the pros and cons of investing in clean water. There are still
considerable debates about private vs. public water provision, but these controversies concern
costs more than cleanliness, since today, private water quality can be easily monitored.
       The local externalities associated with public provision of water supply and sewerage
have parallels in the case of transportation infrastructure, notably when there are congestion
externalities associated with road overcrowding. One common justification for public subsidies
to metropolitan transportation systems is that they may reduce road congestion. Taxing driving
is a more direct and efficient means of reducing congestion externalities than subsidizing
alternative modes of transportation. Baum-Snow and Kahn (2000) found that newer metro
systems in the US have had limited impact on commuting patterns. Declining ridership and
chronic budget deficits are important challenges for public transit more generally.
       If congestion pricing is politically infeasible, then whether it is appropriate to subsidize
public transit becomes an empirical question. The appropriate subsidy for each public transit
trip equals the reduction in driving caused by that trip multiplied by the external benefits of
reducing the number of drivers, including both congestion and deaths from traffic accidents. If

                                                  7
public transit takes the form of buses, then this optimal subsidy can be estimated using
experiments with bus service to determine the impact on rides, traffic and accidents. The
number of buses can then be scaled up or down depending on the appropriate subsidy. If public
transit means a fixed rail system, however, then pricing can still be altered ex post, but it is
difficult to change the quantity of subway lines after building finishes..
       Congestion externalities also potentially justify building more highways, but any new
construction must recognize that more highways often generate more driving. Indeed,
fundamental law of highway traffic, suggested by Downs (1962) and supported by Duranton and
Turner's (2011) empirical analysis, suggests that the level of traffic may be roughly independent
of the number of roads, since vehicle miles travelled seem to scale up roughly one-for-one with
highway miles built. If that law holds, then new highway construction raises welfare by
allowing more trips, but does not materially reduce congestion on existing highways.
1.3 Nation-Building
       In the 19th century, Henry Clay and the Whig Party advanced a program called the
"American System" which was meant to strengthen the nation by imposing tariffs on imports and
subsidizing internal improvements such as transportation infrastructure. The Cumberland or
National Road was the most visible example. That macadamized road ran from the Potomac to
Illinois. The Whig's Republican successors used federal land grants to subsidize a privately
built intercontinental railroad, also with the hope of binding the nation together.
       Nation-building has at least three coherent economic interpretations. First, it may refer to
general equilibrium impacts of transportation that are not internalized by railroad builders.
Building new infrastructure may raise land values. Firms may benefit from cheaper inputs.
Donaldson and Hornbeck (2016) and Hornbeck and Rotemberg (2019) document that the U.S.
railroad system yielded significant and far-flung benefits. This finding is not inconsistent with
Fogel's (1962) claim that American economic development could have proceeded without the
railroads; Fogel focused exclusively on the cost saving for users of pre-rail transportation modes,
thereby neglecting gains in productivity and innovation in other sectors.
       Second, nation building may refer to protecting or expanding a nation's territory. In the
19th century, the U.S. had border disputes with Mexico, Great Britain and native Americans. A
more developed transportation network, and the migration that the network would induce, could
have been viewed as strengthening the nation's political hold over the central North American

                                                  8
land mass. In this case, nation-building would be associated with political benefits for the US
that come at a cost to other nations and peoples.
       Third, nation-building may mean creating a coherent sense of national unity. By
increasing economic interdependence between regions, transportation infrastructure could
potentially limit future secession movements and reduce the inter-regional strife that led to the
Civil War. There is some evidence, for example, that the strong transportation linkages between
New York City and the American South made some New York merchants more sympathetic to
the southern cause during the Civil War. While the benefits of national coherence are hard to
quantify, the costs of fighting over national dissolution were enormous and many leaders,
including Lincoln, saw the cause of preserving the Union as paramount.
       Today, the second nation-building motive, defending borders, is no longer relevant for
the U.S.. The nation's borders have been essentially fixed for 150 years. The other two motives
still matter. Trade economists build general equilibrium models to quantify the national
economic gains from better connections. In addition, infrastructure's role in national cohesion
has evolved. While 19th century infrastructure advocates argued that simply connecting to
dispersed areas would help build the country, 21st century advocates emphasize that
infrastructure can help bring prosperity to poorer regions and to allow residents of those regions
to feel like fuller partners in the national economy.
       While arguments for infrastructure-led economic development are often made, whether
new infrastructure projects can substantially increase economic activity in poorly performing
regional economies is uncertain. In the context of U.S. regional policies, two studies find that
infrastructure improvements, notably low-cost electricity and an expanded highway network,
have had positive effects in the low-income southeastern United States. Kline and Moretti
(2014) find that the infrastructure projects associated with the Tennessee Valley Authority raised
average incomes, largely by shifting employment from agriculture to manufacturing. Jaworski
and Kitchens (2019) estimate that the Appalachian Highway Development System, which built
about 2,500 miles of highways, raised income in Appalachia by about $22 billion. This
translates to an income gain of nearly $10,000 per road-mile. Even with such initiatives,
however, Appalachia is still quite poor after 50 years of extra investment. It is particularly
difficult to assess the long-run effects of infrastructure projects, given the potential range of
confounding factors.

                                                    9
1.4 Macroeconomic Externalities
       Another potential rationale for national spending on infrastructure is the provision of
macroeconomic externalities. Herbert Hoover pioneered the view that public infrastructure
investment can offset downturns in the national business cycle. In 1921, as Commerce
Secretary, Hoover organized the President's Conference on Unemployment, which urged state
and local governments to undertake construction projects during the downturn. Hoover, a
mining engineer by training, believed that the costs of such construction would be lower during
the recession, because labor was cheap, and that such projects would reduce unemployment by
boosting the demand for labor. As President, Hoover wanted an infrastructure act as early as
1930; he eventually signed the Emergency Relief and Construction Act of 1932. Hoover's early
efforts were expanded by Franklin Roosevelt and infrastructure spending was a significant part
of the New Deal. President Obama's American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
followed this path and included $105 billion of infrastructure spending, split equally between
transportation and energy projects. Proposals to increase infrastructure spending are frequently
offered during economic downturns as a potential tool to reduce unemployment and boost
aggregate demand.
       Ramey's contribution to this volume calls into question the efficacy of infrastructure as
anti-recessionary spending too. Other studies, analyzing historical experience, reach similar
conclusions. Garin (2019) found that transportation spending generated only small increases in
employment. The macroeconomic case for infrastructure remains among the most important
and least well-developed aspects of the economic analysis of infrastructure spending.
1.5 Monopoly Power and the Regulation of Railroads
       Inter-city railroads in the U.S. were built by private companies, many of which received
subsidies for nation-building purposes. Although in some markets multiple railroads competed
actively, this often gave way to consolidation. In other markets, the railroads had local
monopolies. Over time, the railroads were criticized for alleged abuse of their monopoly power.
The public policy response to natural monopolies in industries like railroads has taken one of two
forms in most countries: regulation of private operators, or public ownership. The U.S. initially
followed the regulatory approach.
       In 1887, the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) was created and given authority to
regulate the rates charged by railroads. The 1893 Railroad Safety Compliance Act gave the ICC

                                                10
further control over safety issues; Glaeser and Shleifer (2003) argue that this was in part because
of the belief that traditional tort remedies for damages were insufficient given the railroads' legal
muscle. Subsequent legislation, the Hepburn Act of 1906 and the Mann-Elkins Act of 1910,
strengthened the ICC's controls over rate-setting. In 1917, as part of the World War I
mobilization effort, President Wilson nationalized all US railroads. The US Railroad
Administration oversaw all railroad operations, including scheduling, investment, labor
compensation, and locomotive design. Railroads were returned to private control in March,
1920. The Esch-Cummins Act, enacted that year, further expanded the ICC's regulatory powers.
       Changes in the passenger and freight transportation industry over the subsequent fifty
years, culminating in the bankruptcy of the Penn Central railroad in 1970, combined with a
broader trend toward deregulation in the 1970s, led to a roll-back of the ICC's authority.
Starting in 1976, with the passage of the Railroad Revitalization and Regulatory Reform Act, the
ICC's role in regulating railroads was restructured and reduced. It was finally eliminated in
1995. By the mid-1970s, concerns regarding railroad monopoly power had been replaced by the
prospects of railroad insolvency. The ICC had restricted railroads' ability to abandon
unprofitable routes and to adjust to competitive realities. In the early decades of ICC regulation,
many farmers had few alternatives to shipping their harvest by rail. By the 1970s, the relatively
competitive trucking industry provided a viable alternative for many shippers. Deregulation
allowed the remaining railroads to focus on their profitable lines of business, close poorly-
performing ones, and in some cases to focus on moving goods rather than moving people.
Penn Central's bankruptcy was one of the events that led to the consolidation of US passenger
rail into Amtrak, a quasi-public entity subsidized by tax dollars, and to the creation of Conrail as
the provider of rail freight services in the Northeast Corridor.
       The lightening of regulatory rules allowed Conrail to limit route structure and to innovate
in ways that ultimately restored profitability and supported its sale to CSX and Norfolk Southern.
In addition to loosening ICC regulation, the 1976 legislation also provided funds for Amtrak to
acquire railroad assets in the Northeast Corridor. The evolution of passenger railroads from
private companies to public entities repeats the movement of municipal transit systems from
private to public ownership that began before World War II, as once-profitable local transit
companies lost ridership to automobiles. Public ownership of transit companies became a means
of avoiding bankruptcy.

                                                 11
       The economic cases for Amtrak, which today provides nation-wide inter-city rail service,
and for local public transit systems, are rarely articulated. The standard argument for public
subsidy reflects the congestion externalities associated with driving. Yet that argument can
hardly explain why Amtrak continues to provide service with relatively low ridership in areas
other than California and the Eastern Seaboard. Another argument holds that rail and bus service
are natural monopolies with marginal costs of use below their average costs, which implies that
charging below average cost is efficient and requires subsidies. Winston (2013) presents some
evidence that the social benefits of these services may fall short of current taxpayer support; this
issue warrants further analysis.
2. What Determines the Optimal Level of Public Infrastructure Spending?
       Calls from politicians for increased spending on infrastructure are sometimes echoed by
macroeconomists who see counter-cyclical benefits of spending on infrastructure and perhaps
also benefits for long term growth. Transportation economists, in contrast, are generally more
skeptical of these calls. This section contrasts the microeconomic and macroeconomic
approaches to determining optimal infrastructure spending. We do not develop a grand synthesis
of the two approaches, but we sketch a research agenda that might lead to one. We then turn to
microeconomic concerns that shape the optimal level of infrastructure spending, discussing both
engineering reports and optimal allocation across modes, a topic explored further in Duranton,
Nagpal, and Turner's paper in this volume. We end with a discussion of macroeconomic issues
that shape optimal infrastructure spending.
2.1 Macroeconomic vs. Microeconomic Approaches to Optimal Infrastructure Spending
       Microeconomists approach infrastructure spending project by project with the well-
worked tools of cost-benefit analysis. Benefits are determined primarily by effects on
infrastructure users, although sometimes the analyses incorporate rising local property values or
business profits. Costs are largely construction costs. This approach typically yields only
modest returns for most new large-scale infrastructure projects. Returns for maintenance of
existing infrastructure are typically much higher.
       These arms-length analyses often differ from the cost-benefit calculations that are
provided for policy purposes, sometimes by entities that stand to gain financially through the
construction of new infrastructure. For example, Parsons Brinckerhoff prepared an optimistic
cost-benefit analysis for high speed rail in California in 2014 and received a $700 million

                                                 12
contract to manage the program the next year. Cost projections for this ongoing initiative have
already moved far beyond those included in the report. Kain (1990) and others have also argued
that skewed cost-benefit analyses often radically overstate reasonable projections of future
ridership of rail projects. The relatively low returns to many projects reflect, in part, the
advanced level of infrastructure in the U.S. today. In 1816, it cost as much to move goods 30
miles overland as it did to cross the Atlantic Ocean and consequently, the Erie Canal provided a
stunning reduction in transportation costs. Today, passengers can fly or drive from Los Angeles
to San Francisco and so the benefits of rail are far more muted.
       The most exciting recent development in cost-benefit analysis for transportation projects
has been the introduction of general equilibrium models from trade theory. Allen and Arkolakis
(2019) is an excellent example of this work. Their estimates suggest that the benefits from
expanding some highway corridors, especially around New York City, are particularly high.
Yet, the political and financial costs of such expansions may also be very high. Infrastructure
projects in dense urban areas, such as the "Big Dig" in Boston, have proven to be particularly
expensive in recent decades.
       In contrast to the microeconomic approach, the macroeconomic approach to
infrastructure starts with objectives linked to either stabilization or growth. Keynes (1936) wrote
that "I expect to see the State, which is in a position to calculate the marginal efficiency of
capital-goods on long views and on the basis of the general social advantage, taking an ever-
greater responsibility for directly organizing investment" ( p. 164). Keynes feared both
excessive speculation and "crises of confidence," which would lead private markets to either
over or under invest in capital. He distrusted the ability of private markets to get the overall
level of investment right or to target that investment towards its most productive use. He did not
specifically mention infrastructure, but he saw public sector investment as an antidote for the
vagaries of financial markets.
       Keynes' general skepticism about private investment has had less impact that his
advocacy of public spending during a recession: "the employment of a given number of men on
public works will (on the assumptions made) have a much larger effect on aggregate
employment at a time when there is severe unemployment, than it will have later on when full
employment is approached." He goes on to provide a numerical example in which adding



                                                  13
100,000 workers on public works projects leads total employment to rise from 5.2 million to 6.4
million because of the multiplier.
       While Herbert Hoover's enthusiasm for counter-cyclical spending predates Keynes', the
latter's writing inspired subsequent generations of economists and policy-makers to consider
spending on public works as a way to reduce unemployment. Aschauer (1989a) added a longer-
term macroeconomic rationale for infrastructure spending by empirically linking public
infrastructure spending and economic growth in U.S. economic time series. Aschauer (1989b)
showed the connection between public infrastructure and growth across the G7 nations between
1965 and 1985. Gramlich's (1994) skeptical response to Aschauer's work is widely embraced
by microeconomists, but Aschauer's views retain considerable currency among many policy-
oriented macroeconomists. This may be because of the difficult-to-explain decline in aggregate
U.S. productivity growth is roughly contemporaneous with the decline in infrastructure spending
relative to GDP.
       While the microeconomic approach yields clear policy tools for selecting infrastructure
projects, the macroeconomic approach often yields only general advice to spend more on
infrastructure during a downturn. A much-needed reconciliation of the two approaches could
start with a clear quantification of the macroeconomic externalities associated with providing
different forms of infrastructure. This might be done in any of a number of standard
macroeconomic models. There is probably more debate about the choice of the right model for
the macroeconomic externality analysis than about the choice of discount rate and other
parameters for the microeconomic approach. While both calculations rely on various
assumptions, by unifying the two, and acknowledging the resulting uncertainties, it should be
possible to move forward in evaluating the total return to infrastructure projects.
       The most obvious employment related externality is the fiscal externality. Employed
workers pay taxes. Unemployed workers receive benefits. Any infrastructure that moves
workers from being unemployed to being employed generates fiscal benefits equal to the sum of
the benefits saved and the tax payments collected. The fiscal benefit from each employed
worker is easier to estimate than the employment impact of infrastructure spending. The tax and
benefit payments can be plausibly estimated and so it is relatively easy to multiply the change in
employment by that number.



                                                 14
       Ramey's contribution in this volume makes clear that the empirical literature on the
employment effects of infrastructure has not reached a consensus. Many researchers doubt that
most forms of infrastructure spending affect aggregate employment. An added challenge is that
infrastructure spending is slow to plan and implement. Even if an infrastructure spending
package is pushed at the start of the recession, the money may not flow until after the recession
is over, when its employment benefits will no longer be as valuable. Counter-recessionary
maintenance spending is easier to manage than outlays on new projects, but even then there may
be some social losses from basing maintenance schedules on the state of aggregate employment
rather than the condition of the infrastructure capital stock. New large-scale projects are
particularly hard to initiate during downturns. Planning for California's High-Speed Rail began
with federal funds spent during the Great Recession, but continuous construction activity only
began in 2015 and further work on most of the system was indefinitely postponed in 2019.
       Growth-related benefits are harder to conceptualize and quantify than short-run
macroeconomic effects. Aschauer (1990) treats government capital as a form of productive
capital and he estimates high economic returns to it. Leaving aside a number of empirical issues
surrounding the measurement of the government capital stock as well as concerns about
measuring the rate of return that it generates, such as the correlation of government spending
with unobserved determinants of productivity, this approach yields little clarity about which
forms of infrastructure are likely to yield the most benefit.
       At some point, it may be possible to combine the estimated macroeconomic effects with
the network and other microeconomic effects of particular projects. If the connection between
firms and transportation infrastructure is directly incorporated in a spatial equilibrium model,
then the model can be expected to match any observed relationship between the level of public
infrastructure and overall economic activity. This could generate an empirically grounded
estimate of the productive benefits of different road segments that incorporates the larger growth
estimates and permit welfare statements about different forms of infrastructure investment.
Keynes' skepticism about the rationality of private investment may be the most difficult
macroeconomic concern to include within infrastructure planning. If the market mis-perceives
the value of additions to the capital stock, private spending could be stimulated or taxed through
the tax code, or public planners could raise or lower the level of infrastructure spending. It is not



                                                 15
clear whether these planners can outguess the private sector and correctly compute "the marginal
efficiency of capital-goods on long views and on the basis of general social advantage."
2.2 Microeconomic Analyses of Optimal Infrastructure Spending
       The microeconomic approach to infrastructure investment generally proceeds on a project
by project basis, and correspondingly yields results on whether an investment should be
undertaken at this disaggregate level. There are at least two major aggregate scorecards,
however, that adopt a microeconomic approach to infrastructure assessment, and provide widely-
followed assessments of the infrastructure capital stock. One report is prepared by the American
Society of Civil Engineers' (ASCE). It is the Infrastructure Report Card. The other is the
World Economic Forum's Global Competitiveness Report. The ASCE Report Card is the work
of 28 civil engineers who assign grades based on their assessment of the current state of
infrastructure. The Global Competitiveness Report is based on surveys of business leaders.
       The overall grade for the U.S. on the ASCE 2017 infrastructure report card is a D+,
which implies that infrastructure is "poor" and "at risk." Roads received a straight D, bridges a
C+, which implies that they are "mediocre" and "need attention," and drinking water received a
D. The ASCE methodology is often mis-interpreted as an engineering assessment of the
physical condition of existing infrastructure, and the language may cause confusion. A bridge
that is "structurally deficient" need not be unsafe, but it may not meet all current standards for
bridge construction. Moreover, while assessments of the structural status of existing
infrastructure capital are a component of the grade, there are also a number of other elements,
such as funding, future need, and innovation, that include either forecasts or subjective elements.
One consideration is "what is the cost to improve the infrastructure, [and] will future funding
prospects address the need?" Another is "what new and innovative techniques ... are being
implemented to improve the infrastructure?" Both questions go well beyond current physical
condition. The score for an infrastructure category could be pulled down by limited current
public funding relative to anticipated future needs, or by the absence of the latest technology,
even if the capital's current physical condition is satisfactory.
       An important limitation of the grading rubric is the assumption that the only way to
address projected growth in infrastructure demand is to build more of it. Alternative approaches,
such as adopting congestion pricing to use existing infrastructure more efficiently, do not feature



                                                  16
in the analysis. This is likely to overstate the potential shortfalls in future infrastructure capacity
and to bias the grades for existing infrastructure downward.
       Taken at face value, these grades suggest that the U.S. needs to spend more on its
infrastructure, although some might observe that civil engineers might have a financial interest in
making the case for more spending on such projects. Moreover, it is hard to reconcile a grade of
D for drinking water given the rarity of outbreaks of water-borne diseases. The Flint, Michigan
catastrophe was correctly seen as terrible disaster not the routine state of affairs. Duranton,
Nagpal, and Turner's paper in this volume shows that interstate highways in the U.S. have
become smoother over time, which makes the grade of D for roads difficult to understand
especially since the report card gave the much-rougher highways of 1988 a grade of C+. While
there may be challenges reconciling the ASCE grades with some data on the service flow from
infrastructure capital, the engineers are most likely to know if bridges are in danger of imminent
collapse, or if other components of infrastructure have reached the end of their design lifetimes
and need to be repaired or replaced.
       The heterogeneous grades by sector and state offer the hope of incorporating more
engineering into public infrastructure decisions. To make these estimates usable, they need to
be combined with estimates of the harm of failing to maintain particular assets. Estimates of the
current state of infrastructure need to be turned into assessments of the risk of various failures,
and these can in turn be multiplied by the social costs of an infrastructure failure. For example,
bridges may be in better shape than roads, but if they fail the loss of life may be far more terrible.
That comparison should feature in the calculation of replacement or maintenance expenditures
on bridges versus roads.
       The World Competitiveness Report does not claim to utilize the civil engineering
expertise embedded in the ASCE report card, but it does have the virtue of global compatibility.
The report contains a significant section on infrastructure and it splits the infrastructure scores
into transportation and utilities. Overall, the U.S. score on infrastructure in 2019 was 87.9,
which placed thirteenth in the world. While this score (a high B?) is considerably higher than the
civil engineer's D+, many are still troubled that infrastructure in the U.S. no longer rates as
among the best in the world.
       The two worst infrastructure scores for the U.S. appear in the railroad sector: 41.3 in
railroad density, 48th in the world, and 69.2 in the efficiency of rail services. These low scores

                                                  17
reflect the reality that since the 1970s deregulation of rail services, the U.S. has not significantly
invested in passenger rail. Yet generations of transportation economists since Meyer, Kain and
Wohl (1965) have argued that passenger rail is relatively inefficient both within and across cities.
A low score in the rail categories may well be optimal.
       In other areas, connectivity in the U.S. is superb, but maintenance is less good. The U.S.
is the global leader in road and airport connectivity. One hundred percent of the U.S. population
has access to electricity and the nation ranks eighth in "liner shipping connectivity." The quality
of road infrastructure, however, is rated only 74.5, 17th in the world. The efficiency of airport and
port services ranks tenth. The Competitiveness Report gives the U.S. a 100 for water safety,
somewhat belying the ASCE Report Card's D, but only an 86.1 for water reliability.
The Competitiveness Report lends support to Gramlich's (1994) conclusion that the U.S.
invested in the most productive forms of infrastructure first. Subsequent investments yielded
lower economic returns. Consequently, for the U.S., the highest social returns come from
maintaining existing infrastructure rather than from new projects. . This has been a mantra for
microeconomic transportation economists ever since. Winston (2013) calls attention to the
inefficiencies in road maintenance policies, suggesting that public expenditures to achieve
improvements in road quality have been larger than needed.
       Decisions about new infrastructure can be divided into within-mode choices and choices
across modes. Tools similar to those that are used to explore expanding network capacity can be
used to estimate the returns to adding capacity in different airports. Duranton, Nagpal and
Turner provide a simple framework for optimal investment across modes. They maintain that
the marginal benefit of public spending needs to be equalized across modes of travel. If the
marginal benefit is proportional to the average cost of each mile of travel, then this implies that
public spending per mile travelled should be equalized across modes. While their assumed
relationship between marginal benefit and average spending is unlikely to be literally correct,
they find that the marginal product of spending on interstate highways is three times that
marginal benefit of spending on buses and more than twice the marginal benefit of spending on
rails. While they do not incorporate any redistributive benefits of favoring transit for lower
income individuals, their work highlights the fact that the U.S. currently spends far more per
passenger mile on rail and buses than on highways. This may in part reflect historical path



                                                  18
dependence: many components of the rail network were built before auto, truck, and air
competition was a viable alternative to rail travel.
       While rail and buses look similar in the Duranton, Nagpal and Turner calculations, there
are two major differences between these modes. Buses are particularly skewed towards the poor
and they are also flexible. Consequently, providing extensive bus service may impact
individuals on the margins of employment, which can encourage working and generate fiscal
externalities. The flexibility of buses also means that they can be scaled up or down in response
to new information. Such adjustments are much harder with fixed rail investments.
2.3 Macroeconomic Determinants of Optimal Infrastructure Investment
       The macroeconomic approach to infrastructure typically emphasizes two measurable
variables: the interest rate and joblessness. It could also include the effects of infrastructure
spending on economic growth, but there is little evidence on these effects for different types of
projects. The benefits of infrastructure investment occur over time and consequently, the
discount rate determines the net present value of the flow of these investments. Lower interest
rates mean that the future benefits are valued more highly. All else equal, a decline in the
discount rate implies that the optimal level of infrastructure investment should rise.
Equivalently, if the repayment of infrastructure debt is timed to coincide with future usage and
user fees, then lower long-term interest rates imply that future taxpayers will have a lower tax or
user fee burden for any fixed level of infrastructure spending.
       This logic, which is true for any form of capital investment, lies behind the calls from
Furman and Summers (2019) and many others for spending more on infrastructure in the current
low interest rate environment than in previous higher interest rate settings. Their basic logic is
unassailable, since many infrastructure projects have up-front costs and future benefits that must
be discounted. However, even when the interest rate is zero, it does not make sense to invest in a
project with a negative undiscounted sum of net benefits. In addition, some forms of
infrastructure involve future costs as well as benefits, and lower rates raise, rather than lower, the
present value of those costs.
       The chapter by Lucas and Montecinos addresses the issue of risk-adjustment when
discounting the stream of net benefits from public infrastructure projects. The widely-referenced
Arrow-Lind (1970) theorem proves that the benefits of public projects should be discounted at
the risk-free rate when the benefits of each project are independent of one another and of overall

                                                  19
macroeconomic risk and when the number of projects is large. In this case, the overall portfolio
of projects becomes risk-free and the risk-free rate is appropriate.
        The Arrow-Lind conditions seem unlikely to hold in most cases. Many projects,
including roads and bridges, yield benefits that increase with the overall level of economic
activity. Many projects, including roads, have benefits that are correlated across project.
Improvements in the quality of cars will cause the benefits of all roads to rise together.
Increasing costs of fossil fuel emissions will cause the benefits of all roads, and many other
forms of infrastructure as well, to decline together. The issue of risk adjustment for discounting
the benefits of infrastructure projects is far from settled.
        There is similar controversy about the connection between the level of unemployment
and optimal infrastructure investment. Keynes argued that the employment-related benefits of
public works spending were higher when employment was low, and macroeconomic advocates
of counter-cyclical infrastructure spending echo his line. Ramey's chapter casts doubt on this
view, noting that both empirical work and theory suggest that infrastructure is a weak tool for
fighting unemployment. The changing nature of infrastructure investment lends support to her
perspective. When Keynes wrote, public works were labor intensive. New Deal projects often
featured large numbers of unskilled laborers. Today, infrastructure is far more capital intensive
and far more likely to use skilled laborers who would be employed in any case. If infrastructure
requires machines, more than less skilled people, then the scope for infrastructure policy to exert
short-run effects on employment will be limited.
3. Pricing, Provision, and Maintenance
        We now turn from a discussion of the optimal level of infrastructure capital to questions
about the management of this capital. We begin with optimal pricing, and then turn to whether it
should be provided by the public or private sector. a topic which is addressed in the chapters by
Engel, Fischer and Galetovic and by Lucas and Montecinos. We also consider the optimal
allocation of infrastructure responsibilities between the federal and local governments. We
conclude by discussing maintenance and repair, highlighting cases in which the answers about
optimal funding and provision may differ between maintenance and new construction.
3.1 Efficient Infrastructure Pricing and Funding
        Pricing determines the level of infrastructure usage conditional upon its level of
maintenance. It can also play a role in determining infrastructure investment decisions, shape

                                                   20
incentives for maintenance, and affect the distribution of net benefits from infrastructure. Higher
prices for some infrastructure services, such as bus trips, can particularly impact the poor.
The starting point for pricing any service is the principle that efficient use results if price equals
marginal cost. On a road, that cost includes the depreciation, congestion and lost safety to other
drivers created by an extra driver. Historically, these costs have often been treated as being
minimal and consequently, free roads seemed like a reasonable benchmark. Indeed, the
interstate highway system was originally intended to be without tolls, partially because tolls were
seen as largely as a way to raise revenues rather than to ration use. Traditionally, the perceived
marginal cost of public transit use was also thought to be quite low, at least up to the point where
added buses or cars need to be run. The gap between marginal and average cost was also
invoked in support of tax subsidies for infrastructure construction, such as exempting the interest
on bonds issued to finance such projects from income taxation.
       In dense metropolitan regions today, the marginal costs of both transit use and driving
can be high. Subways, buses and roads can be quite crowded. For roads, optimal congestion
pricing could lead to charges that significant exceed the average cost of provision, especially if
the opportunity cost of the land under the road is ignored. Efficient pricing in this setting would
mean that road systems break even or generate surpluses instead of requiring subsidies. Small,
Winston, and Evans (1991) present calculations in which a system of congestion charges for both
cars and trucks, coupled with pavement damage charges for trucks, roughly covers the road
system's operating costs.
       We have considered externalities within the transit system together with other costs, but
if there are other externalities associated with infrastructure use then they should also be included
in pricing. If carbon use generates negative environmental externalities then the price of fuel-
intensive infrastructure should be increased to reflect this. If water use in dry states exacerbates
fire risks, then the price charged to users of water-intensive infrastructure should include the cost
of remediating or insuring those risks.
       The optimal pricing for one transport mode, using one type of infrastructure, depends on
the pricing or mis-pricing of other modes. If driving creates negative externalities that are not
priced, then reducing the cost of public transit provides one tool for mitigation. This second-best
solution will always be less efficient, absent administration costs, than directly taxing the
negative externality.

                                                  21
       The consequences of pricing decisions can extend beyond rationing use. In public-
private partnerships, Engel, Fischer, and Galetovic (2014) point out, charging users for
infrastructure access creates incentives for better maintenance since the private provider doesn't
get paid unless the roads are used, and the roads do not get used if they are in bad shape. Ashraf,
Glaeser, Holland and Steinberg (2017) find that water pipes in Zambia are repaired more rapidly
when consumers pay by the liter of water consumer rather than by the month. Public providers
may be less sensitive to revenues than private providers, but they may also provide better
maintenance if they are concerned about losing users. User-fee financing can also be quite
helpful when selecting infrastructure projects. If projects are funded primarily through subsidies,
then there is little financial reason to choose better projects. If infrastructure is expected to pay
for itself, then there is more discipline in the project selection process. Projects will be more
likely to be selected when they are expected to generate revenues and that helps make sure that
they will actually be used. Typically, equity concerns are used to argue for prices that are lower
than marginal cost for services like buses, but equity concerns can also push for higher prices.
Airport users are, on average, better-off than non-users. If airports are funded by general tax
revenues, and the revenue burden is spread more broadly than airport utilization, then this
represents a transfer from the poor to the rich. Setting user fees to cover the cost of an airport
project eliminates the possibility of redistribution via pricing.
       When there is a gap between the user fee and average cost, then infrastructure requires
other forms of financing. In rare cases, infrastructure is priced through a classic two-part tariff
where users pay a flat fee for accessing the infrastructure and then face a low cost of using the
infrastructure on a daily basis. Commuter trains sometimes offer monthly passes that have this
structure. In other cases, local property taxes serve as form of two-part tariff. If the beneficiaries
of infrastructure live in a particular locale, then a combination of low user fees and property tax
financing can still charge those who use the infrastructure but not distort usage decisions.
Tax increment financing envisions using the increases in property values associated with new
infrastructure to help pay for that infrastructure. Hong Kong's Mass Transit Railway uses a
particularly creative means of financing in this spirit. The company finances its railways with
dense building around new subway stops. The real estate value created by the rail system is
therefore captured by the rail builder.



                                                  22
       Much U.S. highway financing occurs through the federal Highway Trust Fund, which has
historically been financed largely by gasoline taxes. These taxes are a form of user fee since
drivers who use the roads buy gasoline. Over the past 15 years, as gasoline consumption per
mile driven has declined and vehicles that do not require gasoline have emerged, a greater share
of the trust fund has come from general tax revenues, which means that ordinary taxpayers are
subsidizing highway drivers. The highway trust fund also redistributes from high density states
to low density states that have a large number of highways per capita. In some cases, goods
bought in high density states travel through low density states and therefore high-density states
benefit from highways in low density states. Standard economic analysis suggests that directly
charging shippers for their highway use is likely to be a more efficient funding mechanism than
the current use of Highway Trust Fund subsidies. Beyond shipping and occasional recreational
use, it is unclear how higher density parts of the U.S. benefit from highways in more open areas.
3.2 Public vs. Private Provision of Infrastructure
       Privatization of infrastructure may seem to some like a recent innovation, but in fact,
debates over private vs. public infrastructure are centuries old. Private canals and turnpikes were
a common feature of the 18th century; private transit systems were ubiquitous in the 19th.
The classic analysis of Hart, Shleifer and Vishny (1997) presents the choice between private and
public ownership as a choice between good and bad incentives. Private managers have stronger
incentives to cut costs, which can both reduce waste and reduce quality, especially when quality
reductions do not lead to losses in revenues. Consequently, there may be some services, such as
providing airport safety or prisons, for which the welfare losses from lost quality exceed the
benefits from lower expenses.
       Engel, Galetovic and Fischer (2014) turn this logic on its head for PPPs by arguing that
private providers have stronger incentives to deliver quality, especially for roads, when the
number of riders depends on the maintenance of the road. Singh (2018) shows that private road
providers in India deliver smoother roads. The primary difference between public and private
road providers appears to be that private ones share responsibility both for initial construction
and later maintenance. Because private providers do not cut corners at the initial construction
phase, they provide better road services later on.
       For many PPPs, the problem is not cutting quality but subverting the government.
Glaeser (2004) presents a model in which private companies that supply public services bribe the

                                                 23
government to overpay them for their effort. In weak institutional environments, the
combination of highly incentivized private companies and public officials facing weak oversight
can lead to a drain on public funds. Engel, Galetovic and Fischer (2014) discuss the many
problems of this nature created by PPPs in the developing world. While explicit bribery is less
common in the U.S. than in emerging markets, private companies still have the capacity to
influence the politicians and bureaucrats who determine contract terms.
       Several factors bear on whether private or public provision is optimal. If the service is to
be funded by user fees and quality is observable to users, then private ownership creates
incentives for maintenance. If quality is unobservable, or if there is no link between the number
of users of the facility and the private owner's financial return, this effect is not operative. In
such cases, private management can lead to lower quality. Roads may be more natural
candidates for privatization than prisons, because their output is more observable and the
advantage of private rather than public management may therefore be greater. If the procurement
process is well-designed and relatively immune to subversion or collusion, then private
ownership should reduce financial costs. If the number of bidders is small or the institutional
environment is weak, then public ownership may be a more attractive option. If public
management must be combined with private construction, then private ownership may be a better
option since it may be difficult to monitor the quality of initial construction.
       Another consideration is the relative quality of lawyers and engineers in the public sector.
Public management is engineering intensive. Private management is contract intensive, at least
for the public sector. If the legal capacity of government is strong, then contracting with a private
provider is relatively more attractive than otherwise. If the engineering capacity of the
government is strong, then public management may be relatively more appealing.
A final consideration in the choice between public and private provision is resilience to
economic downturns and other adverse demand shocks. In some settings, such as railroads in
the U.S. in the 1950s and 1960s and urban bus service providers in earlier decades, private
infrastructure providers were unable to weather periods of adversity and the public sector
stepped in to ensure continuing service. Enhancing the resilience of private providers, perhaps
with new insurance schemes that involve government support but not take-over during periods of
adversity, could improve the long-run viability of the private sector in the infrastructure sphere.



                                                  24
       This discussion has focused on public vs. private provision, but two other distinctions are
worth making. First, private provision can be done by non-profit firms or for-profit entities. The
former have weaker incentives to make quality reductions that reduce costs and weaker
incentives to subvert the government. Turnpike trusts were essentially local non-profits that
managed roads in 18th century England. Unfortunately, many infrastructure projects today
require outlays that are too large for most non-profits to handle.
       Second, there is a question about the choice of public management. When is it optimal
for public control of infrastructure to be embedded in the executive branch of government rather
than and when is it optimal for that control to be in the hands of a public authority? In the 19th
century U.S., independent authorities were thought to provide freedom from widespread
corruption. Yet in many developing countries today, independent authorities or parastatal
enterprises are seen as being even more corrupt and unaccountable than the elected executive
branch of government. A key question is whether the independent authority will be led by
someone whose future depends more on support by local politicians or on his or her reputation
for excellence. If the leader of the authority is beholden to local politicians then independent
authorities only provide an excuse for poor quality. If the leader cares about his or her reputation,
then the authority is more likely to deliver quality and cost improvements.
3.3 Infrastructure in a Federal System
       In the U.S., infrastructure is provided by national, state and local governments. Water
and sewer infrastructure have primarily been handled at the local level. In some cases, the city
government directly owns the waterworks. Local roads similarly are handled by towns and
municipalities. Major roads and large public transit systems are overseen by state governments,
even when the funding is provided by the federal government. The federal government is
extensively involved in most forms of transportation, most especially air. Most of these
divisions are natural outcomes of network size. Air travel often crosses state boundaries and so
national management is appropriate. Local streets have fewer externalities across place
boundaries. The most basic model of local public finance would allocate control of
infrastructure to the lowest level of government that includes all or most of the network. The
benefit of local control would come, as Tiebout (1956) suggested, from better local information
and stronger incentives to cater to local voters.



                                                    25
        The U.S. also includes some interesting hybrid cases. Highways are an example. The
federally-funded highway trust fund provides resources, but the resources are directed at the state
level. The national government has some ability to place requirements on state governments,
such as tying funding to raising the drinking age or lowering speed limits. Typically, though
federal funding does not come with any attempt to manage the highway network.
The federal role in highway spending reflects both historical precedent and federal willingness
to borrow, especially during a recession. Indeed, if infrastructure spending plays a counter-
cyclical role that spills over state boundaries, then federal funding may be appropriate. States
and localities will not fully internalize the impact that their spending has on national aggregate
demand and unemployment during a recession, and so will underinvest in infrastructure during a
downturn. The case for federal funding is weaker if the macroeconomic stimulus associated with
infrastructure spending is limited. Whether the current federal funding of highways is optimal,
or whether more state and local financial responsibility would lead to more efficient outcomes, is
an open question. The redistribution of highway funds to low density states is done with little
cost-benefit analysis. The reliance on general federal tax revenues rather than local taxes and
user fees is an interesting topic for future research.
        There are also important questions about the division of control between states and
localities. In most cases, localities have better incentives than a state regulator to monitor and
maintain their infrastructure, but they may also be more subject to capture by connected
contractors than the state government. The optimal level of local control must weigh the state's
superiority at contracting with the local edge in directing that contracting efficiently.
3.4 Efficient Maintenance Policy
        Economic analysis and data on the condition of infrastructure assets can help to guide
investments in maintenance. For example, the International Roughness Index (IRI) provided by
the Department of Transportation is created by measuring the vertical acceleration of official
road surveyors who drive at a fixed speed. Big data provided by private companies can
supplement this data by providing more up to date information on road quality and by estimating
the links between road quality and road speeds and accidents. Both Uber and Lyft have real time
data on the vertical acceleration of their drivers during every trip. This data mimics the IRI data,
and is available more frequently and more widely. These data sources can be combined with
Google maps data on road speeds to estimate the time losses due to under-maintained roads, and

                                                  26
with data from the American Automobile Association (AAA) to link road roughness to
breakdowns and flat tires. If merged with police information, these data could be used to test
whether road roughness leads to accidents. Such estimates could be improved by using natural
experiments like the temporal discontinuity in road quality before and after road repaving.
       Armed with estimates of the costs of poor road quality, researchers could estimate the
optimal time, or road quality level, for repaving. This is a standard optimal control exercise and
it has been solved with a variety of different assumptions about the nature of road depreciation
and repair costs, for example by Worm and Van Harten (1996) and Gao and Zhang (2013).
New estimates using big data like the cellphone geolocation information can also contribute to
our knowledge of the causes and speed of road deterioration. Other maintenance decisions are
less amenable to analysis, especially when maintenance is needed to avoid catastrophic risk. At
this point, engineering estimates of the risk of bridge collapse seem far more reliable than
anything that can be gleaned from cars driving on the bridge. Similarly, the risks of rail disaster
are much harder to meaningfully estimate.
3.5 Maintenance, New Construction and Infrastructure Operation
       The foregoing discussion of the appropriate ownership of infrastructure did not
differentiate between initial construction and maintenance. Yet in many cases, the problems are
quite different and it may well be optimal to split these roles between federal and local
government or between public and private entities. Splitting the tasks is easier when monitoring
initial construction quality is easier, because otherwise the initial builder may cut quality to save
costs, thereby placing greater burdens on the actors responsible for maintenance.
       Planning the construction of interstate systems, such as highways and air traffic systems,
seems to merit significant federal engagement. The choice of where to put the roads has the
highest level of interjurisdictional spillovers. By contrast, the maintenance problem may be
more likely to benefit from local attention. Local maintenance is more problematic when the
costs of poor maintenance are born mainly by drivers outside of the community. Indeed, there
are cases when a locality can even have incentives to let roads remain rough to deter cross-town
traffic. In the case of rail, ownership of the rails themselves may generate a local monopoly. In
that case, the appropriate model may be public ownership of the rail lines along with competitive
private access. That model is followed with private roads, which effectively rent out access to
their blacktop to private drivers and truckers. Typically, the monopoly problem in that case is

                                                 27
moderated by rules that limit the size of tolls. This same model is typically followed by airports
in the U.S. They are usually publicly owned entities that contract with private airline companies,
which then negotiate rights over gates while the public entity manages the common space.
Private airport ownership is more common outside of the U.S., where it is often combined with
some regulation to reduce monopoly rent extraction. This model is worthy of more study.
       In many infrastructure projects, distinctions between new construction (capital costs) and
ongoing operations (variable costs) are somewhat artificial. Department of Transportation grants
often privilege new purchases, when leasing might be more appropriate. There is no obvious
reason why public transit authorities should be expected to cover their variable costs but not their
capital costs, but that expectation is quite common. If these entities are pricing at marginal cost,
then operating deficits may be entirely appropriate. If fiscal discipline is a primary concern,
presumably it should focus on overall deficits, not merely operating deficits.
4. Can U.S. Infrastructure Spending Become More Efficient?
       There are three potential areas for improving the efficiency of infrastructure construction
and use: procurement, project management, and cost-benefit analysis of expenditures on
mitigation of potentially adverse project externalities. A concern that motivates the efficiency
discussion is that U.S. infrastructure costs on a per-unit basis are high by international
perspective. Some policies, such as the Davis-Bacon Act that requires contractors to pay
prevailing wages, and Buy American contract provisions, are likely to raise input costs, but their
net impact is not clear. While existing research does not provide a "to do list" for making U.S.
infrastructure spending more cost effective, additional study of the cost of building and
maintaining infrastructure may yield policy-relevant conclusions.
4.1 Procurement
       In the U.S., procurement rules were established in the shadow of corruption. Nineteenth
century procurement often involved high costs that were compensated by kickbacks to
politicians. A strict set of rules about procurement evolved to limit corrupt practices, but in
many cases those rules do not seem to deliver low costs. The rules typically require open bidding
on projects and provide frameworks for vendor choice that lead to the selection of the low-cost
bidder, or the choice of higher cost bidders only with some justification.
       Researchers have identified several ways in which existing first price auctions can fail to
deliver low costs. Most obviously, bidders can collude and agree to only bid high prices or for

                                                 28
some contractors to sit out. When bids involve specifying a cost for each service and a projected
number of services, Bolotny and Vasserman (2019) show that savvy contractors can deliver low
bids on services where predicted use is too high and high bids on services where predicted use is
too low. Finally, highly regulated auctions do not perform well when only one bidder shows up.
The first major procurement choice involves the decision between the use of auctions or
negotiation. Bulow and Klemperer (1996) argue that any advantages provided by negotiation are
small relative to the benefits that come from adding more bidders to an auction. While correct,
this ignores the fact that a highly regulated auction may end up with only one bidder. A smart
negotiator can keep on calling until he or she gets a reasonable bid.
       The downside of flexible negotiation is that it is more prone to corruption than an arms'
length sealed bid auction. While some countries, such as Singapore and Denmark, appear to give
their procuring entities substantial independence, it is unclear if that would produce efficiency or
corruption in the U.S. setting. Flexible procurement will only work if procuring entities have
strong incentives to keep costs down; U.S. bureaucracy is not known for strong incentives.
The Makesovic-Bridge chapter considers the choice between strong incentive systems, such as
fixed price contracts, and weak incentive systems. It points out that strong incentive systems
generally come at a higher cost, which can be explained if contractors are risk averse. In many
cases, byzantine regulations serve to restrict entry into an auction rather than to promote
competition. These restrictions may ensure high quality levels, but they warrant further analysis.
One reliable message of both theory and empirical work on procurement auctions is that
attracting more bidders is important for keeping costs low.
4.2 Project Management
       The initial bidding phase of procurement typically features competition among
contractors, but inevitably once work has begun, renegotiation becomes bilateral. Consequently,
mid-stream renegotiation during the course of a contract is a chance for costs to rise enormously.
The perils of renegotiation provide one explanation for why so many mega-projects end up
costing far more than initially planned or bid. For smaller well-defined projects, the
renegotiation process can be regulated ex ante. For example, the auction process described by
Bolotny and Vasserman (2019), in which bidders specify costs for specific services, is meant to
accommodate changes in services over time. The procurer has the right to change the services
needed as the work develops, and the contractor must provide those services at the auction-

                                                 29
specified price.   If the contractor has some predictive power beyond the estimates provided by
the procurer, then the system can be gamed, but at least it is less subject to wholesale abuse ex
post. In a large mega-project, this renegotiation process is far more complex. When tunneling
hits an unexpected barrier, then it is not simply a matter of adding an extra ton of concrete. The
costs must be renegotiated and there is no competition to keep costs down.
       There is a robust literature, illustrated by Hart and Moore (1988), on contracts and
renegotiation. The models, typically formulated with private sector settings in mind, can be used
to analyze the renegotiation of infrastructure projects. The complexity of these projects
nevertheless limits the application of any simple model. Unless the work can be partitioned so
that any new requirement for renegotiation can be handled competitively, the difficulties of
bilateral bargaining reappear. Renegotiation appears to be a much greater generator of cost
overruns for infrastructure in the U.S. than elsewhere. Further research on this issue is needed.
It could take the form of more qualitative comparisons of the U.S. with other countries in which
renegotiation is less difficult, or of a detailed study of renegotiation across many U.S. contracts.
While painstaking, such work seems necessary if we are to make any progress on understanding
how to limit the extra costs that are added to projects after they are awarded.
4.3 Externality Mitigation and Infrastructure Costs
       In the 1950s, Altshuler and Luberoff (2003) explain, infrastructure projects often ignored
the concerns of local residents. The projects were cheaper, but many of those who were harmed
went largely uncompensated. After the neighborhood organization and freeway revolts of the
1960s, projects were far more carefully selected and planned. They were also far more
expensive, as Brooks and Liscow (2019) document. Glaeser and Ponzetto (2018) present a
simple model in which rising education levels lead to more mitigation expenditures, especially if
the federal government is paying for much of the cost.
       This combination of well-organized community residents and federal funding lies behind
the planning and expense of Boston's Central Artery/Tunnel Project, the Big Dig. Although the
enormous cost of the project was largely paid for by Massachusetts ex post, ex ante voters were
told that the costs would be covered by federal funding. The project was planned so that not a
single house would have to be moved. A key question is how much could have been saved if a
somewhat less sensitive planning procedure had been followed.



                                                 30
       Other countries that pay less attention to community concerns have much lower
infrastructure costs. China is an extreme example; infrastructure is built with a focus on low cost
and speed, not compliance with local desires. It would be helpful to better understand the
sources of cost differences between China and the U.S. France, Japan, and Spain might provide
more natural comparisons. Gordon and Schleicher (2015) report that the per mile cost of
building the Second Avenue Subway line in New York City was eight times higher than a recent
subway project in Japan and 36 times more expensive than one in Madrid. Even Paris' Metro
Line 7, a particularly tricky building project, was much less costly than recent U.S. projects.
       Gordon and Schleicher suggest that potential litigation, standard in common law
countries, may explain some of the difference. The threat of litigation is one reason U.S.
infrastructure builders spend so much on mitigation. The Big Dig, for example, made numerous
concessions because of environmental lawsuits. Concern for local harm is appropriate and
mitigation expenses can be well-justified. Yet if mitigation explains a sizable fraction of the
relatively high infrastructure construction costs in the U.S., some assessment of the efficiency of
mitigation spending may be warranted.
       Two types of research seem necessary. First, there must be more testing of whether
mitigation expenses are responsible for high costs. This research could compare environments in
which mitigation is more or less necessary. Alternatively, mitigation effects can be directly
estimated for particularly projects, with engineering cost estimates used to determine the impact.
Second, there is a need for better cost-benefit tools for examining mitigation actions. How should
we value the losses to neighbors who are harmed by an infrastructure project? Do those
neighbors value the expensive forms of mitigation that now exist? Are there less costly tools for
compensating those neighbors? The call to improve U.S. infrastructure currently collides with
the very high cost of building it. Strategies for reducing costs while still sheltering impacted
communities could lead to welfare improvements for all.
5. A Roadmap of the Volume
       The essays in this volume collectively survey much of the economic research on
infrastructure. While the volume is not comprehensive ­ there are important omitted issues that
have been actively studied, and there are a number of key issues that warrant future research ­ it
nevertheless introduces several core streams of investigation.



                                                 31
       The volume begins with a paper by Bennett, Kornfeld, Sichel and Wasshausen which
describes the measurement of infrastructure in the Bureau of Economic Analysis' National
Income and Product Accounts. Two difficult issues are determining the rate of depreciation for
infrastructure, and computing a price index for new infrastructure projects. The empirical work
used to establish infrastructure depreciation rates is dated and might benefit from updating. The
paper provides basic facts about the stocks of infrastructure and the flow of infrastructure
spending over time, including an experimental new data series on highway investment at the
state level. One finding is that real net infrastructure investment per capita has fallen since the
Great Recession (2007-2009), and that it is currently at its lowest level since 1983. The only
significant infrastructure growth since the 1990s has been in digital infrastructure. The stock of
basic infrastructure has grown by only 0.6 percent per year over the past twenty years. State
level variation in highway infrastructure investment per capita is particularly illuminating.
Throughout the 1992 to 2017 period, states such as the Dakotas and Wyoming have led the
nation in per capita highway investment. Between 1992 and 2017, spending on infrastructure
investment in northeastern states, such as Pennsylvania and New York, has risen dramatically
relative to other states, which may reflect the extremely high cost of building in those areas.
Southern states have seen their highway investment decline relative to northern states.
       The second chapter, by Brooks and Liscow, focuses on the cost of building highways in
the U.S. This paper and their related work, Brooks and Liscow (2019), suggest that the per-mile
cost of building highways rose dramatically between the 1950s and the 1980s. This fact does not
appear to reflect changing highway locations, such as a switch to more urban environments, or
rising input costs. Rather, the cost of mitigating environmental or other local externalities
appears to be an important factor. The rise in highway costs occurred largely after
environmental concerns associated with highways began appearing in the media in the late
1960s. The rise is associated with increasingly wiggly roads, which may arise from attempts to
avoid disturbing existing residents.
       The paper also documents large differences across states in construction costs.
Connecticut and New Jersey spend much more per mile than the national average, even
controlling for geography, while Wyoming and the Dakotas spend much less. Once the
researchers control for geography, Delaware and Rhode Island appear to be particularly low
construction cost areas. Differences in construction costs after 1970 appear to be correlated with

                                                 32
other measures of local spending. For example, while highway costs are correlated with average
construction costs, there is also a strong correlation between highway costs and both Medicare
spending per enrollee and per capita local government spending. These correlations suggest that
some states may exercise less restraint than others with their budgets. The correlation with
construction costs may mean that states that regulate housing supply more, and therefore drive
up building costs, also impose more mitigation requirements on highway construction.
       The third chapter, by Duranton, Nagpal and Turner, presents evidence on the output of
the infrastructure capital stock, rather than the flow of new investment. It shows that according
to Department of Transportation IRI measures, U.S. roads are in much better shape today than in
the past. This fact challenges the prevailing view of national infrastructure decline, primarily by
dispelling the view that in some distant past the nation had pristine roads. Bridge quality also
shows no clear downward trend. The U.S. subway fleet did get older between the 1980s and the
early 2000s, but average subway car age has remained constant since that point.
       This chapter, like the previous one, finds rising highway construction costs. One
consequence of rising costs is a lower optimal level of highway capital and construction. This
paper suggests that the decline in does not dispute the decline of investment levels, but rather
suggests that this decline represents diminishing returns to expanding traditional transportation
infrastructure. These facts suggest the value of grounding infrastructure investment decisions in
data on performance and quantified risks rather than opaque letter grades.
       The paper also includes an interesting theoretical contribution on how to assess the
optimal level of infrastructure investment across different modes. The logic of the model is that
the incremental cost, including public and private spending, of providing a given level of
mobility ­ think "move a person a mile" -- should be equalized across modes. They apply this
framework to highways, buses and subways and find that current spending patterns generate less
transportation services per dollar from spending on subways and buses than from spending on
highways.
       The fourth chapter, Ramey's analysis of the macroeconomic effects of infrastructure
spending, begins with a standard neoclassical macroeconomic model that generates multipliers
from government investment and consumption. The multiplier for government investment is
typically higher than the multiplier from consumption. While her baseline model generates a
multiplier between 2.2 and 4.4, she also presents results from a number of more complicated

                                                 33
models that generate lower multipliers, some even below one. This paper summarizes the large
empirical literature on infrastructure multipliers and presents estimates of the impact of
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) spending. ARRA seems to have generated
a modest increase in highway spending, but little rise in long term highway-related employment.
The findings of Garin (2019), and Ramey's summary of related empirical work, suggest
relatively low multipliers from ARRA-related spending, thereby casting doubt on the use of
infrastructure spending as a counter-cyclical policy tool.
       The next paper, by Makovsek and Bridge, addresses infrastructure procurement. It
adopts a global perspective and describes differences in the structure of procurement contracts
that are used in different nations. Some contracts bundle the design and build phase together,
while others proceed linearly going from design to bid to build. Contracts also differ in whether
they have high powered incentives, such as a fixed price, or more flexible cost-plus structures.
Prior research is not clear about whether bundling designing and building together is optimal,
but the paper suggests that fixed price contracts generally lead to higher costs, perhaps because
risk averse builders require high payments to bear the risk of unknown cost shocks. The paper
presents a typology of procurement contracts which is interpreted through the theoretical lens
developed by Laffont and Tirole (1993) and others. The essay ends by summarizing the
empirical work on the efficiency of different procurement contracts, and with a case study that
illustrates many of the points about procurement that are developed in the study.
       The sixth paper, an assessment of public-private partnerships (PPPs) by Engel, Fischer
and Galetovic, builds on the authors' previous criticism of many standard arguments for PPPs.
The public case for PPPs often claims that private provision reduces the need for public outlays.
The authors note that this argument often is only a reflection of artificial accounting practices. If
the project will cost more than it earns, in net present value terms, then the government will need
to pay for that difference, whether the provision is private or public. The PPP may enable the
government to pay the costs in the future, but the same benefit could be achieved by borrowing.
Instead, these authors argue, the potential gains from PPPs must arise from better incentives in
some part of the infrastructure procurement or management process. For example, while public
managers may not be interested in revenues from tolls, for a PPP those tolls determine profits
and losses. This gives the PPP strong incentives to maintain roads or other infrastructure and to
generate future revenues. The PPP may also have stronger incentives to cut construction costs.

                                                 34
The downside of PPPs is that they must be monitored by the government. Failures to monitor
may mean that the PPP delivers lower quality infrastructure or extracts too much in payments
from the public, either through excessive prices or excessive contributions from the public
sector. The downsides can be particularly large when the public sector can be easily corrupted.
       The next paper, by Lucas and Montecinos, addresses the role of risk in assessing the fair
value of infrastructure investments. This is often a particularly important consideration in
valuing PPPs. The authors question the claim that the benefits of public projects should be
discounted at the risk-free rate because project risks are largely idiosyncratic, suggesting instead
that both public and private investments should be evaluated using a market rate that will differ
from the risk-free rate based on the covariance between the project's future benefits and
aggregate consumption, which is its "beta". A high beta public project should be discounted just
as much as a high beta private project. Using the risk-free rate or the rate on government bonds
to discount the benefits of infrastructure will generally lead to inefficient overinvestment.
A novel aspect of this study is its proposed approach to analyzing minimum revenue guarantees
that are often promised by the public sector to PPPs. These guarantees are options that are
transferred to the PPP; their cost to the government can be evaluated using a variant of the
Black-Scholes options pricing formula. The authors point out that when options change the
incentives of the PPP, for example when guarantees reduce the incentive to maintain
infrastructure, they may have other costs that also need to be considered.
       The volume concludes with Greenstein's analysis of digital infrastructure, which is the
category of infrastructure investment that has grown most significantly over the last 25 years.
This paper divides its discussion into three parts. The first addresses the expansion of digital
access for both consumers and businesses. The adoption of broadband followed an S-shaped
curve: richer consumers adopted first. Later in the adoption cycle, it was not lower prices but
rising broadband speeds and the proliferation of broadband intensive content that attracted
initially-reluctant adopters. This chapter reviews measures of the productivity gains that
broadband produced for businesses.
       The second part focuses on the growth of network-related services that did not exist in
the 1990s. For example, Content Delivery Networks (CDN) that deliver video and gaming
experiences online have proliferated since 2000. The rise of data centers in the "cloud" is
another example of new businesses that are made possible because of improved digital

                                                 35
infrastructure. In a sense, this process is repeating the business transformations that followed the
earlier transportation revolutions around sea shipping, railroads, and highways. The mass
production of cotton in the 19th century, for example, was far more attractive because recent
advances in transportation made it possible to ship cotton worldwide at relatively low cost.
       The third section focuses on governance of the digital world. Protocols that shape the
efficiency of digital connections were largely developed by public and non-profit entities. It
raises questions about whether current institutions are designed to maximize the efficiency of
future protocol innovation, and about the appropriate governance institutions for software,
mapping and entities such as Wikipedia.
6. COVID-19 and the Economic Analysis of Infrastructure
       Four months after the symposium at which the research papers in this volume were
presented, the U.S. was struck by the COVID-19 pandemic. The pandemic has affected virtually
every aspect of the economy, and it is likely to have long-term effects as well as short-term
consequences. Many of the most notable short-run effects, such as the collapse of public transit
use in large metropolitan areas and the drop in air travel, are related to infrastructure. This
section offers a post-script to the papers in this volume by describing some of the ways in which
the pandemic has affected the demand for some types of infrastructure. It also identifies key
questions about the future role of infrastructure that have been raised by the pandemic.
Mobility declined radically over the course of a single week in March 2020. As the pandemic
raged, international air travel was often impossible. Roads that had been clogged were empty.
Many saw public transportation as a source of potential contagion, and millions avoided subway
cars and buses. By May 2020, 49 million Americans were telecommuting, placing extraordinary
demands on the country's digital infrastructure. How the demand for public transportation
infrastructure will evolve after a vaccine or other public health measures make it possible to
return to most pre-pandemic activities is an important but open question, and it is too soon to
offer long-run predictions.
       Nonetheless, it seems sure that existing public transit systems will face enduring
challenges, and that future investments in public transit will want to consider the impact of future
pandemic risk.    Public transit is particularly vulnerable to contagion both because of the human
proximity of travel in this mode and because the costs of public transit scale down less readily
when use declines. Drivers don't pay for gas when they don't drive, but public transit systems

                                                 36
continued to run throughout 2020 with only a small fraction of their pre-COVID ridership.
These systems are incurring large operating costs even with very low levels of use.
       Reduced ridership levels seem likely to persist until there is widespread access to a
COVID-19 vaccine, and even perhaps beyond. All mobility declined substantially because of
COVID-19, but transit particularly suffered because fear that shared travel can lead to infection.
In one May 2020 poll, fifty-seven percent of all Massachusetts residents said that they would
avoid taking public transit even if COVID-19 could be effectively treated. Rules about wearing
masks have proven difficult to enforce on buses, which may further reduce public confidence in
shared vehicular transit.
       Reduction in ridership leaves a fiscal hole in the system that will persist for many years,
without a state or federal bailout. If systems are left to cover their COVID-related fiscal
shortfalls, then they will reduce their service further even after the disease has disappeared. The
fiscal problems will create pressure to increase fares, which will reduce ridership further.
The extreme vulnerability of public transit to pandemics has rarely been incorporated into past
cost-benefit analyses of system extensions, yet the COVID-19 pandemic is a reminder that public
health shocks are a non-trivial risk. Similar disease outbreaks could have potentially occurred
with SARS, MERS and H1N1 during just the last two decades. Going forward, there is value in
research that examines how to make systems more resilient to disease and how to incorporate the
risks of future pandemics in transit planning.
       The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2020) reports that nearly fifty million workers in the
U.S. stopped commuting and switched to working at home in the spring of 2020. If this massive
shift from physical transportation to digital mobility persists, it would require an associated shift
of investment in digital infrastructure. The rise of videoconferencing has led many to suspect
that decades-old predictions that a vast fraction of the American economy would no longer meet
face-to-face might come to pass, creating a massive decrease in demand for cities and urban
space. Bartik et al. (2020) find that over 40 percent of small businesses predict that more than
one third of their workers who switched to remote work during the pandemic will remain at
home after the pandemic. That prognosis does not mean that office towers will be vacant in the
future; rents may decline. Some commercial space may convert into residential usage. Still, if
predictions for increased tele-commuting prove accurate, the demand for urban real estate will
decline along with demand for access to the highways that facilitate commuting.

                                                 37
       The long-run post-pandemic changes in economic activity are difficult to predict. Surges
in entertainment-related mobility that followed the end of lockdowns in the Sunbelt in June and
July 2020 are reminders that the demand for face-to-face contact is likely to be robust, especially
for younger consumers. Younger workers and consumers seem likely to still want to pleasures
of proximity. A switch from older urbanite to younger urbanite, and from established urban
businesses to new firms, would have important implications for transportation infrastructure.
Some suburban office parks may actually see an increase in demand, especially if firms attempt
to provide their workers with more square footage to reduce the risk of disease spread. Some
telecommuting professionals may relocate to high amenity, medium density locales such as Vail
or Boulder. These areas have experienced rapid growth in recent decades, and they seem likely
to continue to have robust demand for future infrastructure investments.
       The pandemic should stimulate new research not just on public transit and air travel, but
also on digital infrastructure. The switch to remote work occurred disproportionately among
better educated and better paid workers, who had presumably acquired access to digital
connections long ago. The switch to remote schooling, however, was universal and the lack of
access to digital infrastructure imposed particular costs on poorer children. While the effects of
the switch to digital learning is sure to be extensively studied, one important realization is that if
on-line classes are going to feature more prominently in the education sector going forward,
digital infrastructure requires heightened attention. Children without reliable wifi access will lose
out in any such transition, even if they are motivated learners.
       The pandemic has renewed calls for the use of infrastructure spending as a tool of
macroeconomic stabilization, while also highlighting some of the limitations of such policy
levers. The Ramey paper in this volume discusses the evidence on the capacity of infrastructure
spending to improve macroeconomic outcomes. One of the traditional arguments for funding
infrastructure investment during a downturn is that there are jobless workers available.
Employment in the construction industries dropped substantially during 2020, but it has already
begun to rebound, without an infrastructure spending plan, in part because of the robust demand
for housing. The brunt of the labor market decline during the pandemic was felt by workers in
urban services industries, like leisure and hospitality. It is not clear that expanding spending on
infrastructure projects would support a stronger labor market for these workers, particularly if
public health concerns still discourage visits to restaurants, bars, and sporting events.

                                                  38
7. Conclusion
       Taken together, the essays in this volume highlight many important economic insights
about infrastructure, but they also show that there is still much to be learned. We need to know
more about improving procurement, and to better understand why U.S. infrastructure costs are so
high. We hope that future research will address these topics, and that the economic analysis of
infrastructure will receive the attention that its enormous importance merits.




                                                39
References
Allen, Treb and Costas Arkolakis. 2019. "The Welfare Effects of Transportation Infrastructure
       Improvements." NBER working paper 25487, Cambridge, MA.

Alsan, Marcella, and Claudia Goldin. 2019. "Watersheds in Child Mortality: The Role of
       Effective Water and Sewerage Infrastructure, 1880­1920." Journal of Political
       Economy 127 (2): 586-638.

Altshuler, Alan and David Luberoff. 2003 Mega-Projects. Washington: Brookings Institution.

American Society of Civil Engineers. 2017. 2017 Infrastructure Report Card. Reston,
      Virginia: ASCE. https://www.infrastructurereportcard.org/

Andonov, Aleksandar, Roman Kraussl, and Joshua Rauh. 2018. "The Subsidy to Infrastructure
      as an Asset Class." NBER Working Paper 25045, Cambridge MA.

Arrow, Kenneth J., and R. C. Lind. 1970. "Uncertainty and the Evaluation Decisions of Public
       Investment." American Economic Review 60 (3): 364-78.

Aschauer, David. 1989a. "Is Public Expenditure Productive?" Journal of Monetary Economics
      23 (2): 177-200.

Aschauer, David. 1989b. "Public Investment and Productivity Growth in the Group of Seven."
      Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Economic Perspectives? 13 (5): 17-25.

Aschauer, David. 1990. "Is Government Spending Stimulative?" Contemporary Policy Issues 8
      (4): 30-46.

Ashraf, Nava, Edward Glaeser, Abraham Holland, and Bryce Millett Steinberg. 2017. "Water,
       Health and Wealth." NBER Working Paper 23807, Cambridge, MA.

Bajari, Patrick, S. Houghton, and S. Tadelis. 2014. "Bidding for Incomplete Contracts: An
        Empirical Analysis." American Economic Review 104 (April): 1288-1319.

Bartik, Alexander W., Zoe B. Cullen, Edward L. Glaeser, Michael Uca, and Christopher Stanton.
        2020. "What Jobs are Being Done at Home During the COVID-19 Crisis? Evidence
        from Firm-Level Surveys." NBER Working Paper 27422.

Baum-Snow, Nathaniel, and Matthew E. Kahn. 2000. "The effects of new public projects to
      expand urban rail transit." Journal of Public Economics 77 (2): 241-263.

Bolotnyy, Valentin and Shoshana Vasserman. 2019. "Scaling Auctions as Insurance: A Case
       Study in Infrastructure Procurement." Working Paper: Harvard Economics Department.

Brooks, Leah and Zachary Liscow. 2019. "Infrastructure Costs." Working Paper, Yale Law
      School.



                                              40
Bulow, Jeremy, and Paul Klemperer. 1996. "Auctions Versus Negotiations," American
      Economic Review 86: 180-194.

Cutler, David, and Grant Miller. 2005. "The role of public health improvements in health
        advances: the twentieth-century United States." Demography 42 (1): 1-22.

Donaldson, Dave, and Richard Hornbeck. 2016. "Railroads and American economic growth: A
      "market access" approach." Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (2): 799-858.

Downs, Anthony. 1962. He Law of Peak-Hour Expressway Congestion." Traffic Quarterly 16
      (3), 393-409.

Duranton, Gilles, and Matthew A. Turner. 2011. "The fundamental law of road congestion:
      Evidence from US cities." American Economic Review 101 (6): 2616-52.

Engel, Eduardo, Ronald Fischer and Alexander Galetovic. 2014. The Economics of Public-
       Private Partnerships: A Basic Guide. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Fogel, Robert. 1962. "A Quantitative Approach to the Study of Railroads in American
       Economic Growth: A Report of Some Preliminary Findings," Journal of Economic
       History 22 (2): 163-197.

Furman, Jason, and Lawrence H. Summers. 2019. "Who's Afraid of Budget Deficits." Foreign
      Affairs. March/April.

Gao, Hui, and Xueqing Zhang. 2013. "A Markovbased road maintenance optimization model
      considering user costs." ComputerAided Civil and Infrastructure Engineering 28 (6):
      451-464.

Garin, Andrew. 2019. "Putting America to work, where? Evidence on the effectiveness of
       infrastructure construction as a locally targeted employment policy." Journal of Urban
       Economics 111: 108-131.

Glaeser, Edward. 2004. "Public Ownership in the American City." In A. E. Schwartz, ed.,
       Urban Issues and Public Finance: Essays in Honor of Dick Netzer. Northampton, MA:
       Edward Elgar Publishing.

Glaeser, Edward and Giacomo Ponzetto. 2018. "The Political Economy of Transportation
       Investment," Economics of Transportation 13: 4-26

Glaeser, Edward and Andrei Shleifer. 2003. "The Rise of the Regulatory State." Journal of
       Economic Literature 41 (2): 401-425.

Gordon, Tracy and David Schleicher. 2015. "High Costs May Explain Crumbling Support for
      U.S. Infrastructure." Real Clear Policy.
      https://www.realclearpolicy.com/blog/2015/03/31/high_costs_may_explain_crumbling_s
      upport_for_us_infrastructure_1249.html


                                              41
Gramlich, Edward. 1994. "Infrastructure Investment: A review essay." Journal of Economic
      Literature XXXII (September): 1176-1196.

Gupta, Arpit, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Constantine Kontokosta. 2020. "Take the Q Train:
       Value Capture of Public Infrastructure Projects." NBER Working Paper 26789,
       Cambridge, MA.

Hart, Oliver, and John Moore. 1988. "Incomplete contracts and renegotiation." Econometrica 56
       (4): 755-785.

Hart, Oliver, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. 1997. "The proper scope of government:
       theory and an application to prisons." Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (4): 1127-
       1161.

Hornbeck, Richard and Martin Rotemberg. 2019. "Railroads, Reallocation, and the Rise of
      American Manufacturing." NBER working paper 26594, Cambridge, MA.

Jaworski, Taylor, and Carl T. Kitchens. 2019. "National Policy for Regional Development:
      Historical Evidence from Appalachian Highways." Review of Economics and Statistics
      101 (5), 777-790.

Kain, John. 1990. "Deception in Dallas: Strategic Misrepresentation in Rail Transit Promotion
       and Evaluation." Journal of the American Planning Association 56 (2) : 184-196.

Keynes, John Maynard. 1936. The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money. New
      York: Harcourt Brace.

Kline, Patrick, and Enrico Moretti. 2014. "Local Economic Development, Agglomeration
       Economies, and the Big Push: 100 Years of Evidence from the Tennessee Valley
       Authority." Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (1), 275-331.

Laffont, Jean-Jacques and Jean Tirole. 1993. A Theory of Incentives in Procurement and
       Regulation. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Meyer, John, John Kain, and Martin Wohl. 1965. The Urban Transportation Problem.
       Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Pigou, Arthur C. 1920. The Economics of Welfare. London: MacMillan.

Singh, Ram. 2018. "Does Choice of Procurement Contract Matter for Cost and Quality of
       infrastructure?" International Growth Center working paper S-89209-INC2.

Small, Kenneth A., Clifford Winston, and Carol A. Evans. 1991. Road Work: A New Highway
       Pricing and Investment Policy. Washington: Brookings Institution.

Tiebout, Charles M. 1956. "A pure theory of local expenditures." Journal of Political
       Economy 64 (5): 416-424.


                                               42
Troesken, Walter. 2004. Water Race and Disease. Cambridge: MIT Press.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2020. Labor Force Statistics from the Current Population
       Survey: Supplemental Data Measuring the Effects of the Coronavirus (COVID-19)
       Pandemic on the Labor Market. https://www.bls.gov/cps/effects-of-the-coronavirus-
       covid-19-pandemic.htm#data (accessed November 26, 2020)

U.S. Congressional Budget Office. 2018. Public Spending on Transportation and Water
       Infrastructure, 1956 to 2017. Washington: CBO.
       https://www.cbo.gov/system/files/2018-10/54539-Infrastructure.pdf

Vickrey, William. 1952. The Revision of the Rapid Transit Fare Structure of the City of New
       York. Technical Monograph Number 3, Finance Project, New York City Mayor's
       Committee for Management Survey.

Winston, Clifford. 2010. Last Exit: Privatization and Deregulation of the US Transportation
      System. Washington, DC: Brookings.

Winston, Clifford. 2013. "On the Performance of the U.S. Transportation System: Caution
      Ahead." Journal of Economic Literature 51 (3), 773-824.

Winston, Clifford. 2020. Autonomous Vehicles: The Road to Economic Growth? Washington,
      DC: Brookings.

World Economic Forum. 2019. Global Competitiveness Report. Geneva: World Economic
      Forum.

Worm, J. M., and A. Van Harten. 1996. "Model based decision support for planning of road
      maintenance." Reliability Engineering & System Safety 51 (3): 305-316.




                                              43
