                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        SELECTION AND CAUSATION IN THE
                   PARENTAL EDUCATION GRADIENT IN HEALTH:
                   LESSONS FROM A LARGE SAMPLE OF ADOPTEES

                                     Evelina Björkegren
                                      Mikael Lindahl
                                       Mårten Palme
                                     Emilia Simeonova

                                     Working Paper 28214
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28214


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2020




Evelina Björkegren gratefully acknowledges financial support from Handelsbanken's Research
Foundations; Mikael Lindahl was a Torsten Söderberg Professor at Handelshögskolan, Göteborgs
Universitet, during the work on this article, and acknowledges support from the Torsten and
Ragnar Söderberg Foundations, and Jan Wallanders and Tom Hedelius Stiftelse, and Tore
Browaldh Stiftelse; Mårten Palme gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Swedish
Council of Social Research; and Emilia Simeonova from the Swedish Research Council and the
National Science Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Evelina Björkegren, Mikael Lindahl, Mårten Palme, and Emilia Simeonova. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Selection and Causation in the Parental Education Gradient in Health:
Lessons from a Large Sample of Adoptees
Evelina Björkegren, Mikael Lindahl, Mårten Palme, and Emilia Simeonova
NBER Working Paper No. 28214
December 2020
JEL No. I1,I12,I14,I26

                                         ABSTRACT

We use data from a large sample of adoptees born in Sweden to study to what extent the well-
established association between parental educational attainments and adult health of the child
generation can be attributed to pre- or post-birth factors, respectively. We find a significant
association between the educational attainment of the adopting parents and child health outcomes
as adults. These results suggest that growing up in a better-educated household has long-term
effects on health outcomes. Our analysis of the mechanisms behind the results suggests that
formation of human capital, and in particular cognitive and non-cognitive skills, may be
important.

Evelina Björkegren                             Mårten Palme
Department of Economics                        Department of Economics
Stockholm University                           Stockholm University
SE-106 91 Stockholm                            SE-106 91 Stockholm
Sweden                                         SWEDEN
evelina.bjorkegren@ne.su.se                    and CESifo, IFS and IZA
                                               Marten.Palme@ne.su.se
Mikael Lindahl
University of Gothenburg                       Emilia Simeonova
Department of Economics                        JHU Carey School of Business
Box 640                                        100 International Drive
SE 405 30 Gothenburg                           Baltimore, MD 21202
Sweden                                         and NBER
and CESifo, IFAU, IZA and UCLS                 emilia.simeonova@gmail.com
Mikael.Lindahl@economics.gu.se
    1. Introduction

Children from families with low socioeconomic status (SES) have on average worse health
outcomes than children from families with high SES. This relation has been documented in a
large number of studies from different countries (see e.g. Currie, 2009, for an overview). 1 It has
also been shown to hold when the health status of the children is measured late in their life and
for mortality (Palme and Sandgren, 2008). It is conceivable that this health gradient in parental
education to some degree is due to causation in the sense that it is the result of household and
environmental factors associated with parental SES. However, it is not possible, based on
observed associations, to rule out that the gradient is due to selection in the sense that genetic
differences between SES groups may be transmitted between generations. To be able to say
something about how much of the overall association is due to the causation, one needs to have
access to data that shut down the genetic link between the parents and their children.

    In this paper, we first establish a positive relationship between adult health and parental
education in the population. Households with parents who are university educated have, on
average, children with almost 6 percentile ranks better health as adults, compared to households
with parents who only have primary education. These results are based more than 3 million
individuals in the child generation. We then investigate to what extent the parental education
gradient in health status is associated with pre-birth factors, primarily genetic differences, or
post-birth ones, primarily environmental differences. We use a large sample of about 11,000
Swedish-born adoptees for whom we, among other things, observe educational attainments of
both biological and adopting parents. If we restrict ourselves to only require identification of
the biological mother, the sample size doubles. We use these samples to decompose the
relationship between long-term health status and mortality and parent's educational attainment
into one part due to pre-birth factors and one part due to post-birth factors.

    Our results suggest that both pre- and post-birth factors matter for the relation between
parental educational attainment and health outcomes for the child generation. The results from
two health indices based on hospitalization data show strongly significant associations and a
fairly equal split between these two factors. The results for mortality only partially confirm
these results, as we find a significant association with the adoptive parents, but not with the
biological parents. Comparing these estimates to those of the relationship in the population


1
 See Mörk, Sjögren and Svaleryd (2014) for descriptive evidence of a social gradient between child health and
SES for Sweden.

                                                      2
suggests that our estimates obtained on adoptees are externally valid. We perform a number of
sensitivity analyses, which confirm that these results are robust to issues of non-random
assignment of children to adopted families and to possible post-adoption contacts between the
adopted child and the biological parents.

    Having shown that environmental factors associated with parents' educational attainments
have lasting impact on health in the child generation, conditional on genetic and pre-natal
factors, we continue by evaluating different hypotheses for mechanisms behind such a nurturing
transmission. In the epidemiological literature, possible mechanisms behind health differences
are often divided into two main groups: those referred to the life course hypothesis and those
referred to the pathway, or latency, hypothesis, respectively (see e.g. Marmot et al., 2001, or
Case, Fertig and Paxson, 2005). The life course hypothesis states that environmental factors
during the individuals' entire life course, including those in the very early childhood, may have
separate and independent effects on health outcomes much later in life (see e.g. Almond and
Currie, 2011, on long-term effects of early environmental exposure). The pathway hypothesis
suggests that the parental education gradient is formed through different mediating factors, such
as formation of skills or health-related life habits.

    Our data are well suited for testing these hypotheses, since they allow us to condition on
the initial health endowment of the child (through outcomes of the biological parents) and
because we are able to follow the individuals over time, which includes observing many
potentially important mediating factors measured in young adulthood. We investigate three
different potential pathways for the parental education gradient in health. First, we look into the
possibility that the effect is mediated through the children's own educational attainments.
Previous studies (see e.g. Björklund, Lindahl and Plug, 2006) have shown that the educational
attainments of the adopting parents are positively associated of those of their children. To the
extent that there is a causal effect of education on health, which is still debated in the literature
(see e.g., Galama, Lleras-Muney and von Kippersluis, 2018), the association may be attributed
to the pathway of the educational attainments of the children. Second, we investigate the
pathway through formation of cognitive and non-cognitive skills. Previous studies have shown
a strong association between skills and health (Conti, Heckman and Urzua, 2010).

    The third mediator that we analyze is formation of health-related life habits. For instance,
we might think that parents with higher education transmit better dietary habits and other health-
related behavior, such as lower alcohol consumption and less smoking (see e.g. Cutler and


                                                  3
Lleras-Muney, 2006, for a discussion). These habits may have direct long-lasting effect for the
child, or, perhaps more likely, may form habits of the child that may be reflected in health
outcomes later in life. To test for this, we use health outcomes ­ BMI and physical fitness ­ for
males obtained at the time of military enlistment.

    We use an econometric method for analyzing mediating factors suggested by Heckman,
Pinto and Savelyev (2013), and applied to data on adoptees by Fagereng, Mogstad and Rønning
(2020), to study to what extent the association between the health outcomes of the adopted
children and the educational attainments of their parents is mediated by the three factors
described above, and to what extent it is attributed to direct exposure. The results from this
exercise unambiguously suggest that the association between adopting parents' education for
child long-term health is entirely driven by the mediators, supporting the pathway model, and
thus primarily due to investments in children's human capital and, in particular, formation of
cognitive and non-cognitive skills. Our results suggest that more than 62 percent of the
association can be attributed to the formation of cognitive and non-cognitive skills, around 26
percent to the educational attainment of the child, and only 12 percent to the formation of health-
related behavior during early, formative years in life.

    Three previous papers using data on adoptees are closely related to our study. Sacerdote
(2007) study 1,650 Korean American adoptees placed by the Holt International Children's
Services during 1964-1985. Showing evidence of random assignment to being placed in a
highly educated and small family, relative to a large family with low education, the beneficial
effects of being placed in the former family type on health-related outcomes is mixed, with
positive effects for health-related behaviors such as leading to less smoking and drinking, but
with no statistically significant effect on BMI (and height). Using data on foreign-born children
adopted to Swedish parents, Lundborg, Nordin and Rooth (2018) show that there is a
relationship between parental (especially maternal) education and youth health outcomes for
sons. Osler et al. (2006) study the relationship between parental social class and child mortality
up until age 77 using data on Danish adoptees. They show that adoptees with biological fathers
from higher social class have lower mortality, but they do not find any long-term effect of
adopting fathers' social class.

    This paper makes several contributions vis-à-vis the previous literature. First, we are able
to look at comprehensive measures of lifetime health based on register data on hospitalizations
during almost 30 years in addition to the data on mortality. The previous studies, with the


                                                4
exception of Osler et al. (2006) which looks at mortality only, use health measures obtained
quite early in life. Second, again with the exception of Osler et al., (2006), we are able to
observe education for the biological parents of the adopted children, which can be used in order
to control for pre-birth factors affecting health heterogeneity. Finally, our data obtained at
different points in the life cycle of the adoptees enables us to study the mechanisms behind the
results. In particular, we are able to distinguish between the life course and the pathway
hypotheses for the formation of health using mediation analysis.

     Our study also relates to the previous literature on the causal effects of parental education
and child health. First, there is a small group of studies which have utilized exogenous changes
in parental education to estimate causal effects on infant and child health, reaching different
conclusions (Currie and Moretti, 2003; McCrary and Royer, 2011; Lindeboom, Llena-Nozal,
and van der Klaauw, 2009; Lundborg, Nilsson and Rooth, 2014). 2 These studies estimate causal
effects using arguably exogenous increases in parental education, whereas we estimate the
transmission channels due to parental education and its correlates, hence capturing broader
channels. The benefit from this approach is that we are able to decompose the importance of
parental education into broader factors, separated into pre- and post-birth channels. Another
contribution is that we apply this approach to our constructed measures of life time health. This
allows us to study the long-term effects of the family educational environment.

     Finally, our findings relate to the literature on intergenerational mobility in general (see e.g.
Solon, 1999 and Black and Devereux, 2011, for overviews) and, in particular, the quite small
literature on intergenerational persistence in health outcomes (see e.g. Andersen, 2019,
Björkegren et al., 2019; Halliday et al., 2018; Petersen, Kragh Andersen and Sørensen, 2005;
and Sørensen et al., 1988). In the literature on intergenerational mobility there is an increasing
number of studies using adoptees to distinguish between pre- and post-birth factors. Black et
al. (2019) presents results for a number of outcomes, and find pre- and post-birth factors ranging
from post-birth factors being much more important (e.g., for wealth) to pre-birth and post-birth
factors both being important. Interestingly, for educational transmission, both pre- and post-
birth factors are important and sizable (Björklund, Lindahl and Plug, 2006; Black et al., 2019)



2
 There is also a literature that estimates the causal effect of other parental resource variables on the health of the
next generation. For instance, Cesarini et al. (2016) find no impact on health of the next generation from
exogenous positive wealth shocks for the parents through winning large sums on lotteries in Sweden. However,
Akee et al. (2013) and Akee et al. (2018) find positive effects of exogenously increasing parental income on
child BMI and child behavioral and emotional health in the US.

                                                          5
whereas for health transmission, pre-birth factors are clearly more important (see Björkegren et
al., 2019).

    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the conceptual framework
for our econometric models. Section 3 presents the data and descriptive statistics. The main
results as well as sensitivity analyses are laid out in Section 4. In Section 5 we provide evidence
on the mechanisms behind the findings. Section 6 concludes the paper. Finally, the paper
contains an Appendix A showing results from various sensitivity analyses.




         2. Empirical Specifications

         2.1 Main analysis

We start by estimating the following intergenerational model on the population of non-adopted
children:

                                    
                 = 0 + 1               +  ,                                                     (1)

                                                                                  
where  represents adult health status for the biological child and                   the biological parents'
educational attainment. Subscript i indexes the family in which the child is born and raised, and
superscripts bc and bp denote the biological child and parent, respectively;  is the child-
                                                                   
specific error term assumed to be uncorrelated with  . The coefficient 1 measures the
strength of the association between adult health of the child and the educational attainment of
the parents and is a combined effect of many different factors such as genetics, prenatal
environment and environment during childhood and adolescence, including the causal effect of
parent's education.

    Using data on the characteristics of adoptees and their biological and adoptive parents, we
are able to estimate the following model on the population of adoptees: 3

                                               
                 = 0 + 1               + 2         +  ,                                         (2)




3
 We follow the strategy to separate pre- and post-birth effects from Björklund, Lindahl and Plug (2006). See
also Björkegren et al. (2019) for a similar description as we provide in this paper.

                                                       6
    where Y once again measures human capital inputs that are transmitted from the biological
    parent bp, or the adoptive parent ap, respectively, to the adoptive child i;  is a child-specific
                                                                    
    error term assumed to be uncorrelated with                and  .

       Using data on adopted children, and conditional on the following key assumptions of the
adoption design, we are able to estimate the association between adult health status and the
observable pre- and post-birth characteristics separately from equation (2): 1) Adoptees are
conditionally randomly assigned to adoptive families; 2) The adoption should have taken place
close to birth so that it is possible to accurately separate pre- and post-birth effects; 4 3) The
biological parents have no contact with the adopted child post adoption. 5

       Note that in general, 2 does not only capture the importance of the adoptive parental
                                 
educational attainment,  , but in addition everything else in the adoption family that is
                      
correlated with  . 6 We therefore interpret the estimates as a measure of the importance of
transmission channels stemming from the pre- or post-birth influences, respectively.

       Assuming that adoptees and non-adoptees are drawn from the same distribution, we are
also able to decompose an estimate of 1 into separate entities of pre- and post-birth factors,
captured by estimates of 1 and 2 , which are then interpretable for the population of children.
The likelihood of generalizability of the adoption estimates increases if the intergenerational
parameter is linear and if the sum of the estimates of 1 and 2 , using the sample of adoptees,
equals an estimate of 1 , obtained in the population of children. We also perform a test of the
external validity of the adoption coefficients by estimating these parameters on the sample of
families where at least one child has been adopted out from the family and at least one child
was not adopted but is instead reared by the biological mother. We discuss these results in
Section 4.2.4.




4
  If adoption is not taking place very shortly after birth, the postnatal pre-adoption environment (e.g., the quality
of the nursery homes) needs to be uncorrelated with the genetic background and the post adoption environment
(or has no influence on the health of the adopted child). Alternatively, the estimates are still unbiased estimates
of the pre- and post-adoption characteristics.
5
  We provide a number of tests of these assumptions in Section 4.2.
6
  For a discussion about the necessary conditions under which 2 can be interpreted as the causal effect of
parents' characteristic on child characteristic, see Holmlund, Lindahl and Plug (2011).

                                                          7
         2.2 Mediation analysis

We look at three different mediating factors as a way of studying possible mechanisms behind
the results: i) education; ii) cognitive and non-cognitive skills and; iii) health behaviors, all
representing traits of the child that were formed before the adult health of the child is measured.
We use mediation analysis techniques for analyzing data on adoptees developed by Fagereng,
Mogstad and Rønning (2020) building on work by Heckman, Pinto and Savelyev (2013) and
Heckman and Pinto (2015), that provide an extension of mediation analysis to the potential
outcomes framework for treatment effect estimation. 7

    The mediation analysis is separated into two parts. The first one estimates a version of
equation (2) where we model the parameter 2 to be a linear function of variables possibly
                                           
mediating the relationship between             and  . This leads to the following model:

                                                                                 
     = 0 + 1               + 2  + 3                        + 4  + 5                 +  ,        (3)

where and  represent the vector of observable mediating factors, where the true mediating
factors ( ) can be decomposed into measured ( ) and unmeasured ( ) mediating factors
                                                                                                            
such as  =  +  ; 8  represent observable individual characteristics other than 
                             9F




and  affecting adult health outcomes, such as gender and birth cohort dummies, as well as,
                                                                              
importantly, the educational attainment of the biological parents  .

    In order to identify the importance of the mediating factors  , we need two additional
assumptions (compared to the analysis building on equation (2)). 9 First, we need  to be
uncorrelated with  . Second, we need  to be uncorrelated with  . These are strong
assumptions, since we do not have access to any quasi-experimental variation in  . However,
the assumptions only need to hold conditionally on observable characteristics, including the
                                                                                        
educational attainment of the biological parents of the adopted children ( ). This compares




7
  For earlier important contributions in the econometrics of mediation analysis see Baron and Kenny (1986) and
MacKinnon, Fairchild and Fritz (2007), which review key works and approaches.
8
  Equation (2), with  represent gender and birth cohort dummies as well as the educational attainment of the
                                                 /                                /
biological parents  , becomes:  = 0 + 1  + 2  +  . Let 0 + 1  = 0 + 2 ( +  ) +
4  +  and 2 = 1 + 3 ( +  ) + 5  +  we get Equation (4), where  =  + 2  +  +
                
3   +   .
9
  We also need  and  to be uncorrelated with  , something which we assume is true by construction.


                                                       8
favorably to many mediation analysis settings, which are unable to condition on any genetic
background of the individuals.

        If the unobserved mediating factors  are positively correlated with  , conditional on
 , we will understate the importance of the mediating factors. Hence, if we find these mediating
factors to be important, supporting some version of the pathway model, this conclusion would
likely be even stronger if these mediating factors are imperfect proxies of the true mediating
factors. 10

        Finally, we estimate the relationship between each of the mediating factors  and the
educational attainment of the adoptive parents, conditioning on  :

                                    
                  = 0 + 1              + 2  + 
                                               .                                                (4)

Combining equations (3) and (4) enables us to decompose the relationship between  and
     
        into a direct and indirect effect, respectively. The latter is the part that goes through the
vector of mediating factors ( ). For the case with only one mediator, and assuming 3 =
                                                                
5 = 0, we can plug (4) into (3) to get the effect of                on  , conditional on  , which is
exactly 2 in equation (2). This parameter 2 is then equal to 1 + 2 1 , where the former is
the direct effect and the latter is the indirect effect. These components can be consistently
estimated from running OLS on equations (3) and (4) conditional on the assumptions stated
above.

        Below, we separately investigate three possible mediators: the child's educational
attainment, cognitive or non-cognitive skill and health-related behaviors. We also show results
from a model where we let  represent the full set of mediating variables.




           3. Adoptions in Sweden, Data and Descriptive Statistics


           3.1 Adoption in Sweden 1932-1967 11



10
   However, one could of course also argue that the mediating factors are multidimensional in a way that makes
our observed mediators negatively correlated with the unobserved mediators. This will overstate the importance
of the mediating factors.
11
   A more exhaustive description of adoptions in Sweden can be found in the Online Appendix of Björkegren et
al. (2019) posted on the home page of the Journal of Human Resources.

                                                       9
Several previous works describe the era of adoptions in Sweden under study in this paper.
Bohman (1970) and Nordlöf (2001), focusing on the development in the Stockholm area, use
primary sources. In addition, several empirical studies using data on adoptees, such as
Björklund et al. (2004), Oskarsson et al. (2015) and Björkegren et al. (2019) give
comprehensive overviews of adoptions in Sweden.

    The first law regulating adoptions in Sweden was enacted in 1917. Although the law has
been changed on several occasions since then, some main features of the regulation remain in
place. The adoption should be finalized in a court decision and all administrative work,
including the contact with the biological parents, should be done by the child welfare offices
(Barnavårdsnämnderna). The three principles ­ that the adoption should be "in the best interest
of the child", that no payments are allowed, and that the adopted child should have the same
rights regarding inheritance as a biological child ­ are still applied.

    Contrary to the situation today, domestic rather than international adoptions dominated.
Bohman (1970) and Nordlöf (2001) give a consistent description of the mothers who gave up
their children for adoption. They were on average substantially younger than the mothers who
kept their children; they were, except for some exceptions, unmarried or divorced; and they had
on average lower SES, although the difference to the mothers who kept their children was quite
small. According to Nordlöf (2001) the largest occupational category of these mothers was
maids (26 %), followed by office workers (18 %), and women employed at restaurants (15 %).

    Bohman (1970) describes the biological fathers to the adopted children as on average
slightly less educated, more likely to have been registered for alcohol abuse and to have been
convicted compare to the fathers who did not leave their children for adoption. The predominant
reason for adoption was lack of economic resources and Nordlöf (2001) attributes the sharp
decline in domestic adoptions in the end of 1960s to changes in social policy, the reduced social
stigma of having children out of wedlock, increased availability of contraceptives as well as
legalization of abortion.

    The final decision of adoption was taken by the mother after she had recovered from
delivery. The child was first placed in a nursery home and thereafter placed in a prospective
adoptive family. The general recommendation was that the child should be placed in the final
adoptive family before six months after birth. The children underwent medical examination
before they were adopted. Bohman (1970) finds no significant average differences between
adopted children and children raised by their biological parents at age 10-11.

                                                10
     There were a few legal requirements on the adopting parents. The most important ones were
that the parents should be aged as they could have been the biological parents of the child and
that the adopting father should have steady employment enabling him to support the family.
Until 1944 families with own biological children were not allowed to adopt. However, as
documented by Nordlöf (2001), it was very rare that these families were admitted to adopt even
after 1944, since it was always a shortage of children available for adoption. This convention
effectively ruled out adoptions within the immediate family of the biological mothers, such as
their mothers or siblings. Nordlöf (2001) estimated that such adoptions constituted less than 1
percent of the cases included in her study.

     The social workers who administrated the adoptions were instructed to find a suitable
homes for the children (Allmänna barnhuset, 1955). Characteristics such as height and eye color
were mentioned in the instructions. However, as pointed out by Björklund et al. (2004), the
information available on the biological parents were usually very scarce. This was also
acknowledged in the instruction, which is reflected in the following quote: "The social worker's
ambition to find an adoptive home that fits a specific child particularly well is often unrealistic.
The important task is to find good adoptive parents who can be expected to give children in
general good conditions." 12 From the instructions to the social workers there are no indications
that the health status of the child was considered in any particular way in the placement.



         3.2 Sample Definition

We use data from different national registers in Sweden and include all males and females born
in Sweden between 1932 and 1967. 13 We use the Multigenerational Register (see Statistics
Sweden, 2012) to identify whether a person was adopted as a child. This register contains
personal identifier of the biological mother and father (if known to the authorities) as well as
the adopting mother and father.

     Table 1 shows the number of observations for the two populations used in this study ­
adoptees and, as a comparison, non-adoptees ­ at different stages of the sample selection
process. In total, there are 73,384 adoptees who we can identify in our data. About 36,000 of
them were adopted by only one parent, in most cases the husband of the child's biological

12
  Originally from Allmänna barnhuset (1969) and obtained by us from Björklund et al. (2004).
13
 The lower cohort restriction is motivated by data availability and the upper one by the fact that domestic
adoptions in Sweden decreased rapidly in the late 1960s.

                                                       11
mother. We excluded these individuals from the analysis. We construct two samples from the
remaining population. First, a larger sample, including 21,386 individuals for whom we have
information on the biological mother as well as the adopting mother and father. Second, a
smaller sample consisting of 10,880 individuals, for whom we also have information on the
biological father.

Table 1. Sample sizes at different stages of the sample selection process.
 Born in Sweden 1932-67                                       Non-adoptees                  Adoptees
 Non-adopted                                                   3,711,734
 Adopted by at least one parent                                                              73,384
 Adopted by both parents                                                                     37,502
 Biological mother is identified                                3,541,345                    24,542
 Not adopted by own parents                                                                  24,498
 Adopting parents' age is correct *                                                          22,934
 Not died or emigrated first year                               3,529,518                    22,920
 Parents' education is known                                    3,227,149                    21,386
 Biological father is identified                                3,227,149                    10,880
*Adopting mother age 25-47 and adopting father age 25-66 at birth of adopted child.

           3.3 Variable construction

           3.3.1 Hospitalization in the Child generation

Data for our measures of hospitalization are obtained from the national In-patient Register (see
Socialstyrelsen, 2009b). The national In-patient Register includes dates for all hospital stays at
Swedish hospitals. This register has a national coverage starting in 1987, and we have access
to data for the entire period until 2014. Since the first birth cohort included in our data was born
in 1932, we observe all its hospital stays from age 55 and until age 82. The In-patient Register
includes ICD codes for the maximum of eight different medical causes of each hospital stay.

    We use two measures of health from the hospitalization data. 14 The first, labeled
"Hospitalization-based health", is simply the residuals from a linear probability model
regression of an indicator variable for whether or not the individual has been in hospital care
for each year separately during the observation window on year and year of birth indicators. If
the person is dead, we treat him or her as missing. In a second step, we average the residuals
for each individual to obtain the measure. This procedure accounts for differences in the




14
   These are the same measures as we used in Björkegren et al. (2019) where we analyzed the intergenerational
transmission of health and mortality.


                                                      12
probability of hospitalization over the life cycle and we may therefore interpret the resulting
variable as a measure of lifetime hospitalization.

     The second measure, labeled "Health index", is constructed in three steps. 15 First, for every
year, we use a Probit model to regress an indicator variable, equal to one if the individual has
died within five years and zero otherwise, on the information from the in-patient register for
that year (days, visits, and diagnoses) and indicators of year of birth and gender. 16 In a second
step, we create a health index ranging between 0 and 1 by predicting the risk of dying within
five years. An individual is assigned the value of 1 in all years after death occurred, individuals
not making any hospital visits are assigned the value of 0. Then, in a third step, we average over
all years. Based on this index, we obtain a percentile rank for each birth cohort and gender
separately. The difference of this measure compared to "Hospitalization-based health" is that it
weights the different diagnoses by "severity" based on how likely the person is to die within
five years.

            3.3.2 Mortality in the Child Generation

Information on date of death is obtained from the national Cause of Death Register (see
Socialstyrelsen, 2009a). The Cause of Death Register records dates and International
Classification of Diseases, revision 10, (ICD 10) codes for the underlying cause of death for all
deaths in Sweden from 1952 and onwards. Our observation period stops in 2016, this implies
that for the child generation that we can observe the oldest person in our sample until age 84
and the youngest until age 49.

            3.3.3 Educational Attainments in the Parental Generation

The number of years of schooling in the parental generation is the key independent variable in
our empirical analysis. Our main data source for this variable is the 1970 Census. If the
information is missing in that Census year, we use data from the 1990 and 2004 waves of the
Swedish Education register. As a third option for observations that are still missing, we use the
1960 Census. 17 Overall, we are able to identify educational attainment for 97 percent of the

15
   The first two follow Cesarini et al. (2016).
16
   We use the first two digits in the ICD10 diagnosis codes (one letter and one number), which constitute about
200 different categories. We do this for the first two diagnoses for each hospital stay. In addition, we include
linear variables for the number of hospital stays and the total number of days in hospital care. We control for
gender and stratify on birth cohort.
17
   The education measure from 1970 is available for the population of individuals given that the individual was
born in 1911 or later and was alive and lived in Sweden in 1970. It is used as the main choice because it


                                                       13
sample. Education in Swedish registries is recorded at seven different levels, which we translate
into years of schooling. 18

            3.3.4 Mediation variables: Measures of BMI, physical fitness, cognitive, non-
            cognitive skills and educational attainment for the child generation

We use data on educational attainment, health and cognitive and non-cognitive skills to test the
life-course and pathway hypotheses. Educational attainment is obtained from the Swedish
educational registers and we use the highest level of education observed for each individual.19
Measures of health, cognitive and non-cognitive skills are obtained for young men at age 18 at
the military enlistment (army draft). The draft was compulsory in Sweden for the child cohorts
included in our sample. We observe data from the army draft registry for men in the birth
cohorts 1950-1967, and for these cohorts we observe information on 88% of all males in our
dataset. We use two measures of health, the first is BMI and the second is a military measure
of physical fitness used for placement in the military service.

     The enlistment also included a cognitive skills test, which consisted of four parts testing for
logical, spatial, verbal and technical abilities. We use the comprehensive measure of these
different parts. An assessment of non-cognitive skills is given after a 20-30 minutes interview
with a trained psychologist, with the aim of learning about the conscript's ability to cope with
military service and armed combat. The conscripts are rated from 1-5 on their willingness to
assume responsibility, independence, outgoing character, persistence, emotional stability, and
power of initiative. 20 These sub scores are then transformed into a general measure of non-


measures educational attainment for individuals when they are supposed to have finished their education.
Education from 1990-2004 will only be utilized for those parents that were not living in Sweden in 1970, so as
not to capture educational investments later in life (which was fairly common in the 1980s and 1990s).
Education in 1960, which is less detailed compared to the 1970 information, will only be used for those parents
that have died before 1970 and/or that were born before 1911. A problem with the 1960 Census is that the coding
of educational attainment is different from our other data sources. Therefore, we use data from individuals that
are present in both the 1960 and 1970 census, and are 35-45 years old in 1960, to predict years of schooling from
the 1960 census for those missing observations.
18
   Primary school (old system) or pre-comprehensive school compulsory level = 7 years; junior secondary
school (old system) or comprehensive school (new system) = 9 years; vocational school =11 years, secondary
school = 12 years; secondary school + 1 or 2 years = 14; college or university = 16 years; and PhD = 20 years.
19
   Educational levels are coding into years for children as we did for parents, see footnote 18. The child
generation went through a reformed educational system, compared to the parental generation, leading to longer
compulsory schooling. This is reflected in the years of schooling measure for the children.
20
   Other important traits in the army is the ability to cope with loss of personal freedom and socials skills, and in
particular the ability to function in a group and help create group cohesion. Difficulty accepting authority and
violent aggressive behavior are among the negative characteristics that psychologists look to identify. Obsession
with the army and military topics is considered a negative trait. See Lindqvist and Vestman (2011), for details
regarding data from the Swedish military enlistment, as well as for evidence that these measures are predictive of
adult wages for the individuals.

                                                         14
cognitive skills. Cognitive, non-cognitive skills and physical fitness are all rated on a stanine
scale 1-9, approximately following a normal distribution. We standardize these measures by
year of birth, to have zero mean and standard deviation one.




          3.4 Descriptive Statistics

Table 2 contains sample means and standard deviations (within parentheses) for the main
outcome and control variables in the sample of adoptees and non-adoptees. Adopting fathers
have almost one additional year of education as compared to the biological fathers of the
adopted children. The adopting parents are on average ten years older than the biological
parents of adoptees.

    Although the quality of our education measure is very good, we also acknowledge that for
the parental generations, there is limited variation in the lower half of the distribution. In
addition to the limited variation in the actual educational outcomes in these birth cohorts, for
those born before 1911 we are restricted to use data from the 1960's census, with less detailed
information on educational outcomes compared to later censuses. This is especially problematic
when we analyze mortality of the child, since the variation of this outcome primarily comes
from those children born in the first cohorts included in the sample. In our main analysis we
therefore use a measure of parental education calculated as the average of years of schooling
for mothers and fathers, hence maximizing the variation in the lower end of the distribution of
the parental education variable.




                                               15
Table 2. Summary statistics of main outcome and control variables
                                       Non-adoptees                                  Adoptees
                            Mean        Std. Dev           N            Mean         Std. Dev       N
 Children, all
  Female                    0.49          (0.50)      3,227,149        0.48            (0.50)     10,880
  Year of birth           1951.78         (9.58)      3,227,149      1956.80           (6.70)     10,880
  Share of dead             0.12          (0.32)      3,227,149        0.10            (0.30)     10,880
  Hospitalization          50.03         (28.20)      3,199,618       44.64           (29.02)     10,845
  Health index             50.03         (28.15)      3,227,149       45.08           (28.58)     10,880
  Education                11.47          (2.69)      3,204,124       11.52            (2.18)     10,812
 Children, men
  Non-cognitive             0.00          (1.00)       794,795        -0.09           (1.03)      4,013
  Cognitive                 0.00          (1.00)       803,957        -0.18           (0.98)      4,061
  Physical fitness          0.00          (1.00)       802,792        -0.09           (0.98)      4,050
  BMI                      21.47          (2.82)       794,722        21.60           (3.02)      4,018
 Biological mother
  Year of birth           1923.58        (11.92)      3,227,149      1932.74          (8.89)      10,880
  Education                 8.18          (2.16)      3,227,149        8.18           (1.92)      10,880
 Biological father
  Year of birth           1920.06        (12.49)      3,227,149      1929.14          (9.87)      10,880
  Education                 8.69          (2.77)      3,227,149        8.43           (2.27)      10,880
 Biological parents
  Education                 8.44          (2.17)      3,227,149        8.31           (1.64)      10,880
 Adopting mother
  Year of birth                                                      1922.61          (8.85)      10,880
  Education                                                            8.62           (2.51)      10,880
 Adopting father
  Year of birth                                                      1919.87          (9.23)      10,880
  Education                                                            9.38           (3.12)      10,880
 Adopting parents
 Education                                                             9.00           (2.49)      10,880
Note: Means and standard deviations of main control and outcome variables.




3.5 The Association between Biological and Adopting Parent Characteristics
A possible concern with the interpretation of the coefficient estimates is that of selective
placement of adoptees. Table 3 illustrates the correlation in years of education between adopting
and biological parents of adoptees.

Table 3. Correlation between biological and adoptive parents' education
                                                               Mothers Fathers

                            Educational attainment             0.1572    0.1708

               Note: Education is standardized by birth cohort. p-values are below 0.1 percent.


The correlation for years of schooling is quite similar to that reported by Björklund, Lindahl
and Plug (2006) for children in cohorts born 1962-1966. There are at least two reasons why we
would observe a positive correlation for characteristics of biological and adoptive parents. First,


                                                      16
this could happen if some adoptions are made by relatives of one of the biological parents.
Second, there could be matching on characteristics known to the adoption agency, either
because of the demand of parents, or because of a view that an adopted child would be better
off in an adoptive family with similar characteristics as the biological parents.

    As discussed in Section 4.2, the empirical importance of the first reason  adoptions by
relatives  is likely to be very limited since the rule of not allowing people with own biological
children to adopt to a large extent precluded parents and siblings of the biological parents from
doing that. Nordlöf (2001) estimated these adoptions to be around 1 percent of the total number
of adoptions in the Stockholm area. Brandén, Lindahl and Öckert (2018) confirm this
conclusion, although their estimate of the share of adoptions by close relatives is slightly higher
at 5.4 percent, applying to the whole country. They are also able to eliminate those adopted by
close relatives from their sample and find that the correlation in years of schooling between
(unrelated) adoptive and biological parents of adoptees remains virtually unchanged.

    The second reason, matching, is likely to be a more important mechanism. If this matching
is made on characteristics observable in the data (such as educational attainment or health
characteristics), we are able to control for this in the estimations. In a sensitivity analysis, we
will investigate this further by including more detailed health and education data of the
biological (adoptive) parents and see what happens to the estimate for the characteristics of
adoptive (biological) parents (a similar test was made in Björklund et al. 2006). If we do not
see any change, which is what happens (see Section 4.2), we can rule out matching on
observable characteristics as affecting our conclusions.

    The remaining reason would then be matching on characteristics that are unobservable in
the data. Björklund el al. (2006) investigate this issue by deriving the magnitude of the bias
(modeled as a combination of selective placement and measurement error), finding evidence
that the bias accounts for at most 13 percent of the estimated impact of the adoptive and
biological parents' characteristics on adoptees' educational attainment. We return to and further
examine this issue in Section 4.2.

    A second potential threat to the random assignment assumption is that adoptees may be
non-randomly assigned to adoptive families based on health endowments at birth. This would
be particularly troubling if more educated adoptive parents are able to select healthier children.
While we cannot directly test for this because we lack data on health at birth, based on the


                                                17
previous literature, we believe this is unlikely to happen. 21 Nevertheless, in Section 4.2, we
perform sensitivity analysis as to whether selective placement is likely to affect our results,
concluding that this is unlikely to be the case.




          4. Results


            4.1 Health Measures Based on Hospitalization Data

Figure 1 shows the relation between parental education, measured as the average years of
schooling of the parents, and adult health status, measured by our two hospitalization indices,
both in percentile ranks, where higher ranks indicate better health. We plot the average rank
against the parental education categories, which are based on the average years of schooling for
the parents.

     As expected, there is a visible pattern of increasing health by parental education in the
samples of non-adoptees (the two top panels a and b). We see that households with parents who
are at the top of the education distribution have, on average, children with 10-15 percentile
ranks better health, compared to households with parents who are at the bottom of the education
distribution. The associations are well approximated by a linear relationship. 22

     The lower four panels, c through f, plot the relation between parental education and adult
health status for adoptees, where the latter is either related to biological parents (panels c and
d) or adoptive parents (panels e and f). The positive relationship applies to both biological and
adopting parents in the adoptee sample. Again, the associations are fairly well approximated by
a linear relationship, except at the top of the educational distribution. 23


21
   As argued in Björkegren et al. (2019): First, the institutional set up at the time was such that adoptive families
were approached as soon as a candidate for adoption became available and there was an excess of candidate
adoptive parents relative to available children. Second, unhealthy infants that were given away by their
biological mothers were not offered for adoption. Finally, Holmlund, Lindahl and Plug (2008) show that there is
no significant correlation between adoptive parents' education, the gender of the adoptee and the biological
mother's age at birth ­ the only two pre-existing characteristics that are available in the data and could
potentially proxy for infant health at birth
22
   Mörk, Sjögren and Svaleryd (2014) provide similar evidence for child health, finding that children in families
with the lowest SES have 10-15 percentile higher risk of being hospitalized compared to children in families
with the highest SES in Sweden.
23
   There is a difference in the share with high education among biological and adopting parents. Among the
adopted children's biological mothers, 4 % have more than 11 years of education and 2.4 % have 14 years or
more. Among adopting mothers 10 % have more than 11 years of education, and 7.9 % have 14 years or more.
Thus, the precision of the estimates for this highest educated group of mothers across the biological and adoptive
mothers' samples varies significantly.

                                                         18
     a) Hospitalization, non-adoptees                         b) Health index, non-adoptees




     c) Hospitalization, adoptees and                         d) Health index, adoptees and biological
        biological parents                                       parents




     e) Hospitalization, adoptees and                         f) Health index, adoptees and adopting
        adopting parents                                         parents

Note: The figures plot the relationship between rank child health indices and average parental education (in years)
for non-adoptees and adoptees. Because of small samples in some educational groups, we round off average
educational years to the closest integer. Categories containing less than 10 observations are grouped with the
closest category with at least 10 observations.

Figure 1. Mean percentile rank of adult health in the child generation and average parental
education


                                                        19
    Table 4 shows the results from our linear regression model for the association between
parental educational attainments and the ranks of hospitalization (the first two columns) and
health index (the last two columns) in the child generation. The results for non-adoptees, shown
in columns (1) and (3), reveal a highly significant association between health and the
educational attainments of the parents. One more year of schooling of both parents is associated
with almost one percentile rank better health of their children when they are adults or of old
age. This means that households with parents who are university educated have, on average,
children with almost 6 percentile ranks better health as adults, compared to households with
parents who only have primary education. In standard deviation units, this is equivalent to one
standard deviation higher parental education being associated with about 0.07 standard
deviation better health for the children as adults.

    A decomposition of the relative influence of the biological and adopting parents,
respectively, gives a close to 50/50 split between biological and adopting parents for the
hospitalization measure (column 1 and 2). The estimates for the health index (column 3 and 4)
are similar to the estimates for hospitalization and confirms that adopting and biological
parents' education are equally important for long-term health.

Table 4. Associations between health indices (in percentile rank) and parental education (in
years).
                                          (1)                (2)                     (3)             (4)
                                            Hospitalization                           Health index
                                     Non-adoptees         Adoptees             Non-adoptees       Adoptees
 Education, Bio parents                0.883***           0.507***               0.801***          0.420**
                                       (0.007)             (0.180)               (0.007)           (0.177)

 Education, Ad parents                                      0.488***                                  0.352***
                                                            (0.120)                                   (0.119)
 N                                      3,199,618           10,845               3,227,149            10,880
Note: Results from OLS regressions. Standard errors in parentheses; *** significant at 1%, ** at 5%, * at 10%.
Each column represents a separate regression and all regressions include indicators for gender and birth cohort of
children, and five-year intervals for parental cohorts. Column (1) and (3) is based on a sample of non-adopted
children, column (2) and (4) on adoptees for whom we have information on all parents.


Appendix Table A1 shows results for mothers and fathers, separately. It also shows results from
the larger sample of adoptees, where we also include adoptees with unknown biological fathers.




                                                       20
         4.2. Sensitivity Analyses

         4.2.1 Tests for selective placement of adoptees to families

To test whether adoptees are conditionally randomly assigned to adoptive families, we do three
sets of sensitivity analyses. First, we look at the robustness with respect to changes in the set of
confounding parental characteristics included in the model. In Section 3.4, we showed that there
is a positive correlation between biological and adopting parents' education. By always
including biological parents' education in our regressions, we mitigate the main concern that
the estimate for adopting parents are capturing the importance of biological parent's education.
We might, however, still worry that there are unobserved factors that are correlated and that
ignoring these could bias the estimates. 24

     In Appendix Table A4, we show the robustness of our main results for hospitalization when
we first only include information on adoptive parents, and then add relevant possible controls
for biological parents, first only education and cohort controls (which is the specification used
in column 4 of our main results Table 4) and then additional controls for the health (and
location) of the biological parents. The purpose is to study how sensitive the coefficient for
adoptive parents is due to omitting variables of the biological family, especially their health,
which we know is predictive of the adopted child's health (see Björkegren et al., 2019).
Although we do see that the adoptive parent's education coefficient is affected by inclusion to
the added parental health variables it remains statistically significant also with the additional
controls included in the specification. We then reverse the order and sequentially add
characteristics of the adoptive parents to investigate how sensitive the coefficient for biological
parents is for omitting variables of the adoptive family. Again, the results in Appendix Table
A4 are shown to be very robust.

     Second, we cannot directly observe whether relatives or friends of the biological parents
adopted some children, but in such cases, children are more likely to stay in the municipality
where they were born. Moreover, adopted children who move from their municipality of birth
are much less likely to interact with their biological parents post adoption. To address the
potential problem resulting from the risk that biological parents might have contact with the
child post-adoption or that there might be closer matching of parents locally, we restrict the

24
  Previous research using these data has shown that the resulting bias coming from matching of biological and
adopting parents' characteristics is likely to be small. See for example Black et al. (2019), Björkegren et al.
(2019) and Björklund, Lindahl and Plug (2004).


                                                       21
sample to children who were adopted to families living in another municipality. 25 Appendix
Table A5 shows that the main results remain very similar in this sample, confirming that the
potential bias likely to be small.

     Third, for the subsample of biological mothers who have given birth to more than one child,
and where at least two of the children has grown up in other families, we regress health on the
adopting mother's education, controlling for biological siblings fixed effects. 26 This means that
we control for selective placement due to unobservable characteristics stemming from the
biological mother. Results are shown in Appendix Table A6, and, although imprecisely
estimated, the estimates for the adoptive mother including fixed effects (in columns 2 and 4),
are very similar to the one only controlling for observable biological characteristics (in columns
1 and 3). Overall, we conclude that selective placement is unlikely to affect our main
conclusions.




           4.2.2 External validity and nature-nurture interactions

Adoptees in our sample are born in families that on average have lower SES than the population
in general. To investigate to what extent the results have external validity, we study a sample
of children to biological mothers who have given birth to at least two children - raised at least
one herself and given up at least one for adoption.

     The results in Table 5 show that there is a significantly stronger correlation between health
and parental educational attainment in this sample. This result suggests that there might be some
non-linearities in the relationship between parental education and health of the next generation.




25
   We make use the Census in 1960 where we have information on the municipality where both adopting and
biological mothers live.
26
   See Björklund, Lindahl and Plug (2006).

                                                    22
Table 5. Associations between health indices (in percentile rank) and parental education (in
years). External validity. Sample of children born to mothers who gave up at least one child
for adoption and kept at least one child.
                                            (1)                  (2)                (3)                (4)
                                              Hospitalization                         Health index
                                       Non-adoptees         Adoptees           Non-adoptees        Adoptees
 Education, Bio parents                  1.272***              0.413*            1.271***            0.373*
                                         (0.103)              (0.214)            (0.102)            (0.210)

 Education, Ad parents                                           0.475***                             0.320**
                                                                 (0.143)                              (0.141)
  N                                          28,516               8,160           28,817               8,184
Note: Results from OLS regressions. Standard errors in parentheses; *** significant at 1%, ** at 5%, * at 10%.
Each column represents a separate regression and all regressions include indicators for gender and birth cohort of
children, and five-year intervals for parental cohorts. The sample only include children with biological mothers
that gave up at least one child for adoption and kept at least one child.



So far, we have estimated separate effects of biological and adopting parents' education on
health in the child generation. It is however possible that there might be important interaction
effects between these two factors that we should consider to better understand how health
capital is formed. However, the results from a model that includes interactions effects between
the educational attainment of biological and adopting parents have produces too imprecise
estimates to draw any conclusions regarding existence of such interaction (see Appendix Table
A7).

         4.3 Mortality

Table 6 shows hazard ratio estimates for the association between mortality and parental
educational attainments. For the sake of comparison, column 1 shows the results for children
raised by their biological parents. The results in this sample suggest that one year additional
schooling in the sum of parental schooling is associated with a decrease in mortality in the child
generation by about 5 percent. The results shown in column 2 reveal that this association can
be fully attributed to post-birth influences. An extra year of education for the sum of the
adopting parents' schooling is associated with a 4 percent decrease in mortality, while there is
no significant association with the educational attainments of the biological parents.




                                                       23
Table 6. Associations between mortality and parental years of schooling (Hazard ratios).
                                                           (1)                               (2)
                                                      Non-adoptees                        Adoptees
 Education, Bio parents                                 0.948***                            1.032
                                                        (0.001)                            (0.021)

 Education, Ad parents                                                                      0.960***
                                                                                            (0.015)
 N                                                        3,227,149                         10,880
Note: Results from Cox proportional hazard models. Standard errors in parentheses; *** significant at 1%, ** at
5%, * at 10%. Each column represents a separate regression and all regressions include indicators for gender and
birth cohort of children, and five-year intervals for parental cohorts. Column (1) is based on a sample of non-
adopted children, and column (2) a sample of adoptees.

Appendix Table A8 shows results separately for mothers and fathers and also adds results from
the extended sample also including adopted children with unknown biological fathers. The
results on the population of children raised by their biological parents show that the protective
effect of parental education are fairly equally shared between the educational attainments of
mothers and fathers. The results on the sample of adoptees show a marginally significant effect
of the adopting mothers' years of schooling on child mortality. Finally, Appendix Table A8
show that the results obtained on the extended sample are very similar to the ones for the sample
including information on both biological parents.

     Appendix Table A9 shows results for different causes of death. These results indicate that
being adopted by parents with higher education reduces the risk of dying from cancer as well
as preventable diseases. As defined in Appendix Table A10, the causes of death defined as
preventable diseases are mainly conditions related to smoking and alcohol consumption.


         5. Mechanisms: Results from the Mediation Analysis

Table 7 presents the results from the estimates of equations (3) and (4) in Section 2.2. 27 We use
hospitalization as the health outcome variable for the child generation, since this variable
provides more precise estimates than the ones obtained from the health index. 28 Column 1
shows parameter estimates from an OLS regression of equation (4) for the sample of men in
the child generation for which we have access to the mediation variables Educational
attainment, Cognitive skills, Non-cognitive skills, Physical fitness and BMI. The latter four
measures are obtained from the military conscription at age 18-19 (see Section 3 for details).


27
   We here confine the presentation of the results to where we impose the restriction 3 = 5 = 0 in order to save
space.
28
   The results for the health index are similar to those in Table 7, but less precise (see Appendix Table A11).


                                                      24
Columns 2-5 present results from various versions of Equation (3) where we have added these
five mediation variables to the model. Finally, columns 6-10 provide results from equation (4),
using the mediation variables as outcomes. 29

     As explained in Section 2.2, the overall role of the mediation variables can be calculated in
two different ways. First, as the product of the vector of the coefficient estimates of the
mediation variables for one of the models estimated in columns 2-5, and the corresponding
coefficient estimates in columns 6-10. Second, as the difference between the coefficient
estimates for adoptive parent's education in column 1 and the corresponding coefficient
estimate in columns 2-5.

     It is evident from the estimates for adoptive parent's educational attainment in column 5
that the mediation variables explain the full effect of the adoptive parents' education on health
in the child generation. This lends strong support for the Pathway hypothesis for the health-
parental SES association, i.e. that the primary effect of parental education is on educational
attainments of the children, which, in turn, affects their health outcomes as adults, as opposed
to the Life course hypothesis, which asserts a separate, and lasting, effect of environmental
factors during childhood on health outcomes much later in life.

     Next, we decompose the mediation effects into the contribution of the separate mediation
variables. We use the estimates from the specification in column 5 of Table 7 including all
mediating factors. The results are summarized in Figure 2. The figure illustrates four sets of
results with different coefficient restrictions. The lowest bar represents the results
corresponding to Table 7, under the restriction 3 = 5 = 0. We find that the human capital
variables play the dominant role in formation of health: 26 percent can be attributed to
educational attainments and 62 percent to the skills variables, where non-cognitive skills are
the largest contributor. 30 The latter result is especially noteworthy since the skills variables are
measured at age 18-19, before many young people in the cohorts under study have finished
their education.

     The two top bars present results when we relax the two restrictions one at a time, and the
third bar presents the results for the most flexible model, without any restrictions on coefficients
in equation (3). The main message is the same in all four sets of results: health mediates between

29
   Lundborg, Nordin and Rooth (2018) and Brandén, Lindahl and Öckert (2018) have previously analyzed the
impact of parents' educational attainment on variables from the military enlistments data using foreign adoptees.
30
   The separate contributions can be calculated as the product of the estimate for the respective mediator in
column 5, times the estimate on adoptive parent's education for the respective outcome in columns 6-10.

                                                       25
6 and 12 percent, education between 24 and 26, and skills are the most important factor in all
three, mediating between 61 and 66 percent.

       The strong role for cognitive and non-cognitive skills is in line with previous research on
the associations between these outcomes and health outcomes (see e.g. Batty and Deary, 2004,
or Osler et al, 2003, on cognitive skills, and Smithers et al., 2018, on non-cognitive skills).
Recent research that emphasizes social interactions and networks, associated with non-
cognitive skills, as being key factors for remaining in good health as the individuals ages (see
e.g. Smith and Christakis, 2008). We find very limited evidence of a role for the health
variables: Physical fitness and BMI measured at age 18. We interpret this as suggestive evidence
that the pathway hypothesis mainly works via building the stock of human capital, but not via
the stock of health capital.

       Since the estimates in Table 7 are based on conscription data, which is only available for
men, and for a certain period, the estimates are fairly imprecise. To assess to what extent our
main conclusions hold up in a larger sample, also including women and men in all birth cohorts,
we perform a mediation analysis including educational attainment of the child as possible
mediator, only.

       Table 8 shows the results equivalent to the ones in columns 1, 5 and 8 in Table 7. 31 These
estimates show that educational attainment of the child explains about 31 percent,
unconditionally on other possible mediators. When we calculate this number based on the
estimates in columns 1, 5 and 8, of Table 7, we find education to explain about 65%,
unconditional on the other mediators. The difference appears to be mainly due to a difference
between education as a mediating channel for men and for women.

       The mediation analysis here has focused on analyzing the role of the child variables as
mediators between adult health of the child and the adoptive parents' educational attainment.
These child variables can, however, also act as mediators between adult health of the child and
the biological parents' educational attainment. This would happen if, for example, inherited
genetic factors relevant for human capital creation affect child adult health through children's
human and health capital formation. If we look at the results in Table 7, we see that, although
the mediators then play a less important role, they explain roughly 60 percent of the link
between biological parents' educational attainment and child adult health (see columns 1 and 5


31
     The results for Health Index are shown in Table A12.

                                                        26
in Table 7).

Table 7. Mediation analysis ­ Hospitalization as health outcome in adulthood
                     (1)         (2)           (3)            (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)         (8)            (9)        (10)
                                          Hospitalization                            BMI      Physical    Education       Non-       Cognitive
                                                                                               fitness                  cognitive
 Education,        0.340*       0.253         0.120          0.033      -0.090     -0.058**   0.020***     0.138***      0.049***     0.071***
 Ad parents
                  (0.190)      (0.190)       (0.193)        (0.192)    (0.192)      (0.024)   (0.007)      (0.014)       (0.007)      (0.006)

 Education,       0.944***     0.864***      0.674**        0.516*      0.419       -0.023    0.037***     0.169***      0.064***     0.102***
 Bio parents
                  (0.287)      (0.285)       (0.288)        (0.289)    (0.287)      (0.031)   (0.010)      (0.022)       (0.010)      (0.010)

 BMI                          -0.954***                                -0.926***
                               (0.167)                                  (0.162)

 Physical                      1.548***                                 -0.078
 fitness
                               (0.482)                                 (0.515)

 Education                                   1.595***                  0.807***
                                             (0.229)                   (0.253)

 Non-                                                       2.415***   2.462***
 cognitive
                                                            (0.489)    (0.523)

 Cognitive                                              2.678***    2.078***
                                                        (0.518)     (0.549)
  N                3,942        3,942        3,942       3,942       3,942        3,942        3,942        3,942        3,942         3,942
Note: Results from OLS regressions. Standard errors in parentheses; *** significant at 1%, ** at 5%, * at 10%. Each column represents a
separate regression and all regressions include indicators for gender and birth cohort of children, and five-year intervals for parental cohorts.
The sample is based on male adoptees with information on educational attainment and measures on health and skills from military conscription.




Table 8. Mediation analysis: Hospitalization as health outcome in adulthood. Both female and
male adoptees, focusing at child's education as mediating variable.
                                                       (1)                               (2)                              (3)
                                                 Hospitalization                   Hospitalization                    Education
 Education, Ad parents                              0.495***                          0.333***                         0.152***
                                                    (0.120)                           (0.122)                          (0.009)

 Education, Bio parents                                 0.477***                        0.281                         0.184***
                                                        (0.180)                        (0.182)                        (0.014)

 Education                                                                            1.062***
                                                                                      (0.134)
 N                                                      10,791                        10,791                           10,791
Note: Results from OLS regressions. Standard errors in parentheses; *** significant at 1%, ** at 5%, * at 10%. Each column represents a
separate regression and all regressions include indicators for gender and birth cohort of children, and five-year intervals for parental cohorts.
The sample is based on all adoptees with information on educational attainment.




                                                                         27
      3=0




      5=0




 30,50




   3=5=0


            0%      10%      20%      30%      40%       50%     60%      70%     80%      90%     100%

                                         Health      Education   Skills


Note: This figure decomposes the association between adopting parents' education and child long-term health by
attributing it to three key groups of observable mediator variables, as described in Section 2.2. We report results
with four different sets of restrictions on coefficients in equation (3).

Figure 2. Decomposition of indirect link between adult health and adopting parent's education,
which is attributed to key groups of mediator variables.



         6. Conclusions

In this study we use a large sample of adoptees, born between 1932 and 1967, and decompose
the parental education gradient in child long-term health into one component reflecting the
influence of pre-birth characteristics (selection) and one component reflecting post-birth
influences of parental educational attainments as well as unobservable characteristics
associated with it (causation). In a second part of the study we look into the mechanism behind
primarily the second component of the decomposition using a mediation analysis technique (see
e.g. Heckman el al., 2013, or Fagereng et al., 2020).

     Three main conclusions can be drawn from our results. First, the parental education
gradient can be attributed to both pre- and post-birth factors. Both components are significantly
different from zero when we use the Hospitalization as well as the Health index as outcome
measures of long-term health in the child generation. Second, we can reject that educational
attainments of the adopting parents is not associated with all three main health outcomes
included in the study, i.e., this applies also for the measure of life expectance. Third, the

                                                         28
mediation analysis suggests that the association between health and parents' educational
attainments can primarily be attributed to improved build-up of human capital, including
cognitive and non-cognitive skills in homes with more educated parents.

       In the introduction, we highlighted three previous studies of particular relevance to the
present one. How do our results relate to the ones obtained in these papers? First, Osler et al.
(2006) shows a significant association between the SES level of the biological father and
mortality in the child generation, but no significant associations to the SES of the adopting
father, i.e., different from what we find on mortality. However, bearing in mind the follow up
period on mortality, by necessity, is limited, to age 77 in the Osler et al. study and 83 for the
oldest cohort included in this study, it is inevitably the case that censoring of the outcome
severely restricts the precision of the estimates. In the main estimates of the Osler et al. study,
the lower limit of the 95 percent confidence interval is a 16 percent lower mortality of being
placed in a home with a high/middle versus working class. This underlines the importance of
using health measures based on mid-life outcomes as a complement to mortality in
intergenerational studies, where mortality is most often heavily censored for at least one of the
generations.

       The results of Lundborg et al. (2018) obtained on Swedish conscription data ­marginally
significant associations between parental educational attainments and youth health outcomes as
well as strong associations to cognitive and non-cognitive skills as well as child education ­
concurs, reassuringly, with the results presented in Table 7 columns 6 through 10 in this paper,
although slightly different samples are used. 32 Finally, Sacerdote (2007) finds association
between being placed in a small high educated family in a sample of Korean adoptees in the
US on early health outcomes and health related behavior, such as BMI, obesity, drinking and
smoking behavior. These results support our general findings, and in particular, the association
between being placed in a small educated family and smoking obtained by Sacerdote can serve
as a possible background to our result on adopting parent education and mortality in preventable
diseases.

       The intergenerational persistence in socio-economic and health outcomes as well as
inequalities in opportunities have largely been overlooked in the previous research on the causes
behind the education gradient in health (see Galama et al., 2018, for a recent overview).
Although this paper is an attempt to fill parts of this gap there is obvious need for further

32
     Lundborg et al. (2018) use foreign born adoptees born between 1965 and 1978.

                                                       29
research in this area. The most immediate direction for future research concerns evaluations of
public policy interventions ­ both in the health and education sectors ­ aiming at promoting
equality of opportunities and counteracting the education gradient in health.




                                              30
References
Akee, R., E. Simeonova, W. Copeland, A. Angold and J. Costello (2013) "Young Adult Obesity
and Household Income: Effects of Unconditional Cash Transfers" American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics, 5(2), 1-28.
Akee, R., E. Simeonova, W. Copeland and J. Costello (2018) "Can Household Income Affect
Child Personality Traits and Behaviors?" American Economics Review, Vol. 108, No 3,
March 2018.

Allmänna barnhuset (1955) Adoption. Handbook for social workers and authorities
responsible for adoption issues. Stockholm.
Allmänna barnhuset (1969) Adoption. Handbook for social workers and authorities
responsible for adoption issues. Stockholm.
Almond, D. and J. Currie (2011) "Human capital development before age five" in David Card
and Orley Ashenfelter (eds.) Handbook of Labor Economics, 4, 1315-1486.
Andersen, Carsten (2019) "Intergenerational Health Mobility: Evidence from Danish
Registers" Economics Working Papers 2019-04, Department of Economics and Business
Economics, Aarhus University.
Baron, R. M., D. A. Kenny (1986) "Moderator-Mediator Variables Distinction in Social
Psychological Research: Conceptual, Strategic, and Statistical Considerations." Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 51(6), 1173-82.
Batty, G. D. and Deary, I. J. (2004). "Early life intelligence and adult health." British Medical
Journal 329, 585-586.
Björkegren, E., M. Lindahl, M. Palme and E. Simeonova (2019) Pre-and Post-Birth
Components of Intergenerational Persistence in Health and Longevity Lessons from a Large
Sample of Adoptees, Journal of Human Resources, forthcoming.
Björklund, A., M.Lindahl, and E. Plug (2004) "Intergenerational Effects in Sweden: What
Can We Learn from Adoption Data?" IZA, Discussion Paper 1194.
Björklund, A., M. Lindahl, and E. Plug (2006) "The Origins of Intergenerational
Associations: Lessons from Swedish adoption data" The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
999-1028.
Black, S. E. and P. J. Devereux (2011) "Recent Developments in the Study of
Intergenerational Mobility" in David Card and Orley Ashenfelter (eds.) Handbook of Labor
Economics, 4, 1487-1541.
Black, S.E., P. J. Devereux, P. Lundborg, and K. Majlesi (2019) Poor Little Rich Kids? The
Role of Nature versus Nurture in Wealth and Other Economic Outcomes and Behaviors.
Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.
Bohman, M. (1970) Adopted Children and their Families. Stockholm: Proprius.
Brandén, G., M. Lindahl and B. Öckert (2018) "The importance of nature-nurture interactions
for socio economic outcomes: Evidence from a large sample of adoptees", Mimeo, University
of Gothenburg.

                                               31
Case, A., A. Fertig and C. Paxson (2005). "The lasting impact of childhood health and
circumstance" Journal of Health Economics, 24, 365-389.9
Cesarini, D., Lindqvist, E., Östling, R., & Wallace, B. (2016). Wealth, health, and child
development: Evidence from administrative data on Swedish lottery players. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 131(2), 687-738.

Conti, G., Heckman, J., & Urzua, S. (2010). The education-health gradient. American Economic
Review, 100(2), 234-38.

Currie, J (2009) "Healthy, Wealthy and Wise: Socioeconomic Status, Poor Health in
Childhood, and Human Capital Development" Journal of Economic Literature, Vol 47, No 1,
pp 87-122
Currie, J., and E. Moretti. (2003) "Mother's education and the intergenerational transmission
of human capital: evidence from college openings" The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
1495-1532..

Cutler, D. M. and A. Lleras-Muney (2006) "Education and health: evaluating theories and
evidence" National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper w12352.
Fagereng, A. M. Mogstad and M. Rønning (2020) "Why do wealthy parents have wealthy
children?", Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
Galama, T., A. Lleras-Muney and H van Kippersluis (2018) "The Effect of Education on
Health and Mortality: A review of the Experimental and Quasi-Experimental Evidence,"
Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Economics and Finance, The Oxford University Press.
Halliday, T., B. Mazumder and A. Wong (2018). "Intergenerational Health Mobility in the US"
FRB of Chicago, Working Paper No. 2018-2.
Heckman, J. J. and R. Pinto (2015). "Econometric mediation analyses: Identifying the sources
of treatment effects from experimentally estimated production technologies with unmeasured
and mismeasured inputs." Econometric Reviews 34 (1-2), 6­31.
Heckman, J. J., R. Pinto, and P. Savelyev (2013). "Understanding the mechanisms through
which an influential early childhood program boosted adult outcomes." American Economic
Review 103 (6), 2052­2086.
Holmlund, H., M. Lindahl, and E. Plug (2008) "The causal effect of parents' schooling on
children's schooling: A comparison of estimation methods" IZA Working Paper 3630, August
2008

Holmlund, H., M. Lindahl, and E. Plug (2011) "The causal effect of parents' schooling on
children's schooling: A comparison of estimation methods" Journal of Economic Literature
49(3), 615-651.

Lindeboom, M., A. Llena-Nozal, and B. van Der Klaauw. (2009) "Parental education and
child health: Evidence from a schooling reform." Journal of Health Economics 28(1), 109-
131.




                                              32
Lindqvist, E., and Vestman, R. (2011). The labor market returns to cognitive and
noncognitive ability: Evidence from the Swedish enlistment. American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics, 3(1), 101-28.
Lundborg, P., A. Nilsson and D. O. Rooth (2014) "Parental education and offspring
outcomes: evidence from the Swedish compulsory School Reform" American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics 6(1), 253-278.

Lundborg, P., M. Nordin and D. O. Rooth (2018) "The Intergenerational Transmission of
Human Capital: the Role of Skills and Health" Journal of Population Economics 31(4), 1035-
1065.

MacKinnon, D., A. Fairchild, and M. Fritz (2007) "Mediation Analysis" Annual Review of
Psychology 58, 593-614

Marmot, M., M. Shipley, E. Brunner, and H. Hemingway (2001) "Relative contribution of
early life and adult socioeconomic factors to adult morbidity in the Whitehall II study"
Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health 55(5), 301-307.

McCrary, J. and H. Royer (2011) "The Effect of Female Education on Fertility and Infant
Health: Evidence from School Entry Policies Using Exact Date of Birth." The American
Economic Review 101(1), 158-195.

Mörk, E., Svaleryd, H., and Sjögren, A. (2014). Hellre rik och frisk: Om familjebakgrund och
barns hälsa. SNS förlag.

Nordlöf, B. (2001) "Svenska adoptioner i Stockholm 1918­1973 (Swedish adoptions in
Stockholm 1918­1973)" FOU-rapport 2001:8 Socialtjänstförvaltningen, Stockholm Stad.

Oskarsson, S., K.-O. Lindgren and C. Dawes (2015) "It Runs in the Family". Mimeo.
Department of Political Science, Uppsala University.
Osler, M., Nybo Andersen, A. M., Due, P., Lund, R., Trab Damsgaard, M., & Holstein, B.
(2003) "Socio-economic position during childhood, birth weight, childhood cognitive
function and mortality in adult life. A longitudinal study of Danish men born in 1953"
Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, 57, 681-86.
Osler, M., Petersen, L., Prescott, E., Teasdale, T. W., and Sørensen, T. I. (2006). Genetic and
environmental influences on the relation between parental social class and
mortality. International Journal of Epidemiology, 35(5), 1272-1277.
Palme, M., and Sandgren, S. (2008). Parental income, lifetime income, and mortality. Journal
of the European Economic Association, 6(4), 890-911.
Petersen, L., P. Kragh Andersen and T. Sørensen (2005) "Premature Death of Adult
Adoptees: Analyses of a Case-Cohort Sample" Genetic Epidemiology 28, 376-382
Sacerdote, B. (2007) "How large are the effects from changes in family environment? A study
of Korean American adoptees." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(1), 119-157.

Smith, K. P. and Christakis, N. A. (2008) "Social networks and health" Annual Review of
Sociology 34, 405-429.


                                              33
Smithers, L.G., Sawyer, A.C.P., Chittleborough, C.R.et al. (2018) "A systematic review and
meta-analysis of effects of early life non-cognitive skills on academic, psychosocial, cognitive
and health outcomes." Nature Humamn Behaviour 2, 867­880.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-018-0461-x
Solon, G. (1999) "Intergenerational Mobility in the Labor Market" in Orley Ashenfelter and
David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume III (Amsterdam: Elsevier) Chapter
29.

Sørensen, T., G. Nielsen, P. Kragh Andersen and T. Teasdale (1988) "Genetic and
Environmental Influences on Premature Death in Adult Adoptees" New England Journal of
Medicine 318(12), 727-732.

Socialstyrelsen (2009a) The Swedish Cause of Death Registry. Sweden, Stockholm. 2009.

Socialstyrelsen (2009b) The Swedish National Patient Register. Inpatient diseases in Sweden
1987-2007. Sweden, Stockholm. 2009.
Statistics Sweden (2012). "The Multi-generation register 2012. A description of contents and
quality" Report BE96BR1301. Örebro: Statistics Sweden.




                                              34
Appendix A: Additional results
Table A1. Associations between health indices (in percentile rank) and mother's and father's education (in
years)
                              (1)            (2)          (3)              (4)           (5)         (6)
                         Non-adoptees Adoptees Adoptees              Non-adoptees Adoptees Adoptees
                                    Hospitalization                               Health index
 Education, Bio mother     0.361***        0.259*      0.523***         0.326***        0.222     0.437***
                            (0.009)       (0.155)      (0.105)          (0.009)        (0.153)     (0.103)

 Education, Bio father        0.499***        0.252*                      0.453***        0.205
                              (0.007)        (0.130)                      (0.007)        (0.128)

 Education, Ad mother                        0.333**     0.248**                         0.279**     0.238**
                                             (0.136)     (0.098)                         (0.134)     (0.097)

 Education, Ad father                          0.176      0.371***                         0.097     0.299***
                                              (0.111)     (0.078)                         (0.110)    (0.078)
 N                            3,199,618        10,845      21,250         3,227,149       10,880      21,386
Note: Results from OLS regressions. Standard errors in parentheses; *** significant at 1%, ** at 5%, * at 10%.
Each column represents a separate regression and all regressions include indicators for gender and birth cohort of
children, and five-year intervals for parental cohorts. Column (1) and (4) contains all non-adopted children, and
column (2) and (4) the sample of adoptees for which we can identify all parents, and column (3) and (6) adds
adoptees with unknown biological fathers.


Table A2. Associations between hospitalization (in percentile rank) and parental education (in years), by child
gender
                                         (1)                  (2)                    (3)                (4)
                                   Non-adoptees          Adoptees             Non-adoptees          Adoptees
                                               Females                                     Males
 Education, Bio parents               0.843***              0.501*                0.922***            0.522**
                                       (0.011)             (0.261)                (0.010)             (0.249)

 Education, Ad parents                                     0.449***                                    0.551***
                                                            (0.173)                                    (0.167)
 N                                       1,569,717           5,228               1,629,901              5,617
Note: Results from OLS regressions. Standard errors in parentheses; *** significant at 1%, ** at 5%, * at 10%.
Each column represents a separate regression and all regressions include indicators for birth cohort of children,
and five-year intervals for parental cohorts.


Table A3. Associations between health index (in percentile rank) and parental education, by child gender
                                          (1)                 (2)                   (3)                 (4)
                                   Non-adoptees          Adoptees             Non-adoptees          Adoptees
                                               Females                                    Males
 Education, Bio parents                0.705***             0.427*               0.892***             0.413*
                                       (0.011)             (0.256)               (0.010)             (0.246)

 Education, Ad parents                                       0.214                                     0.502***
                                                            (0.171)                                    (0.166)
 N                                       1,578,905           5,239               1,648,244              5,641
Note: Results from OLS regressions. Standard errors in parentheses; *** significant at 1%, ** at 5%, * at 10%.
Each column represents a separate regression and all regressions include indicators for birth cohort of children,
and five-year intervals for parental cohorts.




                                                        35
Table A4. Parameter robustness with respect to inclusion of different sets of controls in the econometric model.
Adoptees only. Dependent variable: Hospitalization.
                                  (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)             (5)         (6)
 Education, Ad parents         0.5740***     0.4884***    0.3802***                     0.4884***   0.3557***
                               (0.1156)      (0.1197)     (0.1200)                      (0.1197)     (0.1223)
 Education, Bio parents                      0.5066***     0.2975        0.6830***      0.5066***    0.4522**
                                             (0.1796)     (0.1818)       (0.1738)       (0.1796)     (0.1805)
 Cohorts, Bio mother              No            Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes
 Cohorts, Bio father              No            Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes
 Cohorts, Ad mother               Yes           Yes          Yes            No             Yes          Yes
 Cohort, Ad father                Yes           Yes          Yes            No             Yes          Yes
 Health, Bio parents              No            No           Yes            No             No           No
 Health, Ad parents               No            No           No             No             No           Yes
 Region, Bio parents              No            No           Yes            No             No           No
 Region, Ad parents               No            No           No             No             No           Yes
 N                              10,845        10,845       10,845         10,845         10,845       10,845
 r2                             0.0068        0.0104       0.0233         0.0071         0.0104       0.0166
Note: Results from OLS. Robust standard errors in parentheses; *** significant at 1%, ** at 5%, * at 10%. Each
column represents a separate regression and all regressions include indicators for gender and birth cohort of
children. Each column is adding parental characteristics.



Table A5. Associations between health indices (in percentile rank) and parental education (in years), using
samples restricted to adoptees that move out from their municipality birth.
                                                            (1)                                (2)
                                                      Hospitalization                    Health index
 Education, Ad parents                                   0.543***                           0.408***
                                                         (0.129)                            (0.127)

 Education, Bio parents                                   0.591***                          0.483**
                                                           (0.194)                          (0.190)
 N                                                          9,304                            9,333
Note: Results from OLS regressions. Standard errors in parentheses; *** significant at 1%, ** at 5%, * at 10%.
Each column represents a separate regression and all regressions include indicators for gender and birth cohort of
children, and five-year intervals for parental cohorts. The sample only include adoptees who was adopted by a
mother who lived in a different municipality in 1960 than the biological mother of the adoptee.


Table A6. Associations between health indices (in percentile rank) and parental education (in years), using
samples restricted to adoptees that adopted out at least two children. Specifications w/o and with bio mother
fixed effects.
                                      (1)                   (2)                   (3)                  (4)
                               Hospitalization        Hospitalization        Health index         Health index
                                                            FE                                         FE
  Education, Ad mother             0.845***                0.838               0.939***               1.206
                                    (0.274)               (0.763)               (0.268)              (0.808)

 Education, Bio mother                 0.292            0.000                  0.283               0.000
                                      (0.378)             (.)                 (0.364)                (.)
  N                                    2,254            2,254                  2,261               2,261
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. All models include controls for gender and birth cohorts.
*
  p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                       36
Table A7. Interaction effects between measures of educational attainments (in years) for biological and adopting
parents
                                                          (1)                                 (2)
                                                    Hospitalization                      Health index
 Bio*Ad parents, education                               0.015                               0.009
                                                        (0.059)                             (0.059)

 Education, Bio parents                                      0.361                            0.331
                                                            (0.610)                          (0.603)

 Education, Ad parents                                     0.358                             0.272
                                                          (0.531)                           (0.531)
 N                                                        10,845                             10,880
Note: Results from OLS regressions. Standard errors in parentheses; *** significant at 1%, ** at 5%, * at 10%.
Each column represents a separate regression and all regressions include indicators for gender and birth cohort of
children, and five-year intervals for parental cohorts.


Table A8. Association between mortality and mother's and father's education (in years) (hazard ratios)
                                          (1)                      (2)                      (3)
                                   Non-adoptees                Adoptees                  Adoptees
 Education, Bio mother                 0.978***                  1.028                     0.993
                                       (0.001)                  (0.019)                   (0.012)

 Education, Bio father                   0.971***                      1.006
                                         (0.001)                      (0.015)

 Education, Ad mother                                                  0.967*               0.973**
                                                                      (0.017)               (0.012)

 Education, Ad father                                                  0.989                    0.996
                                                                      (0.013)                  (0.009)
 N                                        3,227,149                   10,880                   21,386
Note: Results from Cox proportional hazard models. Standard errors in parentheses; *** significant at 1%, ** at
5%, * at 10%. Each column represents a separate regression and all regressions include indicators for gender and
birth cohort of children, and five-year intervals for parental cohorts. Column (1) contain all non-adopted
children, column (2) the sample of adoptees for which we can identify all parents, and column (3) adds adoptees
with unknown biological fathers.




                                                       37
Table A9. Association between mortality by cause of death and parental education (in years), (hazard ratios)
                                           (1)               (2)                  (3)                 (4)
                                         Cancer          Circulatory         Preventable          Treatable
 Non-adoptees
 Education, Bio parents                0.9617***          0.9601***           0.9312***           0.9218***
                                        (0.0016)          (0.0023)             (0.0041)            (0.0035)
 Mean dep. Var                           0.044              0.015               0.007               0.011
 Observations                          3,227,149         3,227,149            3,227,149           3,227,149
 Adoptees
 Education, Bio parents                  1.0471            1.0622               1.0401              1.0371
                                        (0.0400)          (0.0485)             (0.1083)            (0.0637)

 Education, Ad parents                     0.9235***           0.9836                0.8766*             0.9703
                                           (0.0280)           (0.0279)              (0.0647)            (0.0552)
  Mean dep. Var                              0.025              0.018                 0.005              0.007
  N                                         10,880             10,880                10,880              10,880
Note: Results from Cox proportional hazard models with competing risks. Standard errors in parentheses; ***
significant at 1%, ** at 5%, * at 10%. Each column represents a separate regression and all regressions include
indicators for gender and birth cohort of children, and five-year intervals for parental cohorts. Panel A is based on
a sample of non-adopted children, and Panel B on the sample adoptees for whom we have information on all
parents. Diagnoses codes ICD10: Cancer C00-D48, Circulatory I00-I99, Preventable C33-C34, K70, K74.3-
K74.6, and Treatable A15-A19, B90, C53, I05-I09, J00-J99, J45, J46, K35-K38, K40-K46, I10-I15, I60-I69, K80-
K81.


Table A10. Diagnoses codes for different diagnose categories

 Diagnoses                                 ICD10 codes

 Cancer                                    C00-D48

 Circulatory                               I00-I99

 Preventable                               C33-C34, K70, K74.3-K74.6

 Treatable                                 A15-A19, B90, C53 , I05-I09, J00-J99, J45, J46, K35-K38, K40-
                                           K46, I10-I15, I60-I69, K80-K81




                                                         38
Table A11. Mediation analysis: Health index
                     (1)           (2)         (3)           (4)          (5)       (6)         (7)           (8)              (9)          (10)
                   Health        Health      Health        Health      Health      BMI       Physical      Education         Non-         Cognitive
                   index         index       index         index        index                 fitness                      cognitive
 Education,        0.309         0.224       0.065         0.000       -0.126     -0.058**   0.020***      0.138***         0.049***      0.071***
 Ad parents
                  (0.190)       (0.190)      (0.191)       (0.191)    (0.191)     (0.024)    (0.007)        (0.014)         (0.007)        (0.006)
                          ***           **           *                                               ***           ***              ***
 Education,       0.816         0.728        0.516          0.388      0.278      -0.023     0.037         0.169            0.064         0.102***
 Bio parents
                  (0.285)       (0.284)      (0.284)       (0.287)    (0.285)     (0.031)    (0.010)        (0.022)         (0.010)        (0.010)

 BMI                            -0.791***                             -0.755***
                                 (0.171)                               (0.165)

 Physical                       1.913***                               0.240
 fitness
                                (0.479)                               (0.513)

 Education                                   1.769***                 1.018***
                                             (0.228)                  (0.253)

 Non-                                                      2.686***   2.507***
 cognitive
                                                           (0.480)    (0.513)

 Cognitive                                             2.515***     1.755***
                                                        (0.511)     (0.540)
  N                3,944        3,944        3,944       3,944       3,944       3,944        3,944         3,944        3,944         3,944
Note: Results from OLS regressions. Standard errors in parentheses; *** significant at 1%, ** at 5%, * at 10%. Each column represents a
separate regression and all regressions include indicators for gender and birth cohort of children, and five-year intervals for parental cohorts.
The sample is based on male adoptees with information on educational attainment and measures on health and skills from military conscription.


Table A12. Mediation analysis: Health index. Both female and male adoptees.
                                           (1)                    (2)                                                        (3)
                                     Health index            Health index                                                Education
 Education, Ad parents                  0.363***                0.166                                                     0.152***
                                        (0.119)                (0.120)                                                    (0.009)

 Education, Bio parents                                  0.398**                       0.160                             0.183***
                                                         (0.177)                      (0.178)                            (0.014)

 Education                                                                           1.299***
                                                                                     (0.131)
 N                                                       10,812                      10,812                               10,812
Note: Results from OLS regressions. Standard errors in parentheses; *** significant at 1%, ** at 5%, * at 10%. Each column represents a
separate regression and all regressions include indicators for gender and birth cohort of children, and five-year intervals for parental cohorts.
The sample is based on all adoptees with information on educational attainment.




                                                                        39
