                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

                       CHILD-DRIVEN PARENTING:
   DIFFERENTIAL EARLY CHILDHOOD INVESTMENT BY OFFSPRING GENOTYPE

                                        Asta Breinholt
                                        Dalton Conley

                                      Working Paper 28217
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28217

                     NATIOAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2020



We are extremely grateful to all the families who took part in this study, the midwives for their
help in recruiting them, and the whole ALSPAC team, which includes interviewers, computer
and laboratory technicians, clerical workers, research scientists, volunteers, managers,
receptionists and nurses. Earlier version of this manuscript was presented at RC28 Spring
Meeting in Frankfurt March 2019, Population Association of America April 2019, Integrating
Genetics and the Social Science October 2019, at the Princeton Biosociology Lab January
2020, and at the Human Capital, History, Demography & Development seminar at the
Department of Economics at the University of Michigan March 2020. We thank participants at
these conferences and workshops for valuable feedback. A special thanks to Ramina Sotoudeh
for constructing the polygenic score for educational attainment, and to Anna Sanz-de-
Galdeano, Michael Grætz, and Lawrence Berger for comments on the manuscript. The
research leading to the results presented in this article has received funding from the Robert
Wood Johnson Foundation Pioneer Award) and the Independent Research Fund Denmark
(grant number: 8025-00008B). The UK Medical Research Council and Wellcome (Grant
ref: 217065/Z/19/Z) and the University of Bristol provide core support for ALSPAC. This
publication is the work of the authors, and Asta Breinholt and Dalton Conley will serve
as guarantors for the contents of this paper. A comprehensive list of grants funding is
available on the ALSPAC website (http://www.bristol.ac.uk/alspac/external/documents/
grant-acknowledgements.pdf); This research was specifically funded by Wellcome Trust
and MRC (grant number: 092731). GWAS data was generated by Sample Logistics and
Genotyping Facilities at Wellcome Sanger Institute and LabCorp (Laboratory Corporation of
America) using support from 23andMe. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not
been peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that
accompanies official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Asta Breinholt and Dalton Conley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Child-Driven Parenting: Differential Early Childhood Investment by Offspring Genotype
Asta Breinholt and Dalton Conley
NBER Working Paper No. 28217
December 2020
JEL No. D13,I14,I24,J13

                                          ABSTRACT

A growing literature points to children's influence on parents' behavior, including parental
investments in children. Further, previous research has shown differential parental response by
socioeconomic status to children's birth weight, cognitive ability, and school outcomes ­ all early
life predictors of later socioeconomic success. This study considers an even earlier, more
exogenous predictor of parental investments: offspring genotype. Specifically, we analyze (1)
whether children's genetic propensity towards educational success affects parenting during early
childhood; and (2) whether parenting in response to children's genetic propensity towards
educational success is socially stratified. Using data from the Avon Longitudinal Survey of
Parents and Children (N=7,738), we construct polygenic scores for educational attainment and
regress cognitively stimulating parenting behavior during early childhood on these polygenic
scores. We use a range of modeling strategies to address the concern that child's genotype may be
proxying unmeasured parent characteristics. Results show that parents provide more cognitive
stimulation to children with higher education polygenic scores. This pattern varies by
socioeconomic status with college-educated parents responding less to children's genetic
propensity towards educational success than non-college-educated parents do.


Asta Breinholt
Department of Social Sciences and Business
Roskilde University
Universitetsvej 1
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
astab@ruc.dk

Dalton Conley
Department of Sociology
Princeton University
153 Wallace Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
dconley@princeton.edu
Introduction

Cognitively stimulating parenting during early childhood is important for children's skill

development and adult well-being: parent-child activities like shared book reading and play appear

to increase children's cognitive and socioemotional skills and adult socioeconomic attainment

(Attanasio et al. 2014; Cano, Perales, and Baxter 2019; Doyle et al. 2016; Fiorini and Keane 2014;

Gertler et al. 2014; Heckman and Mosso 2014; Hsin and Felfe 2014). Sociological studies often

focus on how socioeconomic status affects parenting, but a growing body of evidence suggests that

parenting may also be influenced by child characteristics and behaviors (Bell 1968; Feinstein,

Duckworth, and Sabates 2008; Melhuish et al. 2008). Normal birth weight, early cognitive skills,

and school performance have all been linked to cognitively stimulating parenting (Aizer and Cunha

2012; Grätz and Torche 2016; Hsin 2012; Lugo-Gil and Tamis-LeMonda 2008; Quadlin 2015;

Restrepo 2016; TuckerDrob and Harden 2012). For instance, toddlers' with higher cognitive skills

receive more cognitively stimulating parenting (Grätz and Torche 2016; Lugo-Gil and Tamis-

LeMonda 2008; TuckerDrob and Harden 2012), and qualitative studies of shared book reading

show that toddlers very much drive and shape this parenting practice (Hall, Levy, and Preece 2018;

Luo and Tamis-LeMonda 2017). Together, these studies show that children play a crucial role in

determining the amount and type of cognitively stimulating parenting they receive.

       While birth weight, early cognitive skills, and school performance are all predictors of later

socioeconomic attainment, an even earlier predictor would be child's genotype. This predictor is

randomly assigned at conception (conditional on parental genotype), not readily observable (as birth

weight is), not subject to reverse causation (as early cognitive skills and school performance might

be), and not subject to concern and advice from health professionals and educators (as birth weight

and school performance may be). Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) show that multiple

                                                                                                   2
genes indexed via single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) across the genome are related to

educational attainment (Lee et al. 2018; Okbay et al. 2016; Rietveld et al. 2013, 2014). Using

GWAS results to construct a measure of genetic propensity for educational attainment, a so-called

polygenic score (PGS), recent studies show that parents provide a better home environment to

school-age children and adolescent siblings with higher PGS for educational attainment (Sanz-de-

Galdeano and Terskaya n.d.; Wertz et al. 2020). However, since socioeconomic and genetic

differences in cognitive skills show up well before school age (Belsky et al. 2016; Ermisch 2008;

Feinstein 2003; von Hippel and Hamrock 2019), and learning during early childhood is crucial for

later achievement (Cunha et al. 2006), we examine whether children's genetic propensity towards

educational success affects parenting during early childhood.

       Moreover, theories on social stratification suggest that parents' response to children's

genetic propensity towards educational success may differ by socioeconomic status. Drawing on the

theories of relative risk aversion and effectively maintain inequality (Breen and Goldthorpe 1997;

Lucas 2001), one may expect that socioeconomically advantaged parents will invest heavily in their

children's development regardless of their genetic propensity towards educational success. Related

to these theories, the concept of compensatory advantage (Bernardi 2014) suggests that

socioeconomically advantaged parents will go further by actively compensating with more

investment directed to those offspring with lower genetic propensities towards educational

success--ceteris paribus. Testing these hypotheses, we examine whether parenting in response to

children's genetic propensity towards educational success is socially stratified.

       Specifically, we analyze whether cognitively stimulating parenting during early childhood

(18-57 months) is influenced by children's PGS for educational attainment, and whether this

influence is socially stratified. In order to answer these questions, we deploy data from the Avon

                                                                                                3
Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children (ALSPAC) (Boyd et al. 2013; Fraser et al. 2013).

ALSPAC provides data on the genotypes of children (n=8,801), mothers (n=9,260), and fathers

(n=1,745), as well as measures of cognitively stimulating parenting from infancy through preschool

age. In our main analysis (n=7,738), we use several modeling strategies and placebo tests to address

the concern that child's genotype may be proxying unmeasured parental characteristics. Further, a

subset of the sample with genotype data on children and both parents (n=1,426) allows us to

perform an innovative robustness check: controlling for both the mother's and father's education

PGSs plausibly renders the variation in the child' education PGS exogenous, in a so-called trio

design. We employ this trio design to validate patterns from the main analysis.

       Our study makes three contributions to the literature. First, we focus on early childhood

where skills develop rapidly, but children are yet to be evaluated by tests or teachers' evaluations.

Any influence of children's PGS on cognitively stimulating parenting that we may detect might

therefore more directly be related to child behavior as compared to previous studies focusing on

school-age children and adolescents. Second, we analyze whether the relationship between child's

education PGS and cognitively stimulating parenting is socially stratified and thereby place

parenting response in the context of social stratification. Third, we contribute with a methodological

advancement by validating our results using a trio design, where controlling for mothers' and

fathers' genotype plausibly renders the variation in child genotype exogeneous.

       We find that parents provide more cognitively stimulating parenting to children with higher

PGSs for educational attainment. This pattern varies by socioeconomic status: College-educated

parents do not appear to respond to children's education PGSs, while non-college educated parents

do respond. Our findings are robust to a variety of ways to control for the potential endogeneity of

child PGS to overall parenting activities, and the direction of the association replicates in the trio

                                                                                                    4
design. These findings suggest that the child is an active agent of socialization of parental behavior

in the family and that there is a social patterning in how parents respond to child characteristics.



Theoretical Framework

In the following section we combine perspectives from sociology and psychology to outline the

argument that genetic effects on educational success may in part be mediated by cognitively

stimulating parenting evoked by the genotype of the child. Based on a framework of genotype-

environment correlations, we propose a hypothesis for the relationship between children's genetic

propensity towards educational success and cognitive stimulating parenting in early childhood. In

the latter part of the section, we hypothesize how socioeconomic resources may shape how parents'

respond to children's genetic propensity towards educational success based on theories about social

inequality in skill formation.



Educational Success and Genotype

Research employing a broad range of methods shows that genetic variation is related to educational

success. A meta-analysis of twin studies shows that genetic variation explains, on average, 40 % of

the variation in educational attainment across western societies, although this estimate varies

substantially across national context and birth cohorts (Branigan, McCallum, and Freese 2013).

Studies comparing intergenerational associations of education of adopted and biological children

draw similar conclusions (see e.g., Sacerdote, 2007; Scheeren, Das, & Liefbroer, 2017). Exploiting

the recent availability of molecular genetic data, genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have

found over thousand genetic variants associated with educational attainment (Lee et al. 2018; Okbay

et al. 2016; Rietveld et al. 2013, 2014). Summarizing GWAS results into PGSs for educational

                                                                                                       5
attainment, studies have found that in independent samples these genetic variants are associated

with early cognitive and socioemotional skills, school performance in adolescence, and educational

attainment in adulthood (Belsky et al. 2016, 2018; Conley et al. 2015; Liu 2018; Smith-Woolley,

Selzam, and Plomin 2019; Ward et al. 2014; Zhu et al. 2015). This result holds up in sibling fixed

effect design, showing that part of the association is causal (Belsky et al. 2018; Conley et al. 2015;

Domingue et al. 2015; Selzam et al. 2019). While there is evidence that genetic variation affects

educational success across the life course, little is known about which mechanisms cause this

relationship.

       Arguing against the understanding of genetic effects as purely physical and biological,

Jencks (1972, 1980) suggests that genetic effects could operate through the environment by evoking

differential responses from the people with whom we interact. Genetic variation affecting

characteristics of the individual such as appearance, aptitude, temper, etc. leads society to treat

individuals differently, resulting in different long-term outcomes. In this way, the social

environment mediates the genetic effect. In early childhood, parents are often the focal persons in

children's lives and hence could be likely to respond to characteristics stemming from children's

genotype. Within behavioral genetics this type of mechanism is called a reactive or evocative

genotype-environment correlation (Plomin, DeFries, and Loehlin 1977). In the following, we

describe the theoretical framework of genotype-environment correlations.



Genotype-Environment Correlation and Child Development

Evocative genotype-environment correlations are one out of at least three types of genotype-

environment correlations. Passive genotype-environment correlations occur when biological parents

pass on genes to their child and those same genes possessed by the parents affect the environment

                                                                                                    6
the parents provide to the child (Plomin et al. 1977). This process has also been termed genetic

nurture or social genetic effects in the recent literature (Kong et al. 2018). Active genotype-

environment correlations occur when the genotype of the child makes the child select activities,

environment, and peer groups. Evocative genotype-environment correlations occur when the

genotype of the child evokes responses from the parents, teachers, or peers (Plomin et al. 1977).

Although labelled as `correlations' as opposed to `effects', genotype-environment correlations can

describe mechanisms linking genetic variation to outcomes through the social environment.

       Passive genotype-environment correlations may have the biggest impact during early

childhood when children are highly dependent on their parents (Scarr and McCartney 1983), while

the importance of evocative genotype-environment correlations may increase as the child takes on a

more active role in the family (Avinun and Knafo 2014). One set of behaviors children may elicit

from their parents is activities like play, shared book reading, games etc. typically described as

cognitively stimulating parenting. In the next section, we review the empirical evidence on the

effect of cognitively stimulating parenting on children's skill development.



Parenting and Skill Development

In early childhood, cognitively stimulating activities like play, shared book reading, cuddling,

imitation games etc. are theorized to increase the development of children's cognitive and

socioemotional skills. Through these activities children gain language skills, learn about the world,

and perhaps build an interest in learning in general (Feinstein et al. 2008; Melhuish et al. 2008).

Studies applying different methodologies on various study populaitons in general find evidence of

an effect of cognitive stimulation in early childhood on children's development of cognitive and

socioemotional skills (Attanasio et al. 2014; Bono et al. 2016; Cano et al. 2019; Doyle et al. 2016,

                                                                                                   7
2017; Fiorini and Keane 2014; Hsin and Felfe 2014; Lugo-Gil and Tamis-LeMonda 2008;

TuckerDrob and Harden 2012) (for exceptions see Andrew et al. 2018; Grätz and Torche 2016).

Since cognitive stimulation affects children's skill development, it is particularly interesting to

examine whether this aspect of parenting is affected by child characteristics. In the next section, we

review studies on how child characteristics affect the cognitive stimulation provided by their

parents.



Child Effects on Parenting

The child development literature on bidirectional socialization suggests that parenting is a function

of both cultural demands and characteristics of the child (Bell 1968). Children's behaviors and

personality evoke and reinforce parenting practices and the intensity of these practices (Bell 1968).

In support of this perspective, qualitative studies find that toddlers initiate and shape shared book

reading stressing how young children play an active role in this type of cognitive stimulation (Hall

et al. 2018; Luo and Tamis-LeMonda 2017). A large scale quantitative study finds positive cross-

lagged associations between children's cognitive skills and parents' cognitive stimulation between

the ages of 14, 24, and 36 months (Lugo-Gil and Tamis-LeMonda 2008). These cross-lagged

associations also show up once genetic variation is taken into account: a study following twins from

age two to four finds that children's cognitive skills predict their parents' future behavior as strongly

as parents' behaviors predict their children's future skills (TuckerDrob and Harden 2012). While

these studies support the notion of child behavior, personality and skills as central to parenting, they

do not point directly towards children's genetic variation as the initial source. In the next section, we

review studies that explicitly test whether children's genetic variation affects parenting.



                                                                                                       8
Parenting Evoked by Child Genotype

Empirical studies find support for evocative genotype-environment correlations in various aspect of

parenting and employing different research methodologies. Narrative reviews and systematic meta-

studies of the twin literature find that children's genotype affects relational aspects of parenting

(e.g., warm, accepting, responsive parenting versus hostile, angry and rejecting behavior) and

regulatory aspects of parenting (e.g., behavioral control through praise and explanations, autonomy

support, setting limits, providing structures, and teaching versus control through power assertiveness

such as verbal and physical punishments and intrusiveness) (Avinun and Knafo 2014; Kendler and

Baker 2007; Plomin and Bergeman 1991). The most recent meta-study estimates that genetic

variation explains 23 % of the variation in these aspects of parenting (Avinun and Knafo 2014).

Findings from adoption studies also suggest evocative genotype-environment correlations in

regulatory parenting (Klahr et al. 2016). Most recently, studies have begun to use PGSs derived

from GWAS to study evocative genotype-environment correlations. A study found that children's

PGS for body mass index is associated with parents' regulation of children's food intake (Selzam et

al. 2018). More relevant to our study, recent research suggests that children's PGS for educational

attainment is positively associated with cognitive stimulation in middle childhood (Wertz et al.

2020) and parental investment in adolescence (Sanz-de-Galdeano and Terskaya n.d.). Based on this

body of research we formulate our first hypothesis:



           Hypothesis 1: Genetic propensity towards educational success increases

           cognitively stimulating parenting in early childhood.




                                                                                                    9
Theoretically, evocative genotype-environment correlations include the surroundings responding to

a genetic test of the child (i.e., for a hereditable disease like phenylketonuria (PKU)). In the case of

genetic propensity towards educational success, we do not think that this type of evocative

genotype-environment correlation is at play. Based on the literature on bidirectional socialization,

we speculate that genetic propensity towards educational success affects child behavior, personality,

and skills, and that these characteristics elicit responses from the parents.



Relative Risk Aversion

Parenting practices are contingent on the social context and vary with families' socioeconomic

resources, and as a result, evocative genotype-environment correlations may differ between

advantaged and less advantaged families. The theory of relative risk aversion suggests that parents

want to avoid that their children end up in a worse position in life than the position of the parents

(Breen and Goldthorpe 1997). Basically, the theory claims that parents have a fear of downward

social mobility. The more socioeconomically advantaged the parents are, the further down the social

ladder their children can potentially fall, and hence the greater the concern. This fear of downward

social mobility causes socioeconomically advantaged families to place a greater emphasis on

educational success than less advantaged families (Breen and Goldthorpe 1997). Regardless of

children's abilities, socioeconomically advantaged parents will maximize the effort to ensure

children's success and thereby effectively maintain the family's advantage (Lucas 2001). This

process may result in a different pattern of genotype-environment correlations in the most

advantaged families: To avoid downward social mobility, socioeconomically advantaged parents

may make large parental investments in terms of cognitive stimulation regardless of whether the

child has a high or low genetic propensity towards educational success. As a result, the evocative

                                                                                                     10
genotype-environment      correlation,   Corr(genotype,    parenting),   may    be    lower   among

socioeconomically advantaged families than among less socioeconomically advantaged families:



       Hypothesis 2: Corr(genotype, parenting)High_SES < Corr(genotype, parenting)Low_SES



Building on relative risk aversion and effectively maintained inequality, the concept of

compensatory advantage suggests that socioeconomically advantaged parents compensate for

negative child development risks by increasing investments (Bernardi 2014; Bernardi and Grätz

2015). In the context of evocative genotype-environment correlations, compensatory advantage

suggests that socioeconomically advantaged parents will direct more cognitively stimulating

parenting to children with lower genetic propensity towards educational success. This scenario gives

rise to a negative genotype-environment correlation, Corr(genotype, parenting)High_SES < 0, which

would support Hypothesis 2 as long the genotype-environment correlation among less advantaged

families is larger.



Data

We analyze data from the Avon Longitudinal Study of Children and Parents (ALSPAC) (Boyd et al.

2013; Fraser et al. 2013). ALSPAC is a birth-cohort study that sampled 14,541 pregnancies with

expected delivery dates between April 1, 1991, and December 31, 1992, in the former Avon County

around Bristol, United Kingdom. Of these initial pregnancies, there was a total of 14,676 fetuses,

resulting in 14,062 live births and 13,988 children who were alive at 1 year of age. ALSPAC is ideal

for the purpose of our study because a sizable subsample of the children (n=8,801), mothers



                                                                                                    11
(n=9,260), and fathers (n=1,745) are genotyped 1, and because ALSPAC contains information on

parenting and socioeconomic status throughout early childhood. 2 We define our analytic sample as

children with no missing values on parenting measures and child's genotype. These restrictions give

us a sample of 7,738 children. Table 1 provides means and standard deviations for the variables in

our analysis.



Outcome: Parenting

Our outcome variable is cognitively stimulating parenting reported by the mother when the child

was 18, 24, 38, and 57 months old. This age range captures the early childhood before children start

formal schooling, where parents have yet to receive evaluations of their children's academic

abilities. At these ages ALSPAC asked the mother how frequently she engaged in a series of

activities with the child (reading stories, singing songs, cuddling, etc.). Table 2 shows the items for

each survey wave. To obtain a measure of parenting with the least possible amount of measurement

error, we combine all available items from all available waves. We first create summative scores

within each wave, standardize these scores within each wave, and then calculate an average of the

standardized scores. Finally, we standardize this variable to have a mean of zero and a standard

deviation of one. However, analyzing each wave separately reveals the same pattern of results

(results available upon request).




1
  There are many missing cases on father's genotype, since DNA from fathers was collected as a separate study (the
Focus on Fathers 1) when children were 20 years old. This was a clinical study involving a two-hour visit. Invitations to
participate in the study were sent to 3,663 fathers. 2,001 men attended the clinic of whom 1,401 consented to have their
DNA analyzed.
2
  Please note that the study website contains details of all the data that is available through a fully searchable data
dictionary and variable search tool (University of Bristol 2020).
                                                                                                                      12
Table 1 Means and Standard Deviations                          !                !
!                                                              Mean             St. Dev.
                 a
Parenting Score                                                       -1.66E-09              1.00
Education PGSb child                                                   6.47E-05          3.92E-06
Education PGSb motherc                                                 6.48E-05          3.87E-06
Education PGSb fatherd                                                 6.56E-05          3.60E-06
Missing only mother's genotype                                              0.03             0.16
Missing only father's genotype                                              0.59             0.49
Missing both parents' genotypes                                             0.20             0.40
Highest parental educational attainment is university degree                0.24             0.43
Mother's educational attainment                                !                !
  CSE or vocational                                                         0.23             0.42
  O Level                                                                   0.34             0.48
  A Level                                                                   0.24             0.43
  Degree                                                                    0.15             0.35
  Missing education                                                         0.03             0.18
Father's educational attainment                                !                !
  CSE or vocational                                                         0.28             0.45
  O Level                                                                   0.21             0.41
  A Level                                                                   0.26             0.44
  Degree                                                                    0.19             0.40
  Missing education                                                         0.06             0.24
Mother's occupational class                                    !                !
  V - Unskilled                                                             0.03             0.18
  IV - Semi-skilled                                                         0.15             0.36
  III - Manual                                                              0.05             0.21
  III - Non-manual                                                          0.41             0.49
  II - Managerial and technical                                             0.30             0.46
  I - Professional                                                          0.04             0.19
  Missing occupation                                                        0.03             0.16
Father's occupational class                                    !                !
  V - Unskilled                                                             0.03             0.17
  IV - Semi-skilled                                                         0.07             0.25
  III - Manual                                                              0.34             0.47
  III - Non-manual                                                          0.12             0.33
  II - Managerial and technical                                             0.30             0.46
  I - Professional                                                          0.09             0.29
  Missing occupation                                                        0.05             0.22
Standardized family income                                             2.40E-09              0.94
Missing family income                                                       0.12             0.33
Female child                                                                0.49             0.50
N                                                              !                            7,738
Note: aThe parenting score is standardized to have mean zero and standard deviation 1. bPGSs
are not standardized in this table. When used in analyses, the PGSs are standardized to mean
zero and standard deviation. cN=6,008. dN=1,641.
                                                                                                 13
Table 2 Parenting Items
"How often do you do these activities with                      Age in months
your baby/toddler?"                            6         18       24       38          57
Sing to child                                  x         x        x        x           x
Show child pictures in books                   x         .        .        x           .
Read stories or show child pictures in books   .         x        .        .           .
Read child stories                             .         .        x        .           x
Play with toys                                 x         x        .        x           x
Cuddle child                                   x         x        x        x           x
Physical play (e.g. clapping, rolling over)    x         x        .        x           .
Take child for walks                           x         x        .        x           .
Imitation games (pat-a-cake, peek-a-boo)       .         x        .        .           .
Go out to a park or playground with child      .         .        x        .           x
Active play (eg. ball games, hide and seek)    .         .        .        .           x
Take child swimming                            .         .        .        .           x
Draw or paint with child                       .         .        .        .           x
Cronbach's alpha                               0.52      0.68     0.45     0.66        0.73




Predictor: The Polygenic Score for Educational Attainment

Our variable of interest is the polygenic score (PGS) for educational attainment. The PGS is

calculated as a weighted sum score:




where    is the association between SNP j and educational attainment,       is the number of alleles

on SNP j possessed by individual i. We use      weights and SNPs from the most recent GWAS on

educational attainment (Lee et al. 2018). Only SNPs on the autosomal chromosomes are included in
                                                                                             14
the GWAS, so the PGS is by construction orthogonal to sex. Following the recommendations by

Ware and colleagues (2017), we do not prune SNPs in linkage disequilibrium. The mean and the

standard deviation of the raw score for children, mothers, and father are displayed in Table 1. For

the purpose of regression analysis, we standardize the education PGS to have mean zero and

standard deviation 1 within each analytic sample. In the Appendix A, we show that the education

PGS predicts the educational attainment of mothers in the ALSPAC very well, with an incremental

R2 of 14 % (Table A2). This incremental R2 is similar to incremental R2s in other datasets (Lee et al.

2018).



Moderator: Parental Socioeconomic Resources

For the purpose of testing our hypotheses 2, 3 and 3A on whether socioeconomic status moderates

the effect of children's education PGS on parenting, we operationalize high socioeconomic status as

having at least one parent with a university degree and low socioeconomic status as both parents

having less education than a university degree. We focus on education, as an individual's

educational attainment predicts other aspects of socioeconomic status. We get similar results for

occupational class and family income (see Table S8 in the Appendix A).



Control variables

Education. Mother's and father's education are measured indicator variables for (1) certificate of

secondary education or vocational, (2) O level, (3) A level, and (4) university degree. For each

parent, we also include an indicator for missing information on education.

         Occupational class. Mother's and father's occupational class are measured as (1) V -

unskilled, (2) IV - semi-skilled, (3) III - manual, (4) III - non-manual, (5) II - managerial or

                                                                                                     15
technical, (6) I - professional. For fathers, we use their own report if available, and the mother's

report when the father's own report is missing. For each parent, we also include an indicator for

missing information on occupation.

       Family income. Mothers were asked to report their weekly take-home family income on a

five-point ordinal scale when the child was 33 and 47 months old. In order to get a robust measure

of household income, we combine these two variables into a mean of the standardized items. We

standardize this combined household income variable to have mean zero and standard deviation one.

The Cronbach's alpha for this combined measure is 0.88.

       Principal Components of Genetic Variation. To account for the possibility of population

stratification in the genetic data, we control for the first eight principal components (PCs) of the

variation in the SNPs. Since the participants in ALSPAC were recruited from a limited geographical

area it is likely that there are unrecorded family ties. These family ties might distort the principal

component analysis. For this reason, we follow the procedure used by The UK Biobank (Bycroft et

al. 2018) and identify a set of unrelated individuals among the children and mothers, from whom we

calculate the PCs. We estimated the kinship relations using the software KING and used Igraph in R

to find a set of unrelated individuals. For this sample of unrelated individuals, we linkage

disequilibrium (LD) pruned the SNPs and calculated the top 8 PCs using PLINK2.0. Based on this

first principal component analysis, we selected a set of SNPs that contributed very little to the first

three PCs. Using this set of SNPs, we re-estimated the kinship and once again found a set of

unrelated individuals. We LD pruned the original set of SNPs for this unrelated sample and

calculated the 20 PCs. Finally, we projected the full sample on to the PCs. Using PC 1 and PC 2 we

detected 12 outliers. We removed the 12 outliers from the second sample of unrelated individuals,



                                                                                                       16
LD pruned the original set of SNPs for this sample, recalculated the top 20 PCs, and projected them

on to the rest of the sample. We use this final set of the first eight PCS as control variables.



Analytical Strategy

The purpose of the analysis is to estimate the effect of genetic propensity towards educational

success on cognitively stimulating parenting and whether this effect varies across socioeconomic

status.

          The ideal research design in terms preventing confounding (omitted variable bias) is the trio

design, where the education PGS of both parents are included as control variables. Half of the

child's genetic variants stems from the mother and the other half from the father, and a random

process governs which genetic variants each parent passes on to the child. As a result, conditioning

on both parents' education PGSs renders the variation in the child's education PGS exogenous.

Therefore, there are no bias from environmental variation or genetic nurture. Hence, our ideal model

specification is the following:



                                                       (1)



Where for the i indexes children,      is the parenting score,        is the education PGS of the child,

           is the education PGS of the mother, and               is the education PGS of the father.

captures the effect of genetic propensity towards educational success on parenting.

          In ALSPAC a model specification like equation (1) is possible with a subsample of 1,426

children. However, this empirical strategy has two drawbacks. First, this sample size implies a low

statistical power. The incremental R2 would have to be 0.006 to yield a power over 80%. Second,

                                                                                                       17
data on parents' genotypes in ALSPAC is not missing at random: the mean parenting score and the

mean child education PGS are higher in the subsample than in full sample (see Table 1). In addition,

24% in the full sample has at least one parent with a university degree, while this figure is 36%

among the subsample with both parents genotyped (see Table 1).

        To achieve greater statistical power and reduce sample selection, we estimate three

alternative model specifications on the full sample (N=7,738). With this sample size the incremental

R2 can be as low as 0.001 to achieve a statistical power of 80%. We compare these estimates to the

estimate from the trio design on the subsample with both parents genotyped as a tentative test of

whether the direction and magnitude of the coefficients are the same.

        The first model specification in the full sample uses social proxies for parental genotypes.

This strategy assumes that the effect of parental genotype on parenting are completely mediated by

social proxies. These proxies include parents' education, occupational class and income (as

described in the section on control variables):



                                                                            (2)


For the ith child,     is the sex of the child,          and          are vectors of the mother's and

father's education, household income, and occupational class, and         is a vector of children's first

eight principal components of SNP variation. We include PCs to control for population

stratification. As the PGS by construction are orthogonal to the sex of the child, we only include this

variable to reduce overall variation and decrease standard errors. Assuming that this set of control

variables captures the relevant confounders,         is the estimated effect of the child's genetic




                                                                                                       18
propensity towards educational success on the amount of cognitively stimulating parenting the child

receives.

        In the second model specification in the full sample, we include the education PGS of the

mother. This allows us to control directly for confounding by the mother's genetic propensity

towards educational success by way of the 50 % shared genes between offspring and parents. We

drop the social proxies of mother's genotype to avoid collider bias, but we keep the social proxies

for the genotype of the father to rule out confounding. Hence, we specify the following model:



                                                                                              (3)



where           is the education PGS of the mother,             is a vector of variables for father's

education and occupational class,        is an indicator for missing the mother's genotype,         are

the child's first eight PCs of SNP variation, an       is a vector of the mother's first eight PCs of

SNP variation. If we have controlled for all relevant confounders,           captures the effect of

children's genetic propensity towards educational success on cognitively stimulating parenting.

        In the third model specification in the full sample, we include the education PGS of the

father while keeping the social proxies for the father's genotype as only 20% of the sample has a

genotyped father:



                                                                                        (4)



where           is the father's education PGS.           is a vector of an indicator for missing

information on the genotype of the mother, an indicator of missing information on the genotype of
                                                                                                    19
the father, and an indicator of missing information on both parents' genotypes.      captures the effect

of children's genetic propensity towards educational success on cognitively stimulating parenting.

         In the final step of our analysis we examine whether the effect of genetic propensity towards

educational success on cognitively stimulating parenting varies across socioeconomic status. For

this purpose, we specify a model with an interaction terms between the education PGS of the child,

       , and an indicator of having a least one parent with a university,    :             . We do not

include any variable that might mediate the effect of parental education on parenting, which limits

our set of control variables to the mother's education PGS, father's education PGS, and the

indicators of missing information on parents' genotypes:



                                                                                                   (5)



   captures variation across socioeconomic status in parenting response to children's genetic make-

up. Hypothesis 2 states that genetic propensity towards educational success is unrelated to

cognitively stimulating parenting in socioeconomically advantaged families, which corresponds to

   +      = 0. Hypothesis 3 states that genetic propensity towards educational success is negatively

related to cognitively stimulating parenting among socioeconomically advantaged families, which

corresponds to       +     < 0. Hypothesis 3A states that genetic propensity towards educational

success is unrelated to cognitively stimulating parenting among socioeconomically disadvantaged

families, which corresponds to      = 0. However, for the interaction term       to be unbiased we need

exogenous variation both in the child's education PGS and in parental education. Unfortunately, we

do not have exogenous variation in parental education, so this part of the analysis represents a

tentative test. ALSPAC data has been used to estimate the casual effect of parental education on
                                                                                                     20
children's educational performance using the 1972 schooling reform that increased minimum

schooling age (Dickson, Gregg, and Robinson 2016). However, a well-powered genotype-

environment interaction analysis relying on the 1972 reform needs a much larger sample than

ALSPAC (Barcellos, Carvalho, and Turley 2018). Future research may follow up with analyses on

large-scale data sets including both parents' and children's genotypes and exogenous variation in

educational attainment.



Results

Children's Education PGS and Parenting during Toddlerhood and Preschool Years

We start by testing hypothesis 1 that genetic propensity towards educational success increases

cognitively stimulating parenting in early childhood. We regress parenting at the ages 18-57 months

on child's education PGS.

       The zero-order correlation between the parenting score and children's education PGS is

0.087*** (s.e.= 0.011). Table 3 shows results from our three model specifications on the full

sample, all with the goal of reducing upward bias in this estimate (for full regression tables see

Table A4). The three model specifications deliver similar results. In Model 1 that controls for social

proxies of parental genotypes and children's PCs of SNP variation the estimate is 0.033**

(s.e.=0.012). In Model 2 that controls for mothers' education PGS, social proxies of the father's

genotype, and the children's and mother's PCs for SNP variation, the estimate is 0.042** (0.014). In

Model 3 that controls both parents' education PGS and social proxies for the father's genotype, the

estimate is 0.046** (0.014). These estimates suggest that one standard deviation increase in the




                                                                                                   21
child's education PGS leads to about 3-5% of a standard deviation increase in cognitively

stimulating parenting. 3



    Table 3 Parenting during Early Childhood Regressed on Child's Education Polygenic Score
    !                                      Model 1 !       ! Model 2 !          ! Model 3 !
    !                                      coef.    s.e.   ! coef.      s.e.    ! coef.        s.e.
    Child's polygenic score                0.033** (0.012) ! 0.042** (0.014) ! 0.046** (0.014)
    Female child                           yes             ! yes                ! yes
    Mother's education                     yes             ! !          !       ! !            !
    Father's education                     yes             ! yes                ! yes
    Mother's occupation                    yes             ! !          !       ! !            !
    Father's occupation                    yes             ! !          !       ! !            !
    Family income                          yes             ! !          !       ! !            !
    Child's principal components           yes                yes
    Mother's principal components          yes                yes
    Mother's polygenic score               !        !      ! yes                ! yes
    Father's polygenic score               !        !      ! !          !       ! yes          !
    Mother's polygenic score missing                          yes               ! yes
    Father's polygenic score missing!                         !         !       ! yes
    Both polygenic scores missing                             !         !          yes
    N                                      7,738    !      ! 7,738      !       ! 7,738        !
    R2                                     0.047    !      ! 0.035      !       ! 0.032        !
    Note: Cluster robust standard errors. *** p<0.001; ** p<0.01; * p<0.05; (two-tailed tests).




In addition, we regress the parenting score on child education PGS in in the subsample with both

parents genotyped, which allow us to control for both the mother's and the father's education PGS.

As explained in the Analytical Strategy section, this design ensures exogenous variation in the

child's education PGS. With the ALSPAC data, however, the design results in sample selection and

low statistical power. The zero-order correlation between the parenting score and the child's

education PGS in the subsample is 0.074** (s.e.=0.026), which is lower but not too far from the


3
  We find similar results in analyses using a PGS based on a GWAS of performance in cognitive tests (available upon
request).
                                                                                                                      22
zero-order correlation in the full sample (0.087***, s.e.= 0.011). The post-hoc statistical power for

the child's education PGS is only 21 % as opposed to 76-81 % for models in the full sample (see

Table A3 in Appendix A). A statistical power of 21% gives us too slim of a change to discover a

true effect. Bearing these limitations in mind, we discuss the result from the ideal estimation

strategy on the subsample to assess whether the coefficients are comparable in direction and

magnitude. In the fully controlled Model 1 (Table A5 in Appendix A), the coefficient it 0.048

(s.e.=0.041) which closely resembles the results from the full sample although not statistically

significant. Figure 1 provides an overview of the results from the subsample and full sample.

       In sum the regression results suggest that parents reinforce children's genetic propensity

towards educational success by providing more cognitively stimulating activities to children with

higher education PGS. This finding supports our first hypothesis that genetic propensity towards

educational success increases cognitively stimulating parenting in early childhood.



Figure 1 Comparison of Estimates of Parenting during Early Childhood Regressed on Child's
Education Polygenic Scores for Full Sample and Subsample with Both Parents Genotypes




Note: 95 % confidence intervals are calculated from cluster robust standard errors. Estimate A and
B are the zero-order estimates from the full sample (n=7,738) and the subsample with both parents
genotyped (n=1,426). Estimate C, D, and E are from Model 1, 2, and 3 in Table 3, respectively, all
estimated on the full sample. Estimate F is estimated on the subsample (n=1,426) and is controlled
for education polygenic scores of the mother and the father (Model 1, Table A5).


                                                                                                  23
Placebo Tests

We conduct two placebo tests, one for the outcome, cognitively stimulating parenting during early

childhood, and one for the variable of interest, the education PGS.

       As a placebo test for the variable of interest, we regress cognitively stimulating parenting on

children's PGS for height and PGS for body mass index (BMI) (Yengo et al. 2018). We do not

expect that SNPs associated with height and BMI will predict cognitively stimulating parenting.

Hence, if the PGS for height and the PGS for BMI predicts cognitively stimulating parenting this

would suggest that the association between the education PGS and cognitively stimulating parenting

is spurious.

       Figure 2 shows the zero order correlations and estimates from a model specification like

equation (4) (for the full regression tables see Table A6 in Appendix A). The dashed line in Figure 2

represents the estimate of cognitively stimulating parenting regressed on children's education PGS

from the same model specification (Model 3, Table 3). Both zero order correlations and estimates

controlled for confounding are not statistically significant different from zero, and as compared to

the magnitude of the education PGS estimate, also substantially closer to zero.




                                                                                                   24
Figure 2 Parenting Regressed on Child's BMI Polygenic Score and Height Polygenic Score




Note: The dashed line represents the estimate of parenting regressed on children's education PGS
from Model 3, Table 3 (0.046**, s.e.=0.014). 95% confidence intervals are calculated from cluster
robust standard errors. Full sample N=7,738. For full regression tables see Table A6.


       As another placebo test for the outcome, we regress cognitively stimulating parenting at age

six months on the child's education PGS. As we mentioned in the theoretical framework, we

speculate that genetic propensity towards educational success leads to child behavior that evokes

cognitively stimulating parenting. Such child behaviors may include intentionally communicating

for shared attention with the parent (e.g., when the child with coordinated eye contact points to

something exciting to share enjoyment) (Salley et al. 2020). At the age of six months, children are

yet to exhibit such communication skills. While children at this age may communicate via eye-

gazing, vocalizing (e.g., babbling and crying), and gesturing (e.g., reaching), the combination of

                                                                                                25
these three elements into intentional communication takes off between 8 months and 12 months

(Ramenzoni and Liszkowski 2016; Reilly et al. 2006; Salley et al. 2020). Further, there is no

research showing that motor skills at this age is associated with later outcomes (Oster 2019). Thus,

at this developmental stage, it is too early for children's genetic propensity towards educational

success to be expressed via child behavior. At age six months, parents' educational achievement

predicts cognitively stimulating parenting (see Table A9). If the child's education PGS merely

reflects social class or associated background characteristics, then the child's education PGS will

predict parenting at age six months. Hence, we expect not to find any effect of children's education

PGS on cognitively stimulating parenting at age six months.

       Figure 3 shows the results (for the full regression results see Table A7 in Appendix A).

Except for the upwardly biased zero-order correlation in the full sample (estimate A), none of the

estimates are statistically different from zero, and their magnitudes range from 0-1% of a standard

deviation. The largest coefficient is only a fifth of the size of the coefficient from a regression on

cognitively stimulating parenting at age 18-57 months in Model 3, Table 3 (represented in Figure 3

by the dashed line). These results corroborate the results from the main analysis.




                                                                                                   26
Figure 3 Parenting at Age Six Months Regressed on Child's Education Polygenic Score




Note: The dashed line represents the estimate of parenting age 18-57 months regressed on children's
education polygenic scores from Model 3, Table 3 (0.046**, s.e.=0.014). 95% confidence intervals
are calculated from cluster robust standard errors. Estimate A is the zero-order estimate from the full
sample (n=7,291). Estimate B, C, and D are from Model 1, 2, and 3 in Table A7, respectively, all
estimated on the full sample.




Socioeconomic Differences in Parenting Response to Children's Education PGS

We now turn to our second research question, whether the effect of genetic propensity towards

educational success varies by socioeconomic status. To answer this research question we test

hypothesis 2 stating that the correlation between children's genetic propensity towards educational

success and cognitively stimulating parenting is lower among socioeconomically advantaged

families than among less advantaged families.

       We test hypothesis 2 by regressing the parenting score on an interaction terms between the

child's education PGS and university degree as highest parental education. Table 4 shows the result.
                                                                                                    27
The main term for children's education PGS is 0.074*** (s.e.=0.016), the main term for college-

educated parents is 0.204*** (s.e.=0.027), and the interaction term between children's education

PGS and college-educated parents is -0.063* (s.e.=0.025) (Model 5, Table 4). 4 In Appendix A,

Table A5, we show that, although attenuated and not statistically significant, this pattern is

replicated in the subsample with both parents genotyped. These results suggest that the correlation

between children's education PGS and parenting could be lower among socioeconomically

advantaged families than among disadvantaged families. Figure 4 illustrates this finding. While a

standard deviation increase in children's education PGS is associated with a 7% increase of a

standard deviation in parenting among children of parents without university degrees, this is only

1% for children of parents with university degrees and not statistically different from zero. This

finding supports hypothesis 2 that genetic propensity towards educational success is less correlated

with cognitively stimulating parenting in socioeconomically advantaged families than in less

advantaged families. It should be noted, that having college-educated parents is associated with a

20% increase of a standard deviation in the parenting score. Perhaps the high baseline investment

among socioeconomically advantaged families means that evoked genotype-environment

correlations in cognitively stimulating parenting during early childhood matter less. 5,6

         As we mentioned in the analytical strategy section, we do not have exogenous variation in

parental education. Consequently, the association between parental education and parenting and the

4
  The results are similar for interactions between child education PGS and occupational class and family income
(available upon request).
5
  We have also tested for interactions between the child's education PGS and (1) the mother's education PGS, (2) birth
order/sibship size, and (3) sex of the child among firstborns (results available upon request). Only the interaction with
birth order/sibship size is statically different from zero. This interaction is negative, perhaps, indicating that less time per
child leaves less room for parents to pick up on child behaviors stemming from the genetic propensity towards
educational success.
6
  During the early 1990s, preschool in the UK was not publicly subsidized. Some of the ALSPAC cohort may have been
affected by a reform in 1996 providing vouchers for daycare to 3-year olds, but for the majority of the period we study,
there was no public support of child care (West and Noden 2016). While there is an educational gradient in the use of
preschools, controlling for age of preschool enrollment does not change the interaction results (available upon request).
                                                                                                                            28
interaction term between children's education PGS and parental university degree may be

confounded.



Table 4 Parenting during Early Childhood Regressed on Child's Polygenic Score by Education
                                                                               Model 4 !
                                                                               coef.       s.e.
Child's polygenic score                                                        0.074*** (0.016)
Degree                                                                         0.204*** (0.027)
Child's polygenic score x degree                                               -0.063* (0.025)
Parental education missing                                                     0.010       (0.086)
Child's polygenic score x parental education missing                           0.051       (0.083)
Female child                                                                   0.136*** (0.023)
Mother's polygenic score                                                       0.004       (0.015)
Father's polygenic score                                                       -0.008      (0.024)
Mother's polygenic score missing                                               -0.120      (0.072)
Father's polygenic score missing!                                              -0.006      (0.028)
Both polygenic scores missing                                                  -0.107** (0.037)
Constant                                                                       -0.079** (0.028)
N                                                                              7,738       !
R2                                                                             0.021       !
Note: Cluster robust standard errors. *** p<0.001; ** p<0.01; * p<0.05; (two-tailed tests).




                                                                                                 29
Figure 4 The Association between Child's Education Polygenic Score and Cognitively Stimulating
Parenting by Highest Parental Education




Note: 95% confidence intervals are calculated from cluster robust standard errors. N=7,738.



Specific Parenting Activities

Finally, we analyze whether specific parent-child activities drive the overall effect on cognitively

stimulating parenting. For activities that are reported at least three times, we calculate an average

across early childhood (18-57 months). As for the overall score for cognitively stimulating

parenting, we choose this strategy to minimize measurement error. A series of items involves shared

parent-child book reading, but the items change phrasing as the child ages ("show child pictures in

books", "read stories or show child pictures in books", and "read child stories"). We group these

items under the heading "reading". Figure 5 shows the results (full regression results are presented

                                                                                                  30
in Table A8 in the Appendix A) with the dashed line representing the effect of the summary score

for cognitively stimulating parenting in Model 3, Table 3. The effect appears to be driven by reading

(0.051***, s.e.=0.014), singing (0.039**, s.e.=0.014), and playing with toy (0.039**, s.e.=0.015),

while cuddling (0.011, s.e.=0.013), physical play (0.008, s.e.=0.015), and going for walks (0.004,

s.e.=0.014) appear much less affected. Given that success in the educational system (as in getting

many years of education) is highly dependent on language proficiency, it is not surprising that

children's genetic propensity towards educational success evokes activities involving language

stimulation.



Figure 5 Specific Parenting Activities Regressed on Child's Education Polygenic Score




Note: All models are estimated like the model specification of equation (4). 95 % confidence
intervals are calculated from cluster robust standard errors. Full sample, sample size varies between
7,583 and 7,738 (see Table A8 in Appendix A). The dashed line represents the estimate of parenting
regressed on children's education PGS from Model 3, Table 3 (0.046**, s.e.=0.014).


                                                                                                  31
Discussion

Parenting is often conceptualized as a uni-directional socialization process. But parenting is a

dynamic process, where parents respond to children's interests and skills (Bell 1968; Feinstein et al.

2008; Melhuish et al. 2008). As an example, children are active agents in initiating and shaping

shared book reading (Hall et al. 2018; Luo and Tamis-LeMonda 2017). The previous literature has

considered parenting responses to birthweight, early cognitive skills, and school performance

(Abufhele, Behrman, and Bravo 2017; Aizer and Cunha 2012; Grätz and Torche 2016; Hsin 2012;

Quadlin 2015; Restrepo 2016). Most recently children's genetic propensity towards educational

success has been shown to influence parenting during middle childhood and adolescence (Sanz-de-

Galdeano and Terskaya n.d.; Wertz et al. 2020). While parents matter throughout children's lives,

the early years are especially critical to child development: Both socioeconomic and genetic

disparities in cognitive skills show up before school age (Belsky et al. 2016; Ermisch 2008;

Feinstein 2003; von Hippel and Hamrock 2019), and parental investments in this period can have

effects well into adulthood (Gertler et al. 2014). Furthermore, parenting responses to other child

characteristics are often dependent on family socioeconomic status (Aizer and Cunha 2012; Grätz

and Torche 2016; Hsin 2012; Restrepo 2016). There has been no investigation of whether

socioeconomic status affects the parenting response to children's genetic makeup. In this study, we

considered the effect of children's genetic propensity towards educational success on cognitively

stimulating parenting during early childhood (age 18 months to 4 years and 9 months), and whether

this effect varied across family socioeconomic status.

       Our study advances prior work in several ways. First, we draw on molecular genetic data to

construct education polygenic scores (PGS) using the newest GWAS results (Lee et al. 2018), which

gives us a direct measure of children's and parents' genotypes. The advantages of genotype over

                                                                                                   32
past measures of child endowment are that unlike test scores, genotype is fixed and causally prior to

any investments on the part of the parents. Unlike birthweight ­ which is a visible, culturally-

encoded signal at birth to parents, medical professionals and others ­ it is only revealed through the

relevant behavior of the child over the course of development. Second, our large sample size

(N=7,738) allows for a statistically well-powered analysis (post-hoc power ~ 80%). Third, in a

sensitivity analysis for a subsample we control for both the mother's and father's education PGS.

This trio design plausibly renders the variation in the child' education PGS completely exogenous to

family characteristics. Finally, pooling observation from across early childhood (age 18-57 months),

we construct a robust measure of cognitively stimulating parenting less prone to measurement

errors.

          We find that children's education PGS has a positive effect on cognitively stimulating

parenting. An increase of one standard deviation in the children's education PGS increases

cognitively stimulating parenting with 3-5% of a standard deviation. This effect varies across family

socioeconomic status: College-educated parents do not respond, while non-college-educated parents

do respond (7%). To put these findings in perspective, having a least one college-educated parent is

associated with a 20% increase in the standard deviation of cognitively stimulating parenting. An

interpretation of the variation across socioeconomic status may be that college-educated parents are

already investing so heavily in children's cognitive development that the child's genetic make-up

makes less of a difference.

          Our study is subject to at least three limitations. First, 79% of our analytic sample lacks

information on fathers' genotype as less than a third of the ALSPAC fathers were invited to provide

DNA. In order to achieve enough statistical power, we utilize the full sample and estimate models

that in addition to controlling for father's education PGS controls for social proxies for father's

                                                                                                   33
genotype and indicators of missing. If this strategy does not sufficiently control for father's

genotype, the effect of children's education PGS on parenting may be exaggerated via passive

genotype-environment correlations. We address this issue by analyzing the direction and magnitude

of the coefficients in a smaller subsample (N=1,426) with both parents' genotyped. Results from

this trio design support our main findings. We also address the issues of confounding from passive

genotype-environment correlations by conducting several placebo tests. PGSs for traits unrelated to

educational success ­ BMI and height ­ show no effect on parenting. Meanwhile, parenting at age

six months--a developmental stage before genetic signature would have displayed a clear

behavioral signature in the child--is unaffected.

       Second, our analysis of variation across socioeconomic status is limited in its ability to

provide causal evidence as we do not have exogenous variation in parental education, our indicator

of socioeconomic status. Further, this part of the analysis is less statistically powered than the

analysis of the main effect. However, to our knowledge ALSPAC is the largest data set available

with information on both genotype and cognitively stimulating parenting during early childhood.

       Third, we only analyze children with European ancestries which contributes to the

increasing inequality in sociogenetic information between different ancestral populations. PGSs

predict best in samples with similar ancestries as the GWAS discovery sample. While GWAS on

other ancestries than European are getting increasingly well-powered, to date there is no well-

powered GWAS on educational attainment in other ancestries than European. In addition, ALSPAC

only provides genetic information children with European ancestries. Hopefully, the increasing

ancestral inequality in sociogenetic research will be address by future data collections among

diverse populations.



                                                                                                  34
       With these limitations in mind, our study offers some interesting theoretical implications.

While we know that educational attainment has a genetic component (Branigan et al. 2013; Conley

et al. 2015), the mechanisms are unclear. Within sociology, it is a long held idea that genotype

elicits certain responses from the social environment such as parents and that these social responses

create the outcome (Jencks 1972, 1980). Up until recently, this hypothesis was untestable. Our study

provides the first evidence, that children's genetic propensity towards educational success affects

the amount of cognitive stimulation they receive in early childhood. Moreover, this evocative

genotype-environment correlation itself is likely dependent on the social environment. This finding

highlights the complex interplay between social and genetic factors in creating the outcomes we

observe. In the decades to come, where genotyping will become cheaper, and potentially an

everyday tool, it is important to keep in mind that genetic effects are contingent on social factors

and cannot be seen in isolation from the social environment.



Ethical approval and informed consent: Ethical approval for the study was obtained from the
ALSPAC Ethics and Law Committee and the Local Research Ethics Committees. Informed consent
for the use of data collected via questionnaires and clinics was obtained from participants following
the recommendations of the ALSPAC Ethics and Law Committee at the time. Consent for
biological samples has been collected in accordance with the Human Tissue Act (2004).

Acknowledgement: We are extremely grateful to all the families who took part in this study, the
midwives for their help in recruiting them, and the whole ALSPAC team, which includes
interviewers, computer and laboratory technicians, clerical workers, research scientists, volunteers,
managers, receptionists and nurses. Earlier version of this manuscript was presented at RC28 Spring
Meeting in Frankfurt March 2019, Population Association of America April 2019, Integrating
Genetics and the Social Science October 2019, at the Princeton Biosociology Lab January 2020, and
at the Human Capital, History, Demography & Development seminar at the Department of
Economics at the University of Michigan March 2020. We thank participants at these conferences
and workshops for valuable feedback. A special thanks to Ramina Sotoudeh for constructing the
polygenic score for educational attainment, and to Anna Sanz-de-Galdeano, Michael Grätz, and
Lawrence Berger for comments on the manuscript.

Funding information: The research leading to the results presented in this article has received
funding from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation (Pioneer Award) and the Independent Research
                                                                                                35
Fund Denmark (grant number: 8025-00008B). The UK Medical Research Council and Wellcome
(Grant ref: 217065/Z/19/Z) and the University of Bristol provide core support for ALSPAC. This
publication is the work of the authors, and Asta Breinholt and Dalton Conley will serve as
guarantors for the contents of this paper. A comprehensive list of grants funding is available on the
ALSPAC website (http://www.bristol.ac.uk/alspac/external/documents/grant-
acknowledgements.pdf); This research was specifically funded by Wellcome Trust and MRC (grant
number: 092731). GWAS data was generated by Sample Logistics and Genotyping Facilities at
Wellcome Sanger Institute and LabCorp (Laboratory Corporation of America) using support from
23andMe.


References

Abufhele, Alejandra, Jere Behrman, and David Bravo. 2017. "Parental Preferences and Allocations
      of Investments in Children's Learning and Health within Families." Social Science &
      Medicine 194:76­86. doi: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2017.09.051.

Aizer, Anna, and Cunha. 2012. "The Production of Human Capital: Endowments, Investments and
       Fertility." NBER Working Paper No. 18429.

Andrew, Alison, Orazio P. Attanasio, Emla O. A. Fitzsimons, Sally M. Grantham-McGregor,
      Costas Meghir, and Marta Rubio-Codina. 2018. "Impacts 2 Years after a Scalable Early
      Childhood Development Intervention to Increase Psychosocial Stimulation in the Home: A
      Follow-up of a Cluster Randomised Controlled Trial in Colombia." PLoS Medicine
      15(4):e1002556. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1002556.

Attanasio, Orazio P., Camila Fernández, Emla O. A. Fitzsimons, Sally M. Grantham-McGregor,
       Costas Meghir, and Marta Rubio-Codina. 2014. "Using the Infrastructure of a Conditional
       Cash Transfer Program to Deliver a Scalable Integrated Early Child Development Program
       in Colombia." BMJ: British Medical Journal 349(sep29 5):g5785­g5785. doi:
       10.1136/bmj.g5785.

Avinun, Reut, and Ariel Knafo. 2014. "Parenting as a Reaction Evoked by Children's Genotype: A
      Meta-Analysis of Children-as-Twins Studies." Personality and Social Psychology Review
      18(1):87­102. doi: 10.1177/1088868313498308.

Barcellos, Silvia H., Leandro S. Carvalho, and Patrick Turley. 2018. "Education Can Reduce Health
       Differences Related to Genetic Risk of Obesity." Proceedings of the National Academy of
       Sciences of the United States of America 115(42):E9765­72. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1802909115.

Bell, Richard Q. 1968. "A Reinterpretation of The Direction of Effects in Studies of Socialization."
        Psychological Review 75(2):81­95. doi: 10.1037/h0025583.

Belsky, Daniel W., Benjamin W. Domingue, Robbee Wedow, Louise Arseneault, Jason D.
       Boardman, Avshalom Caspi, Dalton Conley, Jason M. Fletcher, Jeremy Freese, Pamela
       Herd, Terrie E. Moffitt, Richie Poulton, Kamil Sicinski, Jasmin Wertz, and Kathleen Mullan
       Harris. 2018. "Genetic Analysis of Social-Class Mobility in Five Longitudinal Studies."
                                                                                               36
       Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115(31):E7275. doi:
       10.1073/pnas.1801238115.

Belsky, Daniel W., Terrie E. Moffitt, David L. Corcoran, Benjamin Domingue, HonaLee
       Harrington, Sean Hogan, Renate Houts, Sandhya Ramrakha, Karen Sugden, Benjamin S.
       Williams, Richie Poulton, and Avshalom Caspi. 2016. "The Genetics of Success."
       Psychological Science 27(7):957­72. doi: 10.1177/0956797616643070.

Bernardi, Fabrizio. 2014. "Compensatory Advantage as a Mechanism of Educational Inequality: A
       Regression Discontinuity Based on Month of Birth." Sociology of Education 87(2):74­88.
       doi: 10.1177/0038040714524258.

Bernardi, Fabrizio, and Michael Grätz. 2015. "Making Up for an Unlucky Month of Birth in School:
       Causal Evidence on the Compensatory Advantage of Family Background in England."
       Sociological Science 2(12).

Bono, Emilia Del, Marco Francesconi, Yvonne Kelly, and Amanda Sacker. 2016. "Early Maternal
       Time Investment and Early Child Outcomes." The Economic Journal 126(596):F96­135.
       doi: 10.1111/ecoj.12342.

Boyd, Andy, Jean Golding, John Macleod, Debbie A. Lawlor, Abigail Fraser, John Henderson,
      Lynn Molloy, Andy Ness, Susan Ring, and George Davey Smith. 2013. "Cohort Profile: The
      'Children of the 90s'--the Index Offspring of the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and
      Children." International Journal of Epidemiology 42(1):111­27. doi: 10.1093/ije/dys064.

Branigan, Amelia R., Kenneth J. McCallum, and Jeremy Freese. 2013. "Variation in the Heritability
       of Educational Attainment: An International Meta-Analysis." Social Forces 92(1):109­40.

Breen, Richard, and John H. Goldthorpe. 1997. "Explaining Educational Differentials. Towards a
       Formal Rational Action Theory." Rationality and Society (9):275­305.

Bycroft, Clare, Colin Freeman, Desislava Petkova, Gavin Band, Lloyd T. Elliott, Kevin Sharp,
       Allan Motyer, Damjan Vukcevic, Olivier Delaneau, Jared O'Connell, Adrian Cortes,
       Samantha Welsh, Alan Young, Mark Effingham, Gil McVean, Stephen Leslie, Naomi Allen,
       Peter Donnelly, and Jonathan Marchini. 2018. "The UK Biobank Resource with Deep
       Phenotyping and Genomic Data." Nature 562(7726):203­203. doi: 10.1038/s41586-018-
       0579-z.

Cano, Tomás, Francisco Perales, and Janeen Baxter. 2019. "A Matter of Time: Father Involvement
       and Child Cognitive Outcomes." Journal of Marriage and Family 81(1):164­84.

Conley, Dalton, Benjamin W. Domingue, David Cesarini, Christopher Dawes, Cornelius A.
      Rietveld, and Jason D. Boardman. 2015. "Is the Effect of Parental Education on Offspring
      Biased or Moderated by Genotype?" Sociological Science 2:82­105. doi:
      http://dx.doi.org.ep.fjernadgang.kb.dk/10.15195/v2.a6.



                                                                                                 37
Cunha, Flavio, James J. Heckman, Lance Lochner, and Dimitriy V. Masterov. 2006. "Interpreting
       the Evidence on Life Cycle Skill Formation." Pp. 697­812 in Handbook of the Economics of
       Education. Vol. 1, edited by E. H. and F. Welch. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Dickson, Matt, Paul Gregg, and Harriet Robinson. 2016. "Early, Late or Never? When Does
      Parental Education Impact Child Outcomes?" The Economic Journal 126(596):F184­231.
      doi: 10.1111/ecoj.12356.

Domingue, Benjamin W., Daniel W. Belsky, Dalton Conley, Kathleen Mullan Harris, and Jason D.
     Boardman. 2015. "Polygenic Influence on Educational Attainment." AERA Open 1(3):1­13.
     doi: 10.1177/2332858415599972.

Doyle, Orla, Colm Harmon, James J. Heckman, Caitriona Logue, and Seong Hyeok Moon. 2017.
       "Early Skill Formation and the Efficiency of Parental Investment: A Randomized Controlled
       Trial of Home Visiting." Labour Economics 45:40­58. doi: 10.1016/j.labeco.2016.11.002.

Doyle, Orla, Edel McGlanaghy, Christine O'Farrelly, and Richard E. Tremblay. 2016. "Can
       Targeted Intervention Mitigate Early Emotional and Behavioral Problems?: Generating
       Robust Evidence within Randomized Controlled Trials." PLoS ONE 11(6):e0156397­
       e0156397. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0156397.

Ermisch, John. 2008. "Origins of Social Immobility and Inequality: Parenting and Early Child
      Development." National Institute Economic Review 205(1):62­71. doi:
      http://dx.doi.org.ep.fjernadgang.kb.dk/10.1177/0027950108096589.

Feinstein, Leon. 2003. "Inequality in the Early Cognitive Development of British Children in the
       1970 Cohort." Economica 70(277):73­97. doi: 10.1111/1468-0335.t01-1-00272.

Feinstein, Leon, Kathryn Duckworth, and Ricardo Sabates. 2008. Education and the Family:
       Passing Success Across the Generations. London; New York: Routledge.

Fiorini, Mario, and Michael P. Keane. 2014. "How the Allocation of Children's Time Affects
        Cognitive and Noncognitive Development." Journal of Labor Economics 32(4):787­836.

Fraser, Abigail, Corrie Macdonald-Wallis, Kate Tilling, Andy Boyd, Jean Golding, George Davey
        Smith, John Henderson, John Macleod, Lynn Molloy, Andy Ness, Susan Ring, Scott M.
        Nelson, and Debbie A. Lawlor. 2013. "Cohort Profile: The Avon Longitudinal Study of
        Parents and Children: ALSPAC Mothers Cohort." International Journal of Epidemiology
        42(1):97­110. doi: 10.1093/ije/dys066.

Gertler, Paul, James Heckman, Rodrigo Pinto, Arianna Zanolini, Christel Vermeersch, Susan
        Walker, Susan M. Chang, and Sally Grantham-McGregor. 2014. "Labor Market Returns to
        an Early Childhood Stimulation Intervention in Jamaica." Science 344(6187):998­1001. doi:
        10.1126/science.1251178.




                                                                                                   38
Grätz, Michael, and Florencia Torche. 2016. "Compensation or Reinforcement? The Stratification
       of Parental Responses to Children's Early Ability." Demography 1­22. doi:
       10.1007/s13524-016-0527-1.

Hall, Mel, Rachael Levy, and Jenny Preece. 2018. "`No-One Would Sleep If We Didn't Have
       Books!': Understanding Shared Reading as Family Practice and Family Display." Journal of
       Early Childhood Research 16(4):363­77. doi: 10.1177/1476718X18809389.

Heckman, James J., and Stefano Mosso. 2014. "The Economics of Human Development and Social
     Mobility." Annual Review of Economics 6(1):689­733. doi: 10.1146/annurev-economics-
     080213-040753.

von Hippel, Paul T., and Caitlin Hamrock. 2019. "Do Test Score Gaps Grow Before, During, or
       Between the School Years? Measurement Artifacts and What We Can Know in Spite of
       Them." Sociological Science.

Hsin, Amy. 2012. "Is Biology Destiny? Birth Weight and Differential Parental Treatment."
       Demography 49(4):1385­1405. doi: 10.1007/s13524-012-0123-y.

Hsin, Amy, and Christina Felfe. 2014. "When Does Time Matter? Maternal Employment,
       Children's Time With Parents, and Child Development." Demography 51(5):1867­94. doi:
       10.1007/s13524-014-0334-5.

Jencks, Christopher. 1972. Inequality; a Reassessment of the Effect of Family and Schooling in
       America. New York: Harper Row.

Jencks, Christopher. 1980. "Heredity, Environment, and Public Policy Reconsidered." American
       Sociological Review 45(5):723­36. doi: 10.2307/2094892.

Kendler, Kenneth S., and Jessica H. Baker. 2007. "Genetic Influences on Measures of the
      Environment: A Systematic Review." Psychological Medicine 37(5):615­26. doi:
      10.1017/S0033291706009524.

Klahr, Ashlea M., S. Alexandra Burt, Leslie D. Leve, Daniel S. Shaw, Jody M. Ganiban, David
       Reiss, and Jenae M. Neiderhiser. 2016. "Birth and Adoptive Parent Antisocial Behavior and
       Parenting: A Study of Evocative Gene­Environment Correlation." Child Development
       88(2):505­13. doi: 10.1111/cdev.12619.

Kong, Augustine, Gudmar Thorleifsson, Michael L. Frigge, Bjarni J. Vilhjalmsson, Alexander I.
      Young, Thorgeir E. Thorgeirsson, Stefania Benonisdottir, Asmundur Oddsson, Bjarni V.
      Halldorsson, Gisli Masson, Daniel F. Gudbjartsson, Agnar Helgason, Gyda Bjornsdottir,
      Unnur Thorsteinsdottir, and Kari Stefansson. 2018. "The Nature of Nurture: Effects of
      Parental Genotypes." Science 359(6374):424­28. doi: 10.1126/science.aan6877.

Lee, James J., Robbee Wedow, Aysu Okbay, Edward Kong, Omeed Maghzian, Meghan Zacher,
       Tuan Anh Nguyen-Viet, Peter Bowers, Julia Sidorenko, Richard Karlsson Linnér, Mark
       Alan Fontana, Tushar Kundu, Chanwook Lee, Hui Li, Ruoxi Li, Rebecca Royer, Pascal N.
                                                                                                 39
Timshel, Raymond K. Walters, Emily A. Willoughby, Loïc Yengo, Michelle Agee, Babak
Alipanahi, Adam Auton, Robert K. Bell, Katarzyna Bryc, Sarah L. Elson, Pierre Fontanillas,
David A. Hinds, Jennifer C. McCreight., Karen E. Huber, Nadia K. Litterman, Matthew H.
McIntyre, Joanna L. Mountain, Elizabeth S. Noblin, Carrie A. M. Northover, Steven J. Pitts,
J. Fah Sathirapongsasuti, Olga V. Sazonova, Janie F. Shelton, Suyash Shringarpure, Chao
Tian, Vladimir Vacic, Catherine H. Wilson, Aysu Okbay, Jonathan P. Beauchamp, Mark
Alan Fontana, James J. Lee, Tune H. Pers, Cornelius A. Rietveld, Patrick Turley, Guo-Bo
Chen, Valur Emilsson, S. Fleur W. Meddens, Sven Oskarsson, Joseph K. Pickrell, Kevin
Thom, Pascal Timshel, Ronald de Vlaming, Abdel Abdellaoui, Tarunveer S. Ahluwalia,
Jonas Bacelis, Clemens Baumbach, Gyda Bjornsdottir, Johannes H. Brandsma, Maria Pina
Concas, Jaime Derringer, Nicholas A. Furlotte, Tessel E. Galesloot, Giorgia Girotto, Richa
Gupta, Leanne M. Hall, Sarah E. Harris, Edith Hofer, Momoko Horikoshi, Jennifer E.
Huffman, Kadri Kaasik, Ioanna P. Kalafati, Robert Karlsson, Augustine Kong, Jari Lahti,
Sven J. van der Lee, Christiaan de Leeuw, Penelope A. Lind, Karl-Oskar Lindgren, Tian
Liu, Massimo Mangino, Jonathan Marten, Evelin Mihailov, Michael B. Miller, Peter J. van
der Most, Christopher Oldmeadow, Antony Payton, Natalia Pervjakova, Wouter J. Peyrot,
Yong Qian, Olli Raitakari, Rico Rueedi, Erika Salvi, Börge Schmidt, Katharina E. Schraut,
Jianxin Shi, Albert V. Smith, Raymond A. Poot, Beate St Pourcain, Alexander Teumer,
Gudmar Thorleifsson, Niek Verweij, Dragana Vuckovic, Juergen Wellmann, Harm-Jan
Westra, Jingyun Yang, Wei Zhao, Zhihong Zhu, Behrooz Z. Alizadeh, Najaf Amin, Andrew
Bakshi, Sebastian E. Baumeister, Ginevra Biino, Klaus Bønnelykke, Patricia A. Boyle,
Harry Campbell, Francesco P. Cappuccio, Gail Davies, Jan-Emmanuel De Neve, Panos
Deloukas, Ilja Demuth, Jun Ding, Peter Eibich, Lewin Eisele, Niina Eklund, David M.
Evans, Jessica D. Faul, Mary F. Feitosa, Andreas J. Forstner, Ilaria Gandin, Bjarni
Gunnarsson, Bjarni V. Halldórsson, Tamara B. Harris, Andrew C. Heath, Lynne J. Hocking,
Elizabeth G. Holliday, Georg Homuth, Michael A. Horan, Jouke-Jan Hottenga, Philip L. de
Jager, Peter K. Joshi, Astanand Jugessur, Marika A. Kaakinen, Mika Kähönen, Stavroula
Kanoni, Liisa Keltigangas-Järvinen, Lambertus A. L. M. Kiemeney, Ivana Kolcic, Seppo
Koskinen, Aldi T. Kraja, Martin Kroh, Zoltan Kutalik, Antti Latvala, Lenore J. Launer, Maël
P. Lebreton, Douglas F. Levinson, Paul Lichtenstein, Peter Lichtner, David C. M. Liewald,
LifeLines Cohort Study Loukola Anu, Pamela A. Madden, Reedik Mägi, Tomi Mäki-Opas,
Riccardo E. Marioni, Pedro Marques-Vidal, Gerardus A. Meddens, George McMahon,
Christa Meisinger, Thomas Meitinger, Yusplitri Milaneschi, Lili Milani, Grant W.
Montgomery, Ronny Myhre, Christopher P. Nelson, Dale R. Nyholt, William E. R. Ollier,
Aarno Palotie, Lavinia Paternoster, Nancy L. Pedersen, Katja E. Petrovic, David J. Porteous,
Katri Räikkönen, Susan M. Ring, Antonietta Robino, Olga Rostapshova, Igor Rudan, Aldo
Rustichini, Veikko Salomaa, Alan R. Sanders, Antti-Pekka Sarin, Helena Schmidt, Rodney
J. Scott, Blair H. Smith, Jennifer A. Smith, Jan A. Staessen, Elisabeth Steinhagen-Thiessen,
Konstantin Strauch, Antonio Terracciano, Martin D. Tobin, Sheila Ulivi, Simona Vaccargiu,
Lydia Quaye, Frank J. A. van Rooij, Cristina Venturini, Anna A. E. Vinkhuyzen, Uwe
Völker, Henry Völzke, Judith M. Vonk, Diego Vozzi, Johannes Waage, Erin B. Ware,
Gonneke Willemsen, John R. Attia, David A. Bennett, Klaus Berger, Lars Bertram, Hans
Bisgaard, Dorret I. Boomsma, Ingrid B. Borecki, Ute Bültmann, Christopher F. Chabris,
Francesco Cucca, Daniele Cusi, Ian J. Deary, George V. Dedoussis, Cornelia M. van Duijn,
Johan G. Eriksson, Barbara Franke, Lude Franke, Paolo Gasparini, Pablo V. Gejman,
Christian Gieger, Hans-Jörgen Grabe, Jacob Gratten, Patrick J. F. Groenen, Vilmundur
                                                                                           40
       Gudnason, Pim van der Harst, Caroline Hayward, David A. Hinds, Wolfgang Hoffmann,
       Elina Hyppönen, William G. Iacono, Bo Jacobsson, Marjo-Riitta Järvelin, Karl-Heinz
       Jöckel, Jaakko Kaprio, Sharon L. R. Kardia, Terho Lehtimäki, Steven F. Lehrer, Patrik K. E.
       Magnusson, Nicholas G. Martin, Matt McGue, Andres Metspalu, Neil Pendleton, Brenda W.
       J. H. Penninx, Markus Perola, Nicola Pirastu, Mario Pirastu, Ozren Polasek, Danielle
       Posthuma, Christine Power, Michael A. Province, Nilesh J. Samani, David Schlessinger,
       Reinhold Schmidt, Thorkild I. A. Sørensen, Tim D. Spector, Kari Stefansson, Unnur
       Thorsteinsdottir, A. Roy Thurik, Nicholas J. Timpson, Henning Tiemeier, Joyce Y. Tung,
       André G. Uitterlinden, Veronique Vitart, Peter Vollenweider, David R. Weir, James F.
       Wilson, Alan F. Wright, Dalton C. Conley, Robert F. Krueger, George Davey Smith, Albert
       Hofman, David I. Laibson, Sarah E. Medland, Michelle N. Meyer, Jian Yang, Magnus
       Johannesson, Peter M. Visscher, Tõnu Esko, Philipp D. Koellinger, David Cesarini,
       23andMe Research Team, COGENT (Cognitive Genomics Consortium), and Social Science
       Genetic Association Consortium. 2018. "Gene Discovery and Polygenic Prediction from a
       Genome-Wide Association Study of Educational Attainment in 1.1 Million Individuals."
       Nature Genetics 50(8):1112­21. doi: 10.1038/s41588-018-0147-3.

Liu, Hexuan. 2018. "Social and Genetic Pathways in Multigenerational Transmission of Educational
       Attainment." American Sociological Review 83(2):278­304. doi:
       10.1177/0003122418759651.

Lucas, Samuel R. 2001. "Effectively Maintained Inequality: Education Transitions, Track Mobility,
       and Social Background Effects." American Journal of Sociology 106(6):1642­90. doi:
       10.1086/321300.

Lugo-Gil, Julieta, and Catherine S. Tamis-LeMonda. 2008. "Family Resources and Parenting
      Quality: Links to Children's Cognitive Development Across the First 3 Years." Child
      Development 79(4):1065­85. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8624.2008.01176.x.

Luo, Rufan, and Catherine S. Tamis-LeMonda. 2017. "Reciprocity between Maternal Questions and
      Child Contributions during Book-Sharing." Early Childhood Research Quarterly 38:71­83.
      doi: 10.1016/j.ecresq.2016.08.003.

Melhuish, Edward C., Mai B. Phan, Kathy Sylva, Pam Sammons, Iram Siraj-Blatchford, and Brenda
      Taggart. 2008. "Effects of the Home Learning Environment and Preschool Center
      Experience upon Literacy and Numeracy Development in Early Primary School." Journal of
      Social Issues 64(1):95­114. doi: 10.1111/j.1540-4560.2008.00550.x.

Okbay, Aysu, Jonathan P. Beauchamp, Mark Alan Fontana, James J. Lee, Tune H. Pers, Cornelius
      A. Rietveld, Patrick Turley, Guo-Bo Chen, Valur Emilsson, S. Fleur W. Meddens, Sven
      Oskarsson, Joseph K. Pickrell, Kevin Thom, Pascal Timshel, Ronald de Vlaming, Abdel
      Abdellaoui, Tarunveer S. Ahluwalia, Jonas Bacelis, Clemens Baumbach, Gyda Bjornsdottir,
      Johannes H. Brandsma, Maria Pina Concas, Jaime Derringer, Nicholas A. Furlotte, Tessel E.
      Galesloot, Giorgia Girotto, Richa Gupta, Leanne M. Hall, Sarah E. Harris, Edith Hofer,
      Momoko Horikoshi, Jennifer E. Huffman, Kadri Kaasik, Ioanna P. Kalafati, Robert
      Karlsson, Augustine Kong, Jari Lahti, Sven J. van der Lee, Christiaan deLeeuw, Penelope A.
      Lind, Karl-Oskar Lindgren, Tian Liu, Massimo Mangino, Jonathan Marten, Evelin Mihailov,
                                                                                              41
Michael B. Miller, Peter J. van der Most, Christopher Oldmeadow, Antony Payton, Natalia
Pervjakova, Wouter J. Peyrot, Yong Qian, Olli Raitakari, Rico Rueedi, Erika Salvi, Börge
Schmidt, Katharina E. Schraut, Jianxin Shi, Albert V. Smith, Raymond A. Poot, Beate St
Pourcain, Alexander Teumer, Gudmar Thorleifsson, Niek Verweij, Dragana Vuckovic,
Juergen Wellmann, Harm-Jan Westra, Jingyun Yang, Wei Zhao, Zhihong Zhu, Behrooz Z.
Alizadeh, Najaf Amin, Andrew Bakshi, Sebastian E. Baumeister, Ginevra Biino, Klaus
Bønnelykke, Patricia A. Boyle, Harry Campbell, Francesco P. Cappuccio, Gail Davies, Jan-
Emmanuel De Neve, Panos Deloukas, Ilja Demuth, Jun Ding, Peter Eibich, Lewin Eisele,
Niina Eklund, David M. Evans, Jessica D. Faul, Mary F. Feitosa, Andreas J. Forstner, Ilaria
Gandin, Bjarni Gunnarsson, Bjarni V. Halldórsson, Tamara B. Harris, Andrew C. Heath,
Lynne J. Hocking, Elizabeth G. Holliday, Georg Homuth, Michael A. Horan, Jouke-Jan
Hottenga, Philip L. de Jager, Peter K. Joshi, Astanand Jugessur, Marika A. Kaakinen, Mika
Kähönen, Stavroula Kanoni, Liisa Keltigangas-Järvinen, Lambertus A. L. M. Kiemeney,
Ivana Kolcic, Seppo Koskinen, Aldi T. Kraja, Martin Kroh, Zoltan Kutalik, Antti Latvala,
Lenore J. Launer, Maël P. Lebreton, Douglas F. Levinson, Paul Lichtenstein, Peter Lichtner,
David C. M. Liewald, LifeLines Cohort Study, Anu Loukola, Pamela A. Madden, Reedik
Mägi, Tomi Mäki-Opas, Riccardo E. Marioni, Pedro Marques-Vidal, Gerardus A. Meddens,
George McMahon, Christa Meisinger, Thomas Meitinger, Yusplitri Milaneschi, Lili Milani,
Grant W. Montgomery, Ronny Myhre, Christopher P. Nelson, Dale R. Nyholt, William E. R.
Ollier, Aarno Palotie, Lavinia Paternoster, Nancy L. Pedersen, Katja E. Petrovic, David J.
Porteous, Katri Räikkönen, Susan M. Ring, Antonietta Robino, Olga Rostapshova, Igor
Rudan, Aldo Rustichini, Veikko Salomaa, Alan R. Sanders, Antti-Pekka Sarin, Helena
Schmidt, Rodney J. Scott, Blair H. Smith, Jennifer A. Smith, Jan A. Staessen, Elisabeth
Steinhagen-Thiessen, Konstantin Strauch, Antonio Terracciano, Martin D. Tobin, Sheila
Ulivi, Simona Vaccargiu, Lydia Quaye, Frank J. A. van Rooij, Cristina Venturini, Anna A.
E. Vinkhuyzen, Uwe Völker, Henry Völzke, Judith M. Vonk, Diego Vozzi, Johannes
Waage, Erin B. Ware, Gonneke Willemsen, John R. Attia, David A. Bennett, Klaus Berger,
Lars Bertram, Hans Bisgaard, Dorret I. Boomsma, Ingrid B. Borecki, Ute Bültmann,
Christopher F. Chabris, Francesco Cucca, Daniele Cusi, Ian J. Deary, George V. Dedoussis,
Cornelia M. van Duijn, Johan G. Eriksson, Barbara Franke, Lude Franke, Paolo Gasparini,
Pablo V. Gejman, Christian Gieger, Hans-Jörgen Grabe, Jacob Gratten, Patrick J. F.
Groenen, Vilmundur Gudnason, Pim van der Harst, Caroline Hayward, David A. Hinds,
Wolfgang Hoffmann, Elina Hyppönen, William G. Iacono, Bo Jacobsson, Marjo-Riitta
Järvelin, Karl-Heinz Jöckel, Jaakko Kaprio, Sharon L. R. Kardia, Terho Lehtimäki, Steven
F. Lehrer, Patrik K. E. Magnusson, Nicholas G. Martin, Matt McGue, Andres Metspalu, Neil
Pendleton, Brenda W. J. H. Penninx, Markus Perola, Nicola Pirastu, Mario Pirastu, Ozren
Polasek, Danielle Posthuma, Christine Power, Michael A. Province, Nilesh J. Samani, David
Schlessinger, Reinhold Schmidt, Thorkild I. A. Sørensen, Tim D. Spector, Kari Stefansson,
Unnur Thorsteinsdottir, A. Roy Thurik, Nicholas J. Timpson, Henning Tiemeier, Joyce Y.
Tung, André G. Uitterlinden, Veronique Vitart, Peter Vollenweider, David R. Weir, James
F. Wilson, Alan F. Wright, Dalton C. Conley, Robert F. Krueger, George Davey Smith,
Albert Hofman, David I. Laibson, Sarah E. Medland, Michelle N. Meyer, Jian Yang,
Magnus Johannesson, Peter M. Visscher, Tõnu Esko, Philipp D. Koellinger, David Cesarini,
and Daniel J. Benjamin. 2016. "Genome-Wide Association Study Identifies 74 Loci
Associated with Educational Attainment." Nature 533(7604):539­42. doi:
10.1038/nature17671.
                                                                                           42
Oster, Emily. 2019. Cribsheet: A Data-Driven Guide to Better, More Relaxed Parenting, from Birth
        to Preschool. New York: Penguin Press.

Plomin, Robert, and C. S. Bergeman. 1991. "The Nature of Nurture: Genetic Influence on
      `Environmental' Measures." Behavioral and Brain Sciences 14(3):373­86. doi:
      10.1017/S0140525X00070278.

Plomin, Robert, J. C. DeFries, and John C. Loehlin. 1977. "Genotype-Environment Interaction and
      Correlation in the Analysis of Human Behavior." Psychological Bulletin 84(2):309­22. doi:
      10.1037/0033-2909.84.2.309.

Quadlin, Natasha Yurk. 2015. "When Children Affect Parents: Children's Academic Performance
       and Parental Investment." Social Science Research 52:671­85. doi:
       10.1016/j.ssresearch.2014.10.007.

Ramenzoni, Verónica C., and Ulf Liszkowski. 2016. "The Social Reach: 8-Month-Olds Reach for
     Unobtainable Objects in the Presence of Another Person." Psychological Science
     27(9):1278­85. doi: 10.1177/0956797616659938.

Reilly, Sheena, Patricia Eadie, Edith L. Bavin, Melissa Wake, Margot Prior, Joanne Williams,
        Lesley Bretherton, Yin Barrett, and Obioha C. Ukoumunne. 2006. "Growth of Infant
        Communication between 8 and 12 Months: A Population Study." Journal of Paediatrics and
        Child Health 42(12):764­70. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1754.2006.00974.x.

Restrepo, Brandon J. 2016. "Parental Investment Responses to a Low Birth Weight Outcome: Who
       Compensates and Who Reinforces?" Journal of Population Economics 29(4):969­89. doi:
       10.1007/s00148-016-0590-3.

Rietveld, Cornelius A., Dalton Conley, Nicholas Eriksson, Tõnu Esko, Medland, Anna A. E.
       Vinkhuyzen, Jian Yang, Jason D. Boardman, Christopher F. Chabris, Christopher T. Dawes,
       Benjamin W. Domingue, David A. Hinds, Magnus Johannesson, Amy K. Kiefer, David
       Laibson, Patrik K. E. Magnusson, Joanna L. Mountain, Sven Oskarsson, Olga Rostapshova,
       Alexander Teumer, Joyce Y. Tung, Peter M. Visscher, Daniel J. Benjamin, David Cesarini,
       and Philipp D. Koellinger. 2014. "Replicability and Robustness of Genome-Wide-
       Association Studies for Behavioral Traits." Psychological Science 25(11):1975­86. doi:
       10.1177/0956797614545132.

Rietveld, Cornelius A., Sarah E. Medland, Jaime Derringer, Jian Yang, Tõnu Esko, Nicolas W.
       Martin, Harm-Jan Westra, Konstantin Shakhbazov, Abdel Abdellaoui, Arpana Agrawal, Eva
       Albrecht, Behrooz Z. Alizadeh, Najaf Amin, John Barnard, Sebastian E. Baumeister, Kelly
       S. Benke, Lawrence F. Bielak, Jeffrey A. Boatman, Patricia A. Boyle, Gail Davies,
       Christiaan de Leeuw, Niina Eklund, Daniel S. Evans, Rudolf Ferhmann, Krista Fischer,
       Christian Gieger, Håkon K. Gjessing, Sara Hägg, Jennifer R. Harris, Caroline Hayward,
       Christina Holzapfel, Carla A. Ibrahim-Verbaas, Erik Ingelsson, Bo Jacobsson, Peter K.
       Joshi, Astanand Jugessur, Marika Kaakinen, Stavroula Kanoni, Juha Karjalainen, Ivana
       Kolcic, Kati Kristiansson, Zoltán Kutalik, Jari Lahti, Sang H. Lee, Peng Lin, Penelope A.
       Lind, Yongmei Liu, Kurt Lohman, Marisa Loitfelder, George McMahon, Pedro Marques
                                                                                              43
       Vidal, Osorio Meirelles, Lili Milani, Ronny Myhre, Marja-Liisa Nuotio, Christopher J.
       Oldmeadow, Katja E. Petrovic, Wouter J. Peyrot, Ozren Polasek, Lydia Quaye, Eva
       Reinmaa, John P. Rice, Thais S. Rizzi, Helena Schmidt, Reinhold Schmidt, Albert V. Smith,
       Jennifer A. Smith, Toshiko Tanaka, Antonio Terracciano, Matthijs J. H. M. van der Loos,
       Veronique Vitart, Henry Völzke, Jürgen Wellmann, Lei Yu, Wei Zhao, Jüri Allik, John R.
       Attia, Stefania Bandinelli, François Bastardot, Jonathan Beauchamp, David A. Bennett,
       Klaus Berger, Laura J. Bierut, Dorret I. Boomsma, Ute Bültmann, Harry Campbell,
       Christopher F. Chabris, Lynn Cherkas, Mina K. Chung, Francesco Cucca, Mariza de
       Andrade, Philip L. De Jager, Jan-Emmanuel De Neve, Ian J. Deary, George V. Dedoussis,
       Panos Deloukas, Maria Dimitriou, Guðný Eiríksdóttir, Martin F. Elderson, Johan G.
       Eriksson, David M. Evans, Jessica D. Faul, Luigi Ferrucci, Melissa E. Garcia, Henrik
       Grönberg, Vilmundur Guðnason, Per Hall, Juliette M. Harris, Tamara B. Harris, Nicholas D.
       Hastie, Andrew C. Heath, Dena G. Hernandez, Wolfgang Hoffmann, Adriaan Hofman, Rolf
       Holle, Elizabeth G. Holliday, Jouke-Jan Hottenga, William G. Iacono, Thomas Illig, Marjo-
       Riitta Järvelin, Mika Kähönen, Jaakko Kaprio, Robert M. Kirkpatrick, Matthew Kowgier,
       Antti Latvala, Lenore J. Launer, Debbie A. Lawlor, Terho Lehtimäki, Jingmei Li, Paul
       Lichtenstein, Peter Lichtner, David C. Liewald, Pamela A. Madden, Patrik K. E.
       Magnusson, Tomi E. Mäkinen, Marco Masala, Matt McGue, Andres Metspalu, Andreas
       Mielck, Michael B. Miller, Grant W. Montgomery, Sutapa Mukherjee, Dale R. Nyholt, Ben
       A. Oostra, Lyle J. Palmer, Aarno Palotie, Brenda W. J. H. Penninx, Markus Perola, Patricia
       A. Peyser, Martin Preisig, Katri Räikkönen, Olli T. Raitakari, Anu Realo, Susan M. Ring,
       Samuli Ripatti, Fernando Rivadeneira, Igor Rudan, Aldo Rustichini, Veikko Salomaa, Antti-
       Pekka Sarin, David Schlessinger, Rodney J. Scott, Harold Snieder, Beate St Pourcain, John
       M. Starr, Jae Hoon Sul, Ida Surakka, Rauli Svento, Alexander Teumer, The LifeLines
       Cohort Study, Henning Tiemeier, Frank J. A. van Rooij, David R. Van Wagoner, Erkki
       Vartiainen, Jorma Viikari, Peter Vollenweider, Judith M. Vonk, Gérard Waeber, David R.
       Weir, H. Erich Wichmann, Elisabeth Widen, Gonneke Willemsen, James F. Wilson, Alan F.
       Wright, Dalton Conley, George Davey-Smith, Lude Franke, Patrick J. F. Groenen, Albert
       Hofman, Magnus Johannesson, Sharon L. R. Kardia, Robert F. Krueger, David Laibson,
       Nicholas G. Martin, Michelle N. Meyer, Danielle Posthuma, A. Roy Thurik, Nicholas J.
       Timpson, André G. Uitterlinden, Cornelia M. van Duijn, Peter M. Visscher, Daniel J.
       Benjamin, David Cesarini, and Philipp D. Koellinger. 2013. "GWAS of 126,559 Individuals
       Identifies Genetic Variants Associated with Educational Attainment." Science
       340(6139):1467­71. doi: 10.1126/science.1235488.

Sacerdote, Bruce. 2007. "How Large Are the Effects from Changes in Family Environment? A
       Study of Korean American Adoptees." Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(1):119­57.

Salley, Brenda, Nancy C. Brady, Lesa Hoffman, and Kandace Fleming. 2020. "Preverbal
        Communication Complexity in Infants." Infancy 25(1):4­21. doi: 10.1111/infa.12318.

Sanz-de-Galdeano, Anna, and Anastasia Terskaya. n.d. "Sibling Differences in Educational
      Polygenic Scores: How Do Parents React?" [Working Paper].




                                                                                              44
Scarr, Sandra, and Kathleen McCartney. 1983. "How People Make Their Own Environments: A
        Theory of Genotype  Environment Effects." Child Development 54(2):424­35. doi:
        10.1111/j.1467-8624.1983.tb03884.x.

Scheeren, Lotte, Marjolijn Das, and Aart C. Liefbroer. 2017. "Intergenerational Transmission of
       Educational Attainment in Adoptive Families in the Netherlands." Research in Social
       Stratification and Mobility 48:10­19. doi: 10.1016/j.rssm.2016.12.002.

Selzam, Saskia, Tom A. McAdams, Jonathan R. I. Coleman, Susan Carnell, Paul F. O'Reilly,
      Robert Plomin, and Clare H. Llewellyn. 2018. "Evidence for Gene-Environment Correlation
      in Child Feeding: Links between Common Genetic Variation for BMI in Children and
      Parental Feeding Practices." PLoS Genetics 14(11):e1007757. doi:
      10.1371/journal.pgen.1007757.

Selzam, Saskia, Stuart J. Ritchie, Jean-Baptiste Pingault, Chandra A. Reynolds, Paul F. O'Reilly,
      and Robert Plomin. 2019. "Comparing Within- and Between-Family Polygenic Score
      Prediction." The American Journal of Human Genetics 105(2):351­63. doi:
      10.1016/j.ajhg.2019.06.006.

Smith-Woolley, Emily, Saskia Selzam, and Robert Plomin. 2019. "Polygenic Score for Educational
      Attainment Captures DNA Variants Shared between Personality Traits and Educational
      Achievement." Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 117(6):1145­63. doi:
      10.1037/pspp0000241.

TuckerDrob, Elliot M., and K. Paige Harden. 2012. "Early Childhood Cognitive Development and
      Parental Cognitive Stimulation: Evidence for Reciprocal Gene­Environment Transactions."
      Developmental Science 15(2):250­59. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01121.x.

University of Bristol. 2020. "Explore Data and Samples."
       Http://Www.Bristol.Ac.Uk/Alspac/Researchers/Our-Data/. Retrieved March 9, 2020.

Ward, Mary E., George McMahon, Beate St Pourcain, David M. Evans, Cornelius A. Rietveld,
      Daniel J. Benjamin, Philipp D. Koellinger, David Cesarini, George Davey Smith, and
      Nicholas J. Timpson. 2014. "Genetic Variation Associated with Differential Educational
      Attainment in Adults Has Anticipated Associations with School Performance in Children."
      PLoS ONE 9(7):1­7. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0100248.

Ware, Erin B., Lauren L. Schmitz, Jessica D. Faul, Arianna Gard, Colter Mitchell, Jennifer A.
       Smith, Wei Zhao, David Weir, and Sharon LR Kardia. 2017. "Heterogeneity in Polygenic
       Scores for Common Human Traits." BioRxiv 106062. doi: 10.1101/106062.

Wertz, Jasmin, Terrie E. Moffitt, Jessica Agnew-Blais, Louise Arseneault, Daniel W. Belsky, David
       L. Corcoran, Renate Houts, Timothy Matthews, Joseph A. Prinz, Leah S. Richmond-Rakerd,
       Karen Sugden, Benjamin Williams, and Avshalom Caspi. 2020. "Using DNA From Mothers
       and Children to Study Parental Investment in Children's Educational Attainment." Child
       Development 91(5):1745­61. doi: 10.1111/cdev.13329.

                                                                                                    45
West, Anne, and Philip Noden. 2016. Public Funding of Early Years Education in England: An
       Historical Perspective. 21. London, UK: London School of Economics and Political
       Science, Department of Social Policy.

Yengo, Loic, Julia Sidorenko, Kathryn E. Kemper, Zhili Zheng, Andrew R. Wood, Michael N.
      Weedon, Timothy M. Frayling, Joel Hirschhorn, Jian Yang, Peter M. Visscher, and the
      GIANT Consortium. 2018. "Meta-Analysis of Genome-Wide Association Studies for Height
      and Body Mass Index in 700000 Individuals of European Ancestry." Human Molecular
      Genetics 27(20):3641­49. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddy271.

Zhu, Bi, Chuansheng Chen, Robert K. Moyzis, Qi Dong, and Chongde Lin. 2015. "Educational
       Attainment-Related Loci Identified by GWAS Are Associated with Select Personality Traits
       and Mathematics and Language Abilities." Personality & Individual Differences 72:96­100.
       doi: 10.1016/j.paid.2014.08.028.


Appendix A: Full Regression Tables and Supplementary Analyses

Table A1 Means and Standard Deviations of Variables Specific to the Appendix A
!                    Full sample      !                   Subsample         !
!                    Mean             Standard dev.       Mean              Standard dev.
                   a
Mother's edu. att.                3.16             1.24 !                   !
               b
Education PGS
  Child                                                   6.56E-05          3.90E-06
  Mother                                                  6.55E-05          3.90E-06
  Father                                                  6.56E-05          3.59E-06
Height PGSb          !                !                   !                 !
  Child                      4.11E-05         9.91E-06 !                    !
  Motherc                    4.14E-05         9.80E-06 !                    !
         d
  Father                     4.16E-05         9.53E-06 !                    !
             b
BMI PGS                                                   !                 !
  Child                      -1.7E-05         7.94E-06 !                    !
           c
  Mother                     -1.7E-05         7.93E-06 !                    !
         d
  Father                     -1.8E-05         7.69E-06 !                    !
Parenting age 6 mthe         -1.4E-08                 1                 0.09            0.94
Professional occ.                 0.11             0.31                 0.17            0.38
Income > 400 UKP                  0.28             0.45                 0.40            0.49
                                 7,738                                1,426
Note: aMothers' educational attainment is measured as an ordinal variable with 5 values: (1) CES, (2) vocational
education, (3) O level, (4) A level, and (5) college degree. bPolygenic scores are not standardized in this table. When
used in analyses, the PGSes are standardized to mean zero and standard deviation. cN=6,008. dN=1,641. eParenting at
age 6 months is standardized within the full sample to have mean zero and standard deviation 1 (N=7,291). For analyses
on the subsample, parenting at age six months is standardized within the subsample (N=1,404).




                                                                                                                    46
Table A2 Mothers' Educational Attainment Regressed on Mothers' Education Polygenic Score
!                                                                         coef.    s.e.
Mother's Education PGS                                                    0.473*** (0.013)
Constant                                                                  3.084*** (0.013)
N                                                                         8,053    !
  2
R                                                                         0.146    !
Note: Cluster robust standard errors. *** p<0.001; ** p<0.01; * p<0.05; (two-tailed tests). The model includes the
first eight PCs. Mothers' educational attainment is measured as an ordinal variable with 5 values: (1) CES, (2)
vocational education, (3) O level, (4) A level, and (5) college degree.




Table A3 Post-Hoc Power Calculation for Children's Education PGS
Model                  R2 without PGS R2 with PGS         Incremental R2                       Power
Model 1, N=7,738       0.04644           0.04736          0.00092                              0.76
Model 2, N=7,738       0.03343           0.03462          0.00119                              0.86
Model 3, N=7,738       0.04662           0.04769          0.00107                              0.82
Subsample, N=1,426     0.00510           0.00603          0.00093                              0.21




                                                                                                                     47
Table A4 Parenting during Early Childhood Regressed on Child's Education Polygenic Score
!                  Model 1 !          ! Model 2 !         ! Model 3 !           ! Model 4 !
!                  coef.      s.e.    ! coef.     s.e.    ! coef.       s.e.    ! coef.    s.e.
Child's PGS        0.033** (0.012) ! 0.042** (0.014) ! 0.046** (0.014) ! 0.048             (0.041)
Female child       0.135*** (0.022) ! 0.137*** (0.022) ! 0.137*** (0.023) !
Mother's educational attainment (ref.=CSE or vocational)!
  O Level          0.130*** (0.035) ! !           !       ! !           !       !
  A Level          0.236*** (0.038) ! !           !       ! !           !       !
  Degree           0.129** (0.046) ! !            !       ! !           !       !
  Missing          0.286* (0.120) ! !             !       ! !           !       !
Father's educational attainment (ref.=CSE or vocational)
  O Level          0.098** (0.035) ! 0.148*** (0.035) ! 0.151*** (0.035) !
  A Level          0.114** (0.036) ! 0.185*** (0.034) ! 0.188*** (0.034) !
  Degree           0.177*** (0.043) ! 0.258*** (0.038) ! 0.265*** (0.038) !
  Missing          -0.100     (0.087) ! -0.001    (0.067) ! 0.001       (0.066) !
Mother's occupational class (ref.=II ­ Man. or tech.)
  V ­ Unskilled -0.403*** (0.083) ! !             !       ! !           !       !
  IV ­ Semi-skill. -0.120** (0.040) ! !           !       ! !           !       !
  III ­ Manual     -0.162** (0.059) ! !           !       ! !           !       !
  III ­ Non-man. -0.124*** (0.029) ! !            !       ! !           !       !
  I ­ Professional -0.251*** (0.055) ! !          !       ! !           !       !
  Missing          -0.159     (0.101) ! !         !       ! !           !       !
Father's occupational class (ref.=II ­ Man. or tech.)
  V ­ Unskilled -0.281*** (0.082) ! -0.341*** (0.082) ! -0.342*** (0.082) !
  IV ­ Semi-skill. -0.037     (0.054) ! -0.090    (0.054) ! -0.088      (0.054) !
  III ­ Manual     -0.012     (0.031) ! -0.049    (0.030) ! -0.049      (0.030) !
  III ­ Non-man. 0.001        (0.036) ! -0.005    (0.037) ! -0.006      (0.037) !
  I ­ Professional 0.083* (0.037) ! 0.065         (0.037) ! 0.070       (0.037) !
  Missing          -0.025     (0.072) ! -0.050    (0.069) ! -0.052      (0.069) !
Family income -0.003          (0.015) ! !         !       ! !           !       !
Income missing -0.009         (0.040) ! !         !       ! !           !       !
Mother's PGS !                !       ! 0.001     (0.015) ! 0.000       (0.015) ! 0.022    (0.033)
Father's PGS       !          !       ! !         !       ! -0.023      (0.024) ! 0.024    (0.034)
Mother's PGS missing          !       ! -0.101*** (0.029) ! -0.121      (0.072) !
Father's PGS missing!         !       ! !         !       ! 0.023       (0.028) !
Both PGS missing              !         !         !         -0.071      (0.037)
Constant           -0.163*** (0.047) ! -0.139*** (0.036) ! -0.165*** (0.042) ! 0.000       (0.027)
N                  7,738      !       ! 7,738     !       ! 7,738       !       ! 1,426    !
R 2
                   0.047      !       ! 0.035     !       ! 0.032       !       ! 0.006    !
Note: Cluster robust standard errors. *** p<0.001; ** p<0.01; * p<0.05; (two-tailed tests). Model
1 and 2 include the first eight child PCs. Model 2 include the first eight mother PCs.




                                                                                                 48
Table A5 Parenting during Early Childhood Regressed on Child's Education Polygenic Score
in Subsample with Both Parents' Genotypes
                                                      Model 1             Model 2 !
                                                      coef.     s.e.      coef.    s.e.
Child's PGS                                           0.048     (0.041) 0.064      (0.048)
Degree                                                                    0.161** (0.059)
Child's PGS x degree                                                      -0.031   (0.055)
Parental education missing                                                0.051    (0.291)
Child's PGS x parental education missing                                  0.059    (0.272)
Mother's PGS                                          0.022     (0.033) -0.005     (0.035)
Father's PGS                                          0.024     (0.034) 0.004      (0.035)
Constant                                              0.000     (0.027) -0.055     (0.037)
N                                                     1,426               1,426    !
  2
R                                                     0.006               0.011    !
Note: Cluster robust standard errors. *** p<0.001; ** p<0.01; * p<0.05; (two-tailed tests).




                                                                                              49
Table A6 Parenting during Early Childhood Regressed on Child's Height PGS & BMI PGS
!                   Model 1 !         ! Model 2 !         Model 3          Model 4
!                   coef.     s.e.    ! coef.     s.e.    coef.   s.e.     coef.     s.e.
Child's height
                    0.006     (0.012) -0.003      (0.013)
PGS                                   !
Child's BMI
                                                          -0.020  (0.011) -0.008     (0.013)
PGS                                                                      !
Female child        !         !       ! 0.136*** (0.023)                   0.136*** (0.023)
Father's edu. att. (ref.=CSE or vocational)
  O Level           !         !       ! 0.159*** (0.035)                   0.158*** (0.035)
  A Level           !         !       ! 0.200*** (0.034)                   0.200*** (0.034)
  Degree            !         !       ! 0.292*** (0.038)                   0.290*** (0.038)
  Missing edu. !              !       ! 0.003     (0.066)                  0.003     (0.066)
Father's occ. class (ref.=II ­ Man. or tech.)
  V ­ Unskilled !             !       ! -0.354*** (0.081)                  -0.355*** (0.081)
  IV ­ Semi-skill. !          !       ! -0.102    (0.054)                  -0.101    (0.054)
  III ­ Manual      !         !       ! -0.058    (0.030)                  -0.058    (0.030)
  III ­ Non-man. !            !       ! -0.007    (0.037)                  -0.007    (0.037)
  I ­ Professional !          !       !  0.075*   (0.037)                  0.075*    (0.037)
  Missing occ. !              !       ! -0.065    (0.069)                  -0.065    (0.069)
Mother's PGS !                !       ! 0.000     (0.014)                  0.002     (0.014)
Father's PGS        !         !       ! 0.021     (0.022)                  -0.018    (0.025)
Mother's PGS missing          !       ! 0.016     (0.028)                  0.017     (0.028)
Father's PGS missing          !       ! -0.127    (0.073)                  -0.124    (0.072)
Both PGS missing              !          -0.079* (0.037)                   -0.078* (0.037)
Constant            -0.000    (0.012) ! -0.164*** (0.042) -0.000  (0.012) -0.164*** (0.042)
N                   7,738     !       ! 7,738     !       7,738   !        7,738     !
R2                  0.000     !       ! 0.031     !       0.000   !        0.031     !
Note: Cluster robust standard errors. *** p<0.001; ** p<0.01; * p<0.05; (two-tailed tests).!




                                                                                               50
Table A7 Parenting at Age 6 Months Regressed on Child's Education PGS
!                   Model 1 !        ! Model 2 !       ! Model 3 !       ! Model 4 !
!                   coef.    s.e.    ! coef.   s.e.    ! coef.   s.e.    ! coef.   s.e.
Child's PGS         -0.008   (0.012) ! 0.001   (0.014) ! 0.005   (0.014) ! 0.011   (0.039)
Female child        0.008    (0.023) ! 0.009   (0.023) ! 0.010   (0.023) !
Mother's edu. att. (ref.=CSE or voc.)!
  O Level           0.130*** (0.035) !                 !                 !
  A Level           0.229*** (0.040) !                 !                 !
  Degree            0.159** (0.051) !                  !                 !
  Missing           0.201    (0.112) !                 !                 !
Father's edu. att. (ref.=CSE or voc.)

 O Level           0.029      (0.037) ! 0.080*           (0.036) !    0.077*     (0.036) !
 A Level           0.091* (0.036) ! 0.167***             (0.034) !    0.163***   (0.034) !
 Degree            0.142** (0.045) ! 0.252***            (0.041) !    0.250***   (0.041) !
 Missing           -0.054     (0.081) ! -0.014           (0.065) !    -0.006     (0.064) !
Mother's occ. class (ref.=II ­ Man. or tech.)!
 V ­ Unskilled -0.447*** (0.083) ! !                     !        !   !          !        !
 IV ­ Semi-skill. -0.169*** (0.041) ! !                  !        !   !          !        !
 III ­ Manual      -0.134* (0.061) ! !                   !        !   !          !        !
 III ­ Non-man. -0.152*** (0.031) ! !                    !        !   !          !        !
 I ­ Professional -0.156* (0.065) ! !                    !        !   !          !        !
 Missing           -0.335** (0.109) ! !                  !        !   !          !        !
Father's occ. class (ref.=II ­ Man. or tech.)!
 V ­ Unskilled 0.072          (0.079) ! 0.000            (0.078) !    -0.001     (0.078) !
 IV ­ Semi-skill. 0.019       (0.055) ! -0.036           (0.055) !    -0.035     (0.055) !
 III ­ Manual      0.024      (0.032) ! -0.017           (0.031) !    -0.017     (0.031) !
 III ­ Non-man. 0.037         (0.040) ! 0.032            (0.040) !    0.027      (0.040) !
 I ­ Professional 0.003       (0.045) ! -0.000           (0.044) !    -0.000     (0.044) !
 Missing           -0.023     (0.078) ! -0.100           (0.073) !    -0.095     (0.073) !
Family income 0.000           (0.015) ! !                !             ! !         !         !
Income missing -0.026         (0.041) ! !                !             ! !         !         !
Mother's PGS !                !       ! 0.010                (0.016) ! 0.010       (0.016) ! -0.004         (0.033)
Father's PGS       !          !       ! !                    !         ! -0.029    (0.025) ! 0.002          (0.033)
Mother's PGS missing!         !       ! -0.094**             (0.030) ! -0.063      (0.086) !
Father's PGS missing          !       !                                ! -0.039    (0.030) !
Both PGS missing!             !       !                                ! -0.129*** (0.038) !
Constant           -0.084     (0.047) ! -0.084*              (0.037) ! -0.057      (0.043) ! 0.000          (0.027)
N                  7,291      !       ! 7,291                !         ! 7,291     !         ! 1,404        !
R 2
                   0.030      !       ! 0.016                !         ! 0.015     !         ! 0.000        !
Note: Cluster robust standard errors. *** p<0.001; ** p<0.01; * p<0.05; (two-tailed tests). Model 1 and 2 include
the child's first eight PCs. Model 2 include the mother's first eight PCs.




                                                                                                                      51
Table A8 Singing, Reading, Toy Play, Cuddling, Physical Play, and Walks Regressed on Child's Education Polygenic Score
                    Singing              Reading           Toy play         Cuddling           Physical Play       Walks
!                   coef.     s.e.    ! coef.    s.e.    ! coef.    s.e.    coef.    s.e.    ! coef.     s.e.    ! coef.                     s.e.
Child's PGS         0.039** (0.014) ! 0.051*** (0.014) ! 0.039** (0.015) 0.011       (0.013) ! 0.008     (0.015) ! 0.004                     (0.014)
Female child        0.156*** (0.023) ! 0.134*** (0.022) ! 0.015     (0.023) 0.043    (0.023) ! 0.101*** (0.023) ! 0.040                      (0.023)
Father's edu. att. (ref.=CSE or voc.)!
  O Level           0.096** (0.035) ! 0.208*** (0.035) ! 0.097** (0.036) 0.020       (0.038) ! 0.035     (0.035) ! 0.026                     (0.035)
  A Level           0.124*** (0.034) ! 0.252*** (0.034) ! 0.112** (0.035) 0.043      (0.033) ! 0.077* (0.034) ! 0.003                        (0.035)
  Degree            0.156*** (0.039) ! 0.406*** (0.038) ! 0.098* (0.041) 0.067       (0.035) ! 0.122** (0.040) ! -0.001                      (0.042)
  Missing
                    -0.031    (0.066) -0.042     (0.069) 0.046      (0.061) -0.055   (0.096) -0.038      (0.069) -0.068                      (0.059)
education                             !                  !                                   !                   !
Father's occ. class (ref.=II ­ Man. or tech.)!
  V ­ Unskilled -0.343*** (0.083) ! -0.268*** (0.075) ! -0.092      (0.083) -0.309* (0.126) ! -0.126     (0.082) ! -0.132                    (0.084)
  IV ­ Semi-skill. -0.087     (0.051) ! -0.135* (0.054) ! 0.037     (0.050) -0.185* (0.086) ! -0.052     (0.056) ! 0.068                     (0.052)
  III ­ Manual      -0.107*** (0.030) ! -0.091** (0.030) ! -0.022   (0.032) -0.005   (0.027) ! 0.012     (0.031) ! 0.063*                    (0.032)
  III ­ Non-man, -0.037       (0.037) ! 0.029    (0.034) ! 0.011    (0.037) 0.022    (0.027) ! -0.015    (0.039) ! 0.005                     (0.039)
  I ­ Professional -0.030     (0.041) ! 0.059    (0.033) ! 0.110** (0.040) 0.055* (0.024) ! 0.052        (0.041) ! 0.110*                    (0.043)
  Missing occ. -0.101         (0.066) ! -0.181* (0.077) ! -0.035    (0.070) -0.056   (0.088) ! 0.066     (0.071) ! 0.212***                  (0.060)
Mother's PGS -0.003           (0.014) ! 0.042** (0.015) ! -0.027    (0.015) -0.001   (0.014) ! -0.009    (0.016) ! -0.023                    (0.015)
Father's PGS        0.016     (0.025) ! -0.053* (0.023) ! -0.062* (0.026) -0.050** (0.019) ! -0.002      (0.026) ! 0.006                     (0.026)
Mother's PGS
                    0.057     (0.070) -0.117     (0.068) -0.124     (0.076) 0.059    (0.033) -0.039      (0.075) -0.163*                     (0.080)
missing                               !                  !                                   !                   !
Father's PGS
                    0.048     (0.029) -0.031     (0.027) 0.007      (0.028) -0.012   (0.023) 0.095** (0.030) 0.022                           (0.030)
missing                               !                  !                                   !                   !
Both PGS
                    -0.051    (0.038) -0.136*** (0.036) -0.065      (0.038) -0.091* (0.035) 0.037        (0.039) -0.003                      (0.038)
missing                               !                  !                                   !                   !
Constant            -0.107* (0.042) ! -0.148*** (0.042) ! -0.063    (0.044) -0.001   (0.038) ! -0.166*** (0.044) ! -0.072                    (0.043)
N                   7,737     !       ! 7,738    !       ! 7,679    !       7,738    !       ! 7,583     !       ! 7,584                     !
R2                  0.025     !       ! 0.072    !       ! 0.010    !       0.012    !       ! 0.009     !       ! 0.007                     !
Note: Cluster robust standard errors. *** p<0.001; ** p<0.01; * p<0.05; (two-tailed tests). All models include children's first eight PCs.



                                                                                                                                              52
