                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          MONETARY POLICY AND REDISTRIBUTION IN OPEN ECONOMIES

                                          Xing Guo
                                        Pablo Ottonello
                                        Diego J. Perez

                                      Working Paper 28213
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28213


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2020




We thank Greg Kaplan, Dmitry Mukhin, and Federica Romei, for useful comments and
suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the
Bank of Canada or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Xing Guo, Pablo Ottonello, and Diego J. Perez. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Monetary Policy and Redistribution in Open Economies
Xing Guo, Pablo Ottonello, and Diego J. Perez
NBER Working Paper No. 28213
December 2020
JEL No. E21,E52,F3,F32,F41,F6

                                         ABSTRACT

We study how monetary policy affects the asymmetric effects of globalization. To this end, we
build an open-economy heterogeneous-agent New Keynesian model (HANK), in which
households differ in their income, wealth, and real and financial integration with international
markets. We use the model to reassess classic questions in international macroeconomics, but
from a distributional perspective: What are the international spillovers of policies and shocks,
how do alternative exchange-rate regimes compare, and what are the implications for monetary
policy of the international price system. Our results indicate the presence of a trade-off between
aggregate stabilization and inequality in consumption responses to external shocks. The
asymmetric effects of globalization can be smaller for economies with higher international
integration.

Xing Guo                                        Diego J. Perez
Bank of Canada                                  Department of Economics
guoxing.econ@gmail.com                          New York University
                                                19 West 4th Street
Pablo Ottonello                                 New York, NY 10012
Department of Economics                         and NBER
University of Michigan                          diego.perez@nyu.edu
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109 and
NBER
pottonel@umich.edu
1. Introduction
The redistributional effects of globalization have featured prominently in the policy debates
in recent decades. An influential view, developed around the idea of "Globalization and
Its Discontents" (Stiglitz, 2002, 2017), argues that international integration has asymmet-
ric effects on households, and that traditional policies, when not designed considering this
dimension, can amplify the resulting inequalities. Although the traditional argument for
discontents in globalization was formulated with regard to emerging economies' crises of the
late 1990s, similar views have taken center stage in developed economies over the last decade.
Related to this policy discussion, a large body of academic research on the intersection of
international trade and labor has been conducted to study the distributional consequences of
international integration and trade policies (see, for example, Goldberg and Pavcnik, 2007;
Autor, Dorn and Hanson, 2016). However, less is known in international macroeconomics
about the extent to which traditional macroeconomic stabilization policies affect the asym-
metric effects of globalization.
    In this paper, we study the distributional effects of monetary policy in open economies,
in the context of households' uneven international integration and exposure to external
shocks. To this end, we build a framework that combines traditional elements of open-
economy monetary transmission, heterogeneity in households' integration with international
financial and real markets, and realistic income and wealth distributons. We then use this
framework to reassess three classic questions in international economics that motivated the
seminal work of Mundell (1963) and Fleming (1962), but focus on their distributional aspects:
What are the international spillovers of policies and shocks, how do alternative exchange-
rate regimes compare, and what are the implications for monetary policy of the international
price system? Our results indicate the presence of a trade-off between aggregate stabilization
and inequality in consumption responses to external shocks.
    The model we develop embeds household heterogeneity in a canonical New Keynesian
open-economy framework. In particular, we consider a small open economy populated by
households that consume three types of goods: Tradable goods produced by home firms,

                                              2
tradable goods produced by foreign firms, and nontradable goods (see, for example, Obstfeld
and Rogoff, 2000).1 To study the distributional effects of monetary policy in this open-
economy framework, we introduce households' heterogeneity along two dimensions. First,
households differ in their income and wealth, modeled with uninsurable labor-income shocks
as in the literature on monetary policy with households' heterogeneity in closed-economy
models. Second, households differ in their international real and financial integration, with
some working in tradable sectors and others in nontradable sectors, and some having access
to internationally traded securities and some restricted to domestically traded securities.
With these ingredients, we aim to construct a laboratory economy that has at play the main
mechanisms of the monetary transmission of open-economy models, combined with realistic
distributions of wealth and marginal propensities to consume across households and uneven
exposures to external shocks. We refer to this as an open-economy heterogeneous-agent
New-Keynesian model (HANK in Kaplan, Moll and Violante, 2018).
      We begin by inspecting the monetary transmission mechanisms in our open-economy
HANK. At the aggregate level, the economy's response to monetary policy shocks is similar
to that of the standard open-economy New Keynesian model, with expansionary monetary
policy shocks stimulating aggregate consumption and increasing inflation and external de-
mand through currency depreciation. At the micro level, our model shows that in addition to
the distributional channels studied in a closed economy, monetary policy can have asymmet-
ric effects on households with different degrees of international integration. First, depending
on its effects on currency depreciation, monetary policy can differentially affect households
in tradable and nontradable sectors. Second, given that monetary policy has a direct effect
on domestic interest rates, it more strongly affects households that are not integrated into
international capital markets and borrow and save in domestic securities.
      We then use this framework to reassess three classic questions in international eco-
nomics, which motivated the seminal work by Mundell (1963) and Fleming (1962), but from
  1
    The three-good structure of consumption and production has more recently been used, for example,
in Gabaix and Maggiori (2015) and Mukhin (2018), among others. It nests two common environments
frequently used in open-economy models: A structure with home and foreign tradable goods (e.g., Gali and
Monacelli, 2005) and one with tradable and nontradable goods (e.g., Schmitt-Groh´
                                                                                e and Uribe, 2011).



                                                   3
a distributional perspective.2 The first question concerns international spillovers and how
external policies and shocks affect different households in the economy. External shocks
naturally have a more severe effect on households more exposed to international integration:
Changes in external demand for home tradable goods have a larger effect on income and
consumption for workers employed in the tradable sector, while changes in foreign monetary
policy have larger effects on households integrated with international capital markets. Tradi-
tional monetary policy policy rules, which target aggregate stability, are unlikely to mitigate
these uneven responses to external shocks, and can even exacerbate them. For instance,
contractionary external demand shocks induce currency depreciation that lead the monetary
authority to increase interest rates, affecting more strongly the consumption of households
that do not have access to international capital markets than those that do have access to
international capital markets.
       The second question is how alternative exchange-rate regimes compare. As is standard
in open-economy New Keynesian models, fixed exchange-rate regimes amplify aggregate re-
sponses to shocks (see, for example, Gali and Monacelli, 2005). We show that with household
heterogeneity, a trade-off can emerge between aggregate stabilization and inequality in con-
sumption responses to external shocks. For instance, when there is an external monetary
expansion, monetary authorities under a fixed exchange-rate regime avoid currency appre-
ciation by cutting interest rates more than a monetary authority that follows a traditional
Taylor rule would. This results in an increase in consumption for households not integrated
to international capital markets, and less inequality in consumption responses between house-
holds integrated and not integrated to international capital markets. Therefore, reducing the
inequality in consumption responses that results from shocks linked to international capital
markets can only be achieved at the expense of obtaining less inflation stability.
       The third question concerns how the international price system matters for monetary
policy. A standard result in open-economy New Keynesian models is that a high degree of
   2
    For instance, the first sentence in Mundell (1963) reads: "The world is still a closed economy, but its
regions and countries are becoming increasingly open. (...) The international economic climate has changed
in the direction of financial integration and this has important implications for economic policy. My paper
concerns the theoretical and practical implications of the increased mobility of capital."



                                                    4
dollar-currency pricing reduces the ability of monetary policy to stimulate exports through
the expenditure-switching channel relative to a case in which prices are set in the currency of
producers (see, for example, Devereux and Engel, 2003; Mukhin, 2018). We show that in the
heterogeneous-agent framework, a corollary of this result is that monetary policy generates
more uneven responses across households in the economy because it stimulates more income
and consumption of workers in nontradable sectors than of those working in tradable sectors.
Therefore, the international price system not only has important implications for the effec-
tiveness of monetary policy but also for its distributional consequences between households
integrated and not integrated to international markets.
       Finally, our paper studies the role of globalization in terms of the aggregate and dis-
tributional effects of monetary policy and external shocks. Economies with lower degrees
of real and financial integration naturally experience milder aggregate effects of changes in
foreign demand and monetary policy, respectively. However, in economies that have lower
degrees of financial integration, external shocks tend to have more uneven responses across
households, because external shocks do not induce large dampening forces from prices in the
rest of the economy or the monetary authority. From this, we conclude that an important
element to consider in the debate regarding the asymmetric effects of globalization is how
generalized international integration is.


Related literature Our paper contributes to three strands of the literature. The first
is the large body of literature on monetary policy in open economies. The three main
questions that guide our work build on the literature that compares policy regimes (see, for
example, the early work of Obstfeld and Rogoff, 2000; Clarida, Gali and Gertler, 2001; Gali
and Monacelli, 2005); analyzes the international spillovers of policies and shocks (see, for
example, Rey, 2015); and examines the role of the international price system in affecting
monetary policy (see, for example, Devereux and Engel, 2003; Engel, 2006; Corsetti, Dedola
and Leduc, 2010; Mukhin, 2018; Gopinath, Boz, Casas, D´
                                                      iez, Gourinchas and Plagborg-
Møller, 2020; Egorov and Mukhin, 2020).3 We contribute to this literature by analyzing the
   3
    Complementing this literature, there is a large body of empirical work on the global financial cycle and
international spillovers (see, for example Forbes and Rigobon, 2002; Gourinchas and Rey, 2007; Giovanni,

                                                     5
distributional aspects of these classic questions in international macroeconomics.
     Second, a recent and growing body of research studies the role of households' hetero-
geneity in open-economy models.4 De Ferra, Mitman and Romei (2020) and Cugat (2019)
introduce household heterogeneity in an open-economy New Keynesian model and study its
role in the transmission of foreign shocks. Auclert, Rognlie, Souchier and Straub (2020)
study monetary transmission in an open-economy HANK, providing general conditions un-
der which households' heterogeneity matters for aggregate transmission, and uncovering the
presence of a strong real-income channel that can lead to contractionary devaluations. Zhou
(2020) analyzes different channels of the redistribution of monetary policy in an open econ-
omy. Guntin, Ottonello and Perez (2020) show how introducing household heterogeneity can
inform macro theories of aggregate consumption adjustment and sudden stops. We comple-
ment this body of work by showing how monetary policy affects redistribution in a context
in which households face heterogeneity in their international real and financial integration,
and globalization leads to asymmetric effects among households.
     Third, our paper is related to the macroeconomics literature that analyzes consumption
inequality (see, for example, Attanasio, Battistin and Ichimura, 2004; Krueger and Perri,
2006; Aguiar and Bils, 2015; Quadrini and R´
                                           ios-Rull, 2015, and references therein) and the
redistributive effects of macroeconomic policies (see, for example, Doepke and Schneider,
2006; Auclert, 2019; Auclert, Rognlie and Straub, 2018; Kaplan and Violante, 2018, and
references therein). Our paper complements this literature by studying the distributional
aspects of monetary policy in open economies, which are characterized by inequality stem-
ming from international integration.


Layout The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the model. Section
3 studies monetary transmission in a parameterized version of the model by analyzing the
Kalemli-Ozcan, Ulu and Baskaya, 2017; Gourinchas, 2018) and on the currency of prices and the international
price system (see, for example, Goldberg and Tille, 2008; Gopinath, Itskhoki and Rigobon, 2010; Gopinath,
2015; Corsetti, Crowley, Han and Song, 2019; Burstein and Gopinath, 2014, and references therein)
   4
     A related empirical literature has documented the heterogenous impacts of currency depreciation (see,
for example, Gopinath and Neiman, 2014; Cravino and Levchenko, 2017; Drenik, Pereira and Perez, 2018;
Blanco, Drenik and Zaratiegui, 2020).



                                                    6
aggregate and distributional effects of monetary policy shocks. Section 4 studies the three
classic questions in international macroeconomics from a distributional perspective. Section
5 analyzes how the degree of real and financial integration affects the distributional effects
of monetary policy and the responses to external shocks. Section 6 concludes.



2. Model
This section describes the open-economy HANK model. The environment is that of a canon-
ical New Keynesian small open-economy model with home tradable goods, foreign tradable
goods, and nontradable goods, enriched with household heterogeneity. The small open econ-
omy is populated by households, firms, and a government. Firms in the economy produce the
home tradable goods and nontradable goods. The rest of the world exchanges tradable goods
and financial securities with the small open economy. Households in the small open econ-
omy are heterogeneous in two dimensions. First, households face uninsurable labor-income
shocks, as is standard in closed-economy HANK models. Second, households are hetero-
geneous in their access to international financial and real markets: Some work in tradable
sectors and others in nontradable sectors; some are able to save and borrow in internationally
traded securities and others only in domestically traded securities.


2.1. Households

Households have preferences over consumption described by the lifetime utility function

                                           
                                      E0          t u(ct , lt ),                          (1)
                                           t=0


where ct and lt denote consumption and hours worked in period t; u : R2
                                                                      +  R is a continu-

ous and differentiable function, increasing in the first argument and decreasing in the second
argument;   (0, 1) denotes the subjective discount factor; and Et denotes the expectation
conditional on the information set available at time t. The consumption good is a composite
of tradable and nontradable goods, with a constant-elasticity-of-substitution (CES) aggre-


                                                  7
                                                                                                                      TN
                                                             1                                                        TN -1
                                                            T N            1-  1                  1
                                                                                                             1-  1
gation technology ct = CTN (cTt , cNt ) =                  T      (cTt )      TN   + (1 - T )    T N
                                                                                                        (cNt )   TN           ,
where cTt and cNt denote tradable and nontradable consumption and TN > 0 is the elas-
ticity of substitution between tradable and nontradable goods. The tradable good is, in
turn, a composite of home and foreign tradable goods with a CES aggregation technology
                                                                                               HF
                                   1                                                          HF -1
                                   HF           1-  1                 1
                                                                                      1-  1
cTt = CHF (cHt , cFt ) = H                 (cHt )   HF   + (1 - H )   HF
                                                                             (cFt )      HF           , where cHt and cFt
denote home tradable and foreign tradable goods and HF > 0 is the elasticity of substitution
between home tradable and foreign tradable goods.
    We set up the household's problem recursively. The idiosyncratic state vector of a
household includes its idiosyncratic income shock, z , its asset holdings, b, and its integration
with international financial and real markets, o  [oR , oF ], with oR denoting a dummy
variable that takes the value of one if the household receives its income from the tradable
sector and zero if it receives it from the nontradable sector and oF denoting a dummy variable
that takes the value of one if the household is integrated to financial international markets
and and zero if the household only has access to domestic markets. Households' recursive
problem is given by


       Vt (z, b, o) =       max                                                     ^t+1 (z , b , o )
                                          u(c, l) +  Et (1 -  )Vt+1 (z , b , o ) +  V                                   (2)
                        cH ,cF ,cN ,l,b

              s.t. c = CTN (cT , cN ) , cT = CHF (cH , cF ) ,                                                           (3)

         qt (oF , b )b = b + z (1 - t )Wt (o)l + Tt + ¯ (z, b, o)t - PHt cH - PFt cF - PNt cN                           (4)

                   b b

                  o = t (z, b, o),


where PHt , PFt , and PNt are the prices of home tradable goods, foreign tradable goods, and
nontradable goods denominated in local currency; Wt (o) is the nominal wage per unit of
effective labor in the sector in which the household is employed; t is a labor-income tax;
Tt is a lump-sum transfer from the government; ¯ (z, b, o) and t are transfers from firms
to households, which potentially depend on the households' idiosyncratic states; qt (oF , b ) is
the price of the zero-coupon bond which, as further detailed below, depends on whether the


                                                             8
household is integrated with international capital markets and on whether households are
borrowing or saving; t (z, b, o) denotes the law of motion of the household's financial and real
integration, which can potentially depend on the aggregate and individual households' states;
                                                             ^t (z, b, o) is the value of a household
b is a fixed debt limit;  is the households' death rate; and V
that receives the realization of a shock indicating that it dies and retires from the economy
                                  ^t (z, b, o) = maxc ,c ,c ,l u(c, l) s.t. PHt cH + PFt cF + PNt cN =
in the following period, given by V                  H F N


¯ (z, b, o)t + b + z (1 - t )Wt (o)lt . Each period, a new mass of households,  , is born with

no assets, so the total mass of households is always fixed at one.


2.2. Firms

The economy has access to technologies to produce two types of goods: home tradable goods
(H) and nontradable goods (N). Two types of firms occupy each sector, described next. All
firms are owned by domestic households.


Final-good Producers A continuum of representative final-good producers occupies each
                                        ~jst , where j  [0, 1] and s  {H, N}, into final goods
sector and transform intermediate goods y
with production technology
                                                                             s
                                                            1       s -1   s -1
                                        Yst =                   y
                                                                ~jst dj
                                                                      s
                                                                                  .
                                                        0

Final-good producers in each sector choose intermediate inputs (~
                                                                yjst )j [0,1] to maximize their
static profits, leading in equilibrium to a demand function faced by intermediate-good pro-
                                                                                                                            1
                                                -   s
                                         pjst                                                                 1      - s   1- s
ducers in each sector, Yjst (pjst ) =    Pst
                                                        Yst and the price aggregator Pst =                   0
                                                                                                                  p1
                                                                                                                   jst            .


Intermediate-good Producers A continuum of intermediate-good producers indexed by
j  [0, 1] use capital and labor to produce intermediate goods with the technology yjst =
   -s
n1
 jst  for s  {H, N}. The markets for intermediate goods and labor are competitive. The
                                                                                                    wst Nst
marginal cost of producing each unit of intermediate good is mcst =                               (1-s )Yst
                                                                                                            ,    where mcst
             Wst
and wst      Pst
                   denote the marginal cost and wage in sector s, and Nst and Yst refer to
aggregate labor and output in sector s. Each intermediate-good producer sets its price
                                                                                                             2
                                                                                  pst       s    pst
facing an adjustment cost `
                          a la Rotemberg (1982), st                           pst-1
                                                                                        =   2   pst-1
                                                                                                        -1       Yst Pst . The

                                                                9
problem of each intermediate-good producer is then given by

                                                           l
       ~ s (pst ) - st         pst                               1           ~ s (ps,t+l ) - st     ps,t+l
   max                                     +         Et                                                              ,
    pst                       pst-1            l=1        k=1
                                                              1 + rt+k                             ps,t+l-1

                                                                                                        -   s
where rt = it - t+1 is the real interest rate and ~ st (pt )                       pst
                                                                                         - mcst   pst
                                                                                                                Yst . From
                                                                                   Pst            Pst

the solution to this problem, we can derive the New Keynesian Phillips Curve for each sector
s  {H, N}:

                              s                 s    -1                1    Ys,t+1
          st (1 + st ) =            mcst -                + Et                     (1 + s,t+1 ) · s,t+1 ,                (5)
                              s                      s              1 + rt+1 Yst

               Pst
where st      Ps,t-1
                       - 1.


2.3. Government

The government determines monetary and fiscal policies in the small open economy. For
monetary policy, we assume that the government follows a simple Taylor Rule,


                                               it = iss + (t - ¯ ) + vt ,                                                (6)


where vt is an exogenous monetary policy shock that follows the autoregressive process
                 m                 Pt
vt = v vt-1 +    t ;   t          Pt-1
                                         - 1 is the inflation of the ideal price index; and iss and ¯ are
linked to steady-state nominal rates and levels of inflation. This interest rate determines the
price of the zero-coupon bond at which unintegrated households invest, which is given by

                                                                      1
                                           qt (dom, b ) =                      ,                                         (7)
                                                               1 + it + 1b <0 

where  > 0 is a borrowing premium.
    In Section 4.2, we compare the dynamics under a fixed-exchange-rate regime instead of
a Taylor rule. On the fiscal side, government raise labor tax and issues domestic debt to




                                                               10
finance their spending and transfer:

                        Bt+1
                               - Bt + t (NHt WHt + NN t WN t ) = Tt + Gt .                   (8)
                        1 + it

We assume that the government maintains a constant level of spending, transfer, and debt,
i.e. Gt = Gss , Tt = Tss , and Bt = Bss , where Tss , Gss , and Bss are parameters that govern
the steady-state level of spending, transfer, and government debt.


2.4. The Rest of the World

The rest of the world trades financial securities and tradable goods with the small open
economy. From the perspective of the small open economy, the rest of the world provides an
international interest rate for trading securities in foreign currency, a foreign demand of the
home tradable good, and a foreign supply of the foreign tradable good.
      For financial securities, the small open economy faces a perfectly elastic demand, with
a nominal interest rate in foreign currency, it , following an exogenous autoregressive process
                              i
i                     
 t = (1 - i )iss + i it-1 +   t ,   where iss is the steady-state rate and 0 < i < 1. The shock,
i
t ,   can be interpreted as a foreign monetary-policy shock, which we consider in Section 4.1 in
analyzing international spillovers. This interest rate determines the price of the zero-coupon
bond at which financially integrated households invest, which is given by

                                                          1
                              qt (ext, b ) =              Et+1
                                                                         ,                   (9)
                                               1 + it + Et Et + 1b <0 


where Et denotes the nominal exchange rate of domestic currency per unit of foreign currency.
      On the tradable goods side, we assume a completely elastic supply of the foreign good
                                                          
at a fixed price in foreign currency, which we denote as PF t , and a downward-sloping foreign

demand of the home tradable good, which is given by

                                                         -HF
                                                  PHt           
                                       CH t =      
                                                               YF t,                        (10)
                                                  PF t

                                                                                    
where PHt is the price of the home tradable good expressed in foreign currency and YF t


                                                   11
                                                                                  
is a foreign demand shifter that follows an exogenous autoregressive process log YF t =
                     
                    YF
         
 YF
   log Y
         Ft-1 +     t .

       These conditions can be micro-founded from the problem of a representative foreign
household that is risk neutral, has CES preferences over H and F tradable goods, and is
infinitely large relative to the small open economy, but the share of home tradable good
consumption in its consumption basket is infinitely small.5


2.5. Equilibrium

We define the competitive equilibrium as follows.

                                                
Definition 1. Given exogenous processes {vt , YF t , it } and government policies {it , t , Tt },

an equilibrium is a stochastic sequence of households' value functions {Vt (z, b, o)} and policy
functions {cH,t (z, b, o), cF,t (z, b, o), cN,t (z, b, o), lt (z, b, o), bt (z, b, o)}; firms' choices {y
                                                                                                        ~st , yst ,
nst , pst }; aggregate quantities {Yt , YN,t , YH,t , Ct , CH,t , CF,t , CN,t , Nt , NH,t , NN,t }; prices
{WH,t , WN,t PHt , PFt , PNt , Et }; bond prices {qt (oF , b )}; and a distribution of households
µt (z, b, o) such that

   1. Household optimization: Value function Vt (z, b, o) solves households' problem (2) with
        the associated policy functions {cH,t (z, b, o), cF,t (z, b, o), cN,t (z, b, o), lt (z, b, o), and
        bt (z, b, o)} taking as given the equilibrium prices, interest rates, policies, and the trans-
        fers.

   2. Firm optimization: Individual firms' choices satisfy their problems given the equilib-
        rium prices, interest rates, policies, and transfers.

   3. Bond prices satisfy (7) and (9).

                                                                            
   4. Prices of foreign tradable goods satisfy the law of one price: PFt = PF Et .
   5
    Under this structure, the foreign supply of the foreign good is infinitely large relative to the small open
economy, which gives rise to a completely elastic supply of that good. On the other hand, the foreign
demand of the home tradable good is finite from the perspective of the small open economy, by making the
share of the home tradable good infinitesimally small. In fact, in this case the demand shifter is equal to
                                1
                                
                           H         
YF t  limH 0,CFt                    CF t > 0 and finite.
                             
                          1-H



                                                           12
  5. The sequence of aggregate quantities and distributions satisfy aggregate consistency
     conditions.

  6. All markets clear.



3. Distributional Effects of Monetary Policy in Open
     Economies

3.1. Parameterization

We calibrate our model to Canada, which is a prototypical small open economy that has been
extensively analyzed in the literature. Our calibration strategy targets key macro moments
of the economy and micro moments related to household heterogeneity. One period is a
quarter. We first discuss the calibration of the model's steady state, which has five different
blocks of parameters that are reported in Table 1.
    Panel 1 of Table 1 reports the first block of parameters that are related to households'
preferences. We assume the following functional form for the period utility:

                                              c1-c    l1+L
                                 u(c, l) =         -       ,
                                             1 - c   1 + L

and set the intertemporal elasticity of substitution 1/c and the Frisch elasticity of labor
supply L to one, which are standard values in the literature. We calibrate the disutility
of labor supply  to target a steady-state level of hours of 0.5, and the discount factor
to target a steady-state domestic annual interest rate of 4%. We calibrate the share of
tradable goods in the consumption basket T = 0.5 to match the share of tradable goods
output in the Canadian economy. Similarly, we calibrate the share of home goods in the
tradable consumption basket H = 0.6 to match the ratio of exports to output. We calibrate
the elasticity of substitution between home and foreign tradable goods and tradable and
nontradable goods to TN = HF = 3 to match the peak response of the exchange rate to a
monetary shock. We provide more details on this and other conditional responses as part of

                                               13
the calibration targets later in this section.
       Panel 2 of Table 1 reports the parameters that govern the idiosyncratic risks faced by
households. The idiosyncratic income shock process is constructed as a mixture of two inde-
pendent Markov processes: z = z1 + z2 , where z1 and z2 are, respectively, the persistent and
temporary components f households' idiosyncratic income process. The idiosyncratic income
shock process is calibrated to target the moments of log-earning dynamics summarized in
Table 2.6 We model the evolution of households' financial and real integration type as two
independent Markov processes with two states. The two states in the financial integration
are integrated and non-integrated, and the transition-probability matrix is calibrated to a
transition probability from non-integrated to non-integrated of F
                                                                0 and a transition proba-

bility from integrated to integrated of F
                                        1 , so that the fraction of integrated households in
                                  F
the ergodic distribution is      F
                                   1
                                     F   . We set F                     F
                                                  1 = 0.9 and calibrate 0 = 0.98 to match a
                                 0 +1

share of financially integrated households of 15%. In the data, we identify financially inte-
grated households as households that have external assets in their asset portfolio or savings
denominated in U.S. dollars.7 The two states in the real integration correspond to working
in the tradable and non-tradable sectors, and the transition-probability matrix is calibrated
to a transition probability of maintaining employment in the non-tradable sector of R
                                                                                    0 and

a transition probability of maintaining the employment in the tradable sector of R
                                                                                 1 , so that
                                                                                 R
the fraction of integrated households in the ergodic distribution is            R
                                                                                  1
                                                                                    R.   We set R
                                                                                                1 = 0.9
                                                                                0 +1

and calibrate R
              0 = 0.94 to target the share of households working in the non-tradable sector

which corresponds to the share of households working in the tradable sector in Canada of
35%.8 In Section 5 we analyze the macroeconomic consequences of varying the degree of
financial and real integration in the economy.
   6
     Both z1 and z2 are approximated as discrete Markov processes with equal-distance state space after
Rouwenhorst (1995). Under this approximation, each process will be uniquely determined by three moments:
the process's first-order autocorrelation i , and the unconditional distribution's standard deviation i , and
the skewness skewi , for i = 1, 2.
   7
     We estimate this share using data for 2008-2015 from the Canadian Financial Monitor Survey.
   8
     We measure the fraction of households working in tradable sectors based on the average fraction of
total employment working in tradable sectors in Canada between 1979 and 2019. The tradable sectors
include: Forestry, fishing, mining, quarrying, oil and gas; Manufacturing; Agriculture; Information, culture
and recreation; Wholesale trade; Professional, Scientific, and technical services; and Finance and insurance.



                                                     14
                                  Table 1: Calibration

                                      Parameter                                          Value

Panel 1. Household preferences
        Exit rate                                                                       1/45/4
1/c     Elasticity of intertemporal substitution                                         1
1/l     Frisch elasticity of labor supply                                                1
        Disutility of labor                                                              3.5107
        Discount factor                                                                  0.9909
T N     Elasticity of substitution between tradable and nontradable goods                3
HF      Elasticity of substitution between home and foreign goods                        3
T       Fraction of tradable goods in consumption basket                                 0.5
H       Fraction of home goods in tradable goods consumption basket                      0.6

Panel 2. Idiosyncratic risk
F0      Transition probability of keeping being non-integrated HH, financial integration 0.98
 F
1       Transition probability of keeping being integrated HH, financial integration     0.90
 R
0       Transition probability of keeping being non-integrated HH, real integration      0.95
R1      Transition probability of keeping being integrated HH,  real integration         0.90
1       Persistent component of idiosyncratic income, first-order autocorrelation        0.75
1       --, unconditional standard deviation                                             0.78
skew1 --, unconditional skewness                                                        -4.07
2       Transitory component of idiosyncratic income, first-order autocorrelation        0.25
2       --, unconditional standard deviation                                             0.31
skew2 --, unconditional skewness                                                        -2.05

Panel 3. Asset markets and financial frictions
iss     Steady-state international interest rate                                         0.04/4
b       Borrowing constraint, relative to quarterly average labor income in steady state-1
        Premium in borrowing interest rate                                               0.06/4

Panel 4. Government
        Income tax rate                                                                 0.20
Tss     Total transfer, relative to quarterly average labor income in steady state      0.12
Bss     Total government debt, relative to annual GDP in steady state                   0.78
¯       Steady-state inflation rate                                                     0.02/4
        Taylor rule, coefficient of inflation                                           1.10
i       --, coefficient of lagged nominal interest rate                                 0.90

Panel 5. New Keynesian
 N      Nontradable goods demand elasticity                                            10
N       Nontradable goods price adjustment cost                                       100
 T      Tradable goods demand elasticity                                               10
T       Tradable goods price adjustment cost                                          100

                                            15
           Table 2: Targeted moments for idiosyncratic income shock processes

                              Moment      Model               Data
                             1-year change in log annual earnings
                             Variance  0.47                    0.49
                             Skewness -0.27                   -0.81
                             Kurtosis 15.56                   15.55
                             5-year change in log annual earnings
                             Variance  0.71                    0.69
                             Skewness -0.29                   -0.71
                             Kurtosis 13.33                   10.33

Notes : Data moments from Bowlus, Gouin-Bonenfant, Liu, Lochner and Park (2020).



     Panel 3 of Table 1 summarizes the financial frictions households face. The steady-state
foreign annual interest rate is also calibrated at 4%, so that there are no steady-state dif-
ferences in the financial returns of integrated and nonintegrated households. The borrowing
constraint is set to the average quarterly labor income, and the annualized premium in the
borrowing interest rate is set to 6%, which is consistent with Kaplan et al. (2018). Panel
4 reports the parameters related to the government's fiscal and monetary policies. The in-
come tax rate is set at 20%, calibrated to match the average ratio of tax payments to total
earnings, obtained from the Canadian Survey of Financial Security. The lump-sum transfer
is set to 12% of the aggregate labor income, which is consistent with the ratio of government
transfers to total earnings. The level of government debt is set to match the average ratio
between government debt and annual GDP in Canada. We set the steady-state level of
annual inflation to be 2%, the aautocorrelation of the Taylor rule to 0.9, and the coefficient
of inflation to 1.1. In Panel 5, we report the calibrated parameter for the demand elasticities
and price adjustment costs, which we set to       N   =   T   = 10 and N = T = 100, respectively.
     The economy is subject to three sources of aggregate fluctuations: shocks to the domestic
and foreign monetary policy rates and shocks to foreign demand of the home tradable good.
For the policy rates, we calibrate the persistence of shock processes at 0.3 and the standard
deviation of the shock at 25 bp. For the foreign demand shock, we set the persistence to 0.7

                                                16
and its standard deviation to 0.02.
    We solve the model with the method proposed by Reiter (2009), which consists of
two steps. First, we solve the steady state with no aggregate shocks. The steady state
characterizes the distribution of households and the heterogeneity in their consumption and
saving when the aggregate quantities and prices are fixed at their steady-state levels. Then we
solve the first-order perturbation around the steady state. The solved dynamics characterize
the responses of different households' consumption and saving policies, the distribution of
households, and the aggregate quantities and prices following the different types of aggregate
shocks.
    Since our focus is on the macro and micro responses to different aggregate shocks and
the role of monetary policy in affecting its transmission, we use the aggregate responses of key
variables to a monetary policy shock as a subset of our targeted moments. We focus on the
peak responses of aggregate consumption, the bilateral exchange rate between the Canadian
dollar (CAD) and the U.S. dollar (USD), and the CPI. As documented by Champagne
and Sekkel (2018), following an 1% decrease in the innovation to monetary policy shock,
consumption increases by 0.6% to 1.4%; the CAD depreciates vis a vis USD by 0.4% to
1.2%; and the CPI increases by 0.05% to 0.55%. The IRF of aggregate consumption is
mainly used to discipline the persistence of monetary policy shock; the IRF of the exchange
rate is mainly disciplined by the elasticity between home and foreign tradable goods, HF ;
and the IRF of the CPI is mostly disciplined by the Taylor rule coefficient of inflation.


3.2. Aggregate and Distributional Effects of Monetary Policy Shocks

Figure 1 shows the aggregate response to an expansionary monetary policy shock: a neg-
                                      m
ative innovation to the Taylor rule   t   = -0.0025; more detailed responses are depicted in
Appendix Figure A.1. Due to price rigidities, the nominal decline in rates translates to
a decline in real rates, which increases consumption. Currency depreciates, generating an
increase in external demand and higher exports. Firms respond to increased external and
domestic demand by increasing both their output and prices. The increase in firms' output
leads to higher wages, leading to additional increases in domestic consumption. Overall,

                                               17
the aggregate effects of monetary shocks are aligned with those of the representative-agent
open-economy New Keynesian model. This result is consistent with the findings of Auclert
et al. (2020), who provide general conditions under which households heterogeneity does not
lead to an aggregate response significantly different from that of the representative-agent
open-economy New Keynesian model.

                    Figure 1: Aggregate Effects of Monetary Policy Shocks

 (a) Interest Rates and Inflation          (b) Aggregate Demand                   (c) Aggregate Supply
    1.50                                0.75                               0.75


    1.00
                                        0.50                               0.50

    0.50
                                        0.25                               0.25
    0.00

                                        0.00                               0.00
   -0.50


   -1.00                                -0.25                              -0.25
        0      4        8        12          0     4        8        12         0        4       8       12



Notes : This figure shows aggregate impulse responses to a 25 bp expansionary monetary policy shock (i.e.,
an innovation to the Taylor rule m  t = -0.0025). Panel (a) shows the response of nominal and real interest
rates, the inflation rate of the ideal price index, and the rate of nominal currency depreciation. Panel (b)
shows the response of aggregate consumption, exports, and the trade balance to GDP ratio. Panel (c) shows
the output of the home tradable good and the non-tradable good.


      Figure 2 illustrates the distributional effects of changes in monetary policy for different
households in the economy. Panel (a) shows that changes in monetary policy have uneven
effects on households, as measured by the standard deviation of consumption responses, the
difference between the 75th percentile and the 25th percentile, and the difference between
the 90th percentile and the 10th percentile, all scaled by the average peak effect of aggre-
gate consumption. All these measures increase in response to the shock. Panels (b)-(d)
decompose these heterogeneous responses for different types of households in the economy.
Panel (b) shows similar responses for households working in the tradable and non-tradable
sectors. Panel (c) shows that monetary policy has a larger effect on households that are not
integrated to international capital markets and are directly affected by changes in domes-
tic rates. Finally, Panel (d) shows that monetary policy has larger effects on consumption
for households with low asset holdings, which tend to have higher marginal propensities to
consume.

                                                       18
                 Figure 2: Distributional Effects of Monetary Policy Shocks

                                     Heterogeneous Consumption Response
      (a) Dispersion        (b) by Real Integration          (c) by Fin. Integration      (d) by Wealth
   0.75                       0.75                             0.75                    0.75




                              0.50                             0.50                    0.50
   0.50


                              0.25                             0.25                    0.25


   0.25
                              0.00                             0.00                    0.00



   0.00                       -0.25                            -0.25                   -0.25
       0     4   8     12          0     4    8    12               0   4   8     12        0   4   8     12


Notes : This figure shows the distributional effects of a 25 bp expansionary monetary policy shock (i.e., an
innovation to the Taylor rule m  t = -0.0025). The Panel (a) shows the standard deviation of consumption
responses across households and the difference between percentiles 75 and 25 and 90 and 10 of consumption
responses, all scaled by the initial response of aggregate consumption. The Panel (b) shows the consumption
responses of households employed in the home tradable sector (integrated ) and those employed in the non-
tradable sector (not integrated ). Panel (c) shows the consumption responses of households that have access
to international capital markets (integrated ) and those that have access to domestically traded financial
securities (not integrated ). The Panel (d) shows consumption responses of households with high and low
levels of assets, defined as those with assets above and below the mean asset position in the economy.




4. Classic Questions in International Macroeconomics
          from a Distributional Perspective
This section uses our open-economy HANK model to reassess three classic questions in
international macroeconomics from a distributional perspective: Section 4.1 analyzes the
international spillovers of external shocks and policies, Section 4.2 studies the implications
of different exchange-rate regimes, and Section 4.3 the implications of the international price
system.


4.1. International spillovers

We study the aggregate and distributional effects of two sources of macroeconomic exposure
that result from real and financial international integration: Changes in external demand
and foreign monetary policy.

                                                        19
External demand The top panels in Figure 3 show the aggregate responses of a positive
shock to external demand of home tradable good, with more details provided in Appendix
Figure A.2. Firms in the home tradable sector respond to higher external demand by in-
creasing their output and prices. On the one hand, the increase in output leads to higher
wages and consumption for workers employed in the tradable sector, which in turn leads to
higher output and wages in the non-tradable sector. On the other hand, the relative price
of home and foreign tradable goods adjust through a currency appreciation and leads to an
expenditure switching of domestic household toward foreign tradable.9 Currency appreci-
ation pushes down inflation, leading the monetary authority to cut its policy rate, which
further amplifies the increase in domestic demand. In spite of currency appreciation, the
initial external demand shock implies that the economy increases its exports and its trade
balance.
       The top panels in Figure 4 show the distributional effects of the external demand shock.
Panel (a) shows that the external demand shock leads to uneven responses in consumption
across households, as measured by the standard deviation of consumption responses, the
difference between the 75th percentile and the 25th percentile, and the difference between
the 90th percentile and the 10th percentile, which all increase in response to the shock. As
shown in Panel (b), external demand shocks naturally have a larger effect on households
working in the tradable sector. In addition, Panel (c) shows that the decline in domestic
interest rates in response to the external demand shock induces a larger consumption response
for households not integrated to international capital markets than for those integrated to
international capital markets. Panel (d) shows that external demand shocks have larger
effect on the consumption of households with low asset holdings, which tend to have higher
marginal propensities to consume.


Foreign monetary policy The bottom panels in Figure 3 show the aggregate responses
to a foreign monetary policy expansion, with more details provided in Appendix Figure A.3.
   9
    The effects of an external demand shock on output and the real exchange rate in our model are quali-
tatively consistent with the effects of terms of trade shocks documented in the literature (see, for example
Mendoza, 1995; Schmitt-Groh´  e and Uribe, 2018).


                                                    20
                          Figure 3: Aggregate Effects of External Shocks

                       Response to an Expansionary Foreign Demand Shock
 (a) Interest Rates and Inflation            (b) Aggregate Demand                    (c) Aggregate Supply
    0.50                                 1.50                                0.45



    0.00                                 1.00
                                                                             0.30


    -0.50                                0.50

                                                                             0.15
    -1.00                                0.00



    -1.50                                -0.50                               0.00
         0      4         8       12          0      4        8        12        0          4       8       12



                    Response to an Expansionary Foreign Monetary Policy Shock
 (d) Interest Rates and Inflation            (e) Aggregate Demand                    (f) Aggregate Supply
    0.30                                 0.20                                 0.05


    0.15                                 0.10                                 0.03


    0.00                                 0.00                                 0.00


    -0.15                                -0.10                               -0.03


    -0.30                                -0.20                               -0.05


    -0.45                                -0.30                               -0.08
         0      4         8       12          0      4        8        12         0         4       8       12



Notes : Panels (a)-(c) show the aggregate impulse responses to a 2% expansionary external demand shock
       Y
(i.e., t F = 0.02). Panels (d)-(f) show the aggregate impulse responses to a 25 bp expansionary foreign
                                                                            
monetary policy shock (i.e., an innovation to the foreign interest rate i  t = -0.0025). Panels (a) and (d)
show the response of nominal and real interest rates, the inflation rate of the ideal price index, and the rate
of nominal currency depreciation. Panels (b) and (e) show the response of aggregate consumption, exports,
and trade balance to GDP ratio. Panels (c) and (f) show the output of the home tradable good and the
nontradable good.


The decline in foreign interest rates increases the consumption of households integrated to
international capital markets. Home tradable firms and nontradable firms respond to the
increase in demand by increasing their output and prices. The increase in output leads to
higher wages, which reinforces the increase in consumption. The increased prices of home
tradable goods and nontradable leads to an expenditure switching of domestic households
toward foreign tradable goods, which is associated with currency appreciation, pushing down
inflation, and leading the monetary authority to cut its policy rate. Currency appreciation
ends up leading to a decline in exports and to trade balance deficits, which are financed with
the capital inflows generated by lower external interest rates.
      The bottom panels in Figure 4 show that the foreign monetary policy shock has un-

                                                         21
                       Figure 4: Distributional Effects of External Shocks

           Heterogeneous Consumption Responses to an Expansionary Foreign Demand Shock
      (a) Dispersion         (b) by Real Integration          (c) by Fin. Integration      (d) by Wealth
   0.90                        0.30                             0.30                    0.30




   0.60                        0.20                             0.20                    0.20




   0.30                        0.10                             0.10                    0.10




   0.00                        0.00                             0.00                    0.00
       0     4    8     12         0    4     8     12              0    4   8    12        0    4    8     12


    Heterogeneous Consumption Responses to an Expansionary Foreign Monetary Policy Shock
      (e) Dispersion         (f) by Real Integration          (g) by Fin. Integration      (h) by Wealth
   6.00                        0.45                             0.45                    0.45




                               0.30                             0.30                    0.30
   4.00


                               0.15                             0.15                    0.15


   2.00
                               0.00                             0.00                    0.00



   0.00                        -0.15                            -0.15                   -0.15
       0     4    8     12          0   4     8     12               0   4   8     12        0   4    8     12


Notes : Panels (a)-(c) of this figure show the heterogeneous responses of consumption to a 2% expansionary
                               Y
external demand shock (i.e., t F = 0.02). Panels (d)-(f) show the heterogeneous effects in response to a 25 bp
                                                                                                
expansionary foreign monetary policy shock (i.e., an innovation to the foreign interest rate i t = -0.0025).
Panels (a) and (e) show the standard deviation of consumption responses across households, and the difference
between percentiles 75 and 25 and 90 and 10 of consumption responses, all scaled by the initial response
of aggregate consumption. Panels (b) and (f) show the consumption responses of households employed in
the home tradable sector (integrated ) and those employed in the nontradable sector (not integrated ). Panels
(c) and (g) show the consumption responses of households that have access to international capital markets
(integrated ) and those that have access to domestically traded financial securities (not integrated ). Panels
(d) and (h) show the consumption responses of households with high and low levels of assets, defined as
those with assets above and below the mean asset position in the economy.



even effects across different households. The main source of these heterogeneous responses
comes from the differential response of households integrated to international capital markets
and those not integrated to international capital markets: As shown in Panel (b), foreign
monetary policy expansions lead to consumption increases for households integrated to in-


                                                         22
ternational capital market that are not accompanied by increases in consumption for house-
holds not integrated to international capital markets. Panels (a) and (c) show more modest
differences coming from the other two sources of heterogeneity, namely, real international
integration and wealth, which suggests that differences in international financial integration
are the main source of inequality in consumption responses for periods of external capital
flows driven by foreign monetary policy.


4.2. Exchange-rate regimes

The second classic question we address is how different exchange rate regimes compare. To
answer this question, we compare the aggregate and distributional responses to external
shocks under the flexible exchange-rate regime from the Taylor rule in our baseline model
(described in Section 4.1) with those in an economy in which the monetary authority chooses
domestic interest rates to set Et = 1 for all periods.
       Panels (a) and (c) of Figure 5 show that, as standard in representative-agent open-
economy New Keynesian models (e.g., Gali and Monacelli, 2005), aggregate consumption has
a larger response to shocks under a fixed-exchange-rate regime that under a flexible regime.
As further detailed in Appendix Figures A.4 and A.5, the reason for this is that when there
is an expansion induced by either an external demand shock or a foreign monetary policy
shock, under a fixed-exchange-rate regime the monetary authority decreases its interest rate
more sharply to avoid currency appreciation, which creates additional expansions in domestic
demand. As a result, for both increases in external demand or declines in foreign interest
rates, the aggregate consumption response is larger under a fixed-exchange-rate regime than
under a Taylor rule.10
       Panels (b) and (d) of Figure 5 compare the distributional implications of the different
exchange-rate regimes, as measured by the standard deviation of consumption responses. In
both cases, fixed-exchange-rate regimes lead to a lower dispersion of consumption responses
relative to the aggregate response. The reason for this result is that, as explained in the
  10
    See Broda (2004) for empirical evidence on the larger output response to a terms of trade shock in
countries with fixed-exchange-rate regimes vs. those with flexible-exchange-rate regimes.



                                                 23
previous section, in the economy with a flexible exchange rates, expansionary external shocks
lead to currency appreciation; this means that to maintain a fixed exchange rate, the mone-
tary authority in the economy with a fixed-exchange-rate regime has to lower its policy rates
by more than under the floating regime (see Appendix Figures A.4 and A.5). The larger
decline in interest rates, in turn, increases consumption for households not directly exposed
to the shock, such as households working in the nontradable sector and households not in-
tegrated to international capital markets (see Appendix Figures A.6 and A.7 for detailed
consumption responses for different groups under floating and fixed-exchange-rate regimes).
From this, it follows that in choosing their exchange rate regime, monetary authorities might
face a trade-off between aggregate stabilization and inequality in consumption responses.




                                             24
Figure 5: Aggregate and Distributional Effects of External Shocks under Alternative
Exchange-Rate Regimes

                Consumption Response to an Expansionary Foreign Demand Shock
               (a) Aggregate                                         (b) Dispersion
   0.90                                                  0.75




   0.60                                                  0.50




   0.30                                                  0.25




   0.00                                                  0.00
       0          4           8           12                 0          4             8         12


            Consumption Response to an Expansionary Foreign Monetary Policy Shock
               (c) Aggregate                                         (d) Dispersion
   0.30                                                  2.00



   0.20



   0.10                                                  1.00



   0.00



   -0.10                                                 0.00
        0         4            8          12                 0          4             8         12


Notes : Panels (a)-(b) show the responses of consumption to a 2 % expansionary external demand shock (i.e.,
   
 YF
 t  = 0.02), under different exchange-rate regimes. Flexible exchange rate corresponds to the baseline model
(described in Section 2); Fixed exchange rate corresponds to the equilibrium under which the monetary
policy sets the nominal rate to target t = 1 in all periods. Panels (c) and (d) show the response to a
                                                                                                         
25 bp expansionary foreign monetary policy shock (i.e., an innovation to the foreign interest rate i    t =
-0.0025). Panels (a) and (b) show the response of aggregate consumption. Panels (b) and (d) show the
standard deviation of consumption responses across households, scaled by the initial response of aggregate
consumption.



4.3. The international price system

The third classic question we address concerns what are the implications of the international
price system for monetary policy. To answer this question, we compare the aggregate and



                                                    25
distributional responses to external shocks under the Producer-currency pricing in our base-
line model (described in Section 4.1) with those in an economy with Dollar-currency pricing,
in which firms face a cost of adjusting the price in foreign currency.
    Panel (a) of Figure 6 shows that, as standard in representative-agent open-economy
New Keynesian models, Dollar-currency pricing reduces the ability of monetary policy to
stimulate exports through the expenditure-switching channel. Panel (b) shows that this
implies a smaller effect of monetary policy on aggregate consumption. This is because, as
shown in Appendix Figure A.8, the smaller effect of exports translates into a more modest
effect on the wage of workers in the tradable sector and indirect effects through income.
    A corollary of the aggregate results in the open-economy HANK is that, as shown in
Panel (c) of Figure 6, monetary policy shocks have larger effects on the inequality of con-
sumption responses under Dollar-currency pricing than under Producer-currency pricing.
This is because, as shown in Appendix Figures A.8 and A.9, under Dollar-currency pricing,
monetary policy has a stronger effect on households employed in nontradable sectors than
in households employed in tradable sectors. An implication of this result is that the interna-
tional price system not only implies challenges for monetary authorities in stimulating the
economy, but also additional challenges stemming from more uneven consumption responses
to changes in monetary policy.




                                              26
Figure 6: Aggregate and Distributional Effects to an Expansionary Domestic Monetary
Policy Shock under Alternative Price Settings

               (c) Exports              (a) Aggregate Consumption            (b) Consumption Dispersion
   0.75                                 0.60                                  0.45



   0.50
                                        0.40                                  0.30


   0.25

                                        0.20                                  0.15
   0.00



  -0.25                                 0.00                                  0.00
       0         4       8        12        0       4         8        12         0       4         8        12



Notes : This figure shows the aggregate distributional effects of a 25 bp expansionary monetary policy shock
(i.e., an innovation to the Taylor rule m   t = -0.0025) under alternative price settings. Producer currency
pricing corresponds to the baseline model (described in Section 2), in which firms face a cost of adjusting
their price in local currency; Dollar currency pricing corresponds to a variant of the model in which firms
face a cost of adjusting their price in foreign currency (described in Section 4.3). Panel (a) shows the response
of exports, Panel (b) that of aggregate consumption, and Panel (c) the standard deviation of consumption
responses across households, scaled by the initial response of aggregate consumption.




5. The Role of International Integration
So far, we have focused on how monetary policy affects the asymmetric effects of external
shocks for a given degree of international integration. In this section, we study how our
conclusions are affected by the degree of international integration that characterizes the
economy. From a positive perspective, this exercise helps us understand how changes in
the international integration that countries often experience is expected to affect the effects
of shocks and the ability of monetary policy to influence these effects. From a normative
perspective, this is an important input to the debate on the consequences of globalization
that motivated this paper.
          We study the role of international integration by analyzing how external shocks affect
economies with different degrees of real and financial international integration. For real in-
tegration, we consider economies with different shares of households working in the home
tradable goods sector vs. the nontradable sector and those in which households' consumption
baskets are composed of home tradable goods vs. nontradable goods. For financial integra-


                                                        27
tion, we consider economies with different shares of households that have access to financial
securities internationally traded.11 These alternative economies aim to capture changes that
occur, for instance, due to trade and financial liberalizations, in which some goods the econ-
omy produces switch from only being traded by domestic households to also face demand
from the rest of the world, and in which households that only have access to domestically
traded securities start having access to financial securities traded with the rest of the world.
     Figure 7 shows the aggregate responses of consumption to shocks under alternative
degrees of real and financial integration, and Figure 8 shows their distributional effects,
measured by the dispersion of consumption responses. These exercises reveal two main
takeaways. The first is that monetary policy is less effective in environments of high real
and financial integration. In the case of high real integration, monetary policy loses its
effects on nontradable sectors, which play an important role in monetary transmission (see
panels (a) of Figure 7 and Appendix Figure A.10). In the case of high financial integration,
monetary policy loses an important part of its direct channel in stimulating the consumption
of households that borrow and save in domestic securities (see panels (b) of Figure 7 and
Appendix Figure A.13). In fact, in economies in which most agents borrow and save in
foreign securities, the effects of monetary policy on consumption are three times smaller
than in our baseline economy.
     The second takeaway is that although higher international integration increases the
aggregate effect of external shocks, it can dampen the distributional consequences of these
shocks. For aggregate effects, Panel (c) of Figure 7 indicates that changes in external demand
have larger effects when the share of tradable sector is high; Panel (f) indicates that the effect
of changes in foreign monetary policy are larger when the share of households integrated to
international capital markets is large. For distributional effects, Panel (c) of Figure 8 shows
that the distributional effects of changes in external demand are larger when real integration
is low; and Panel (f) shows that the effects of changes in foreign monetary policy are larger
when financial integration is low. This is because as shown in Appendix Figures A.11,
  11
     In each scenario, we calibrate the level of government debt to keep the average level of households' wealth
at the same level as in the baseline calibration.



                                                      28
A.12, A.14, and A.15, in economies with low international integration, a large share of the
aggregate effects of external shocks are borne by a small set of households.




                                             29
Figure 7: Aggregate Consumption Response to Shocks under Alternative Degrees of Inter-
national Integration

                           Expansionary Domestic Monetary Policy Shock
            (a) by Degree of Real Integration      (b) by Degree of Financial Integration
              0.90                                      0.90




              0.60                                      0.60




              0.30                                      0.30




              0.00                                      0.00
                  0       4         8        12             0       4         8        12



                                Expansionary Foreign Demand Shock
            (c) by Degree of Real Integration      (d) by Degree of Financial Integration
              0.45                                      0.45




              0.30                                      0.30




              0.15                                      0.15




              0.00                                      0.00
                  0       4         8        12             0       4         8        12



                          Expansionary Foreign Monetary Policy Shock
            (e) by Degree of Real Integration      (f) by Degree of Financial Integration
               0.20                                     0.20



                                                        0.10
               0.10


                                                        0.00


               0.00
                                                        -0.10



              -0.10                                     -0.20
                   0      4         8        12              0      4         8        12




Note: Panels (a) and (b) show aggregate consumption responses to a 25 bp expansionary monetary policy
shock ( mt = -0.0025); Panels (c) and (d) responses to a 2% expansionary external demand shock
  Y
( t F = 0.02); and Panels (e) and (f) the responses to a 25 bp expansionary foreign monetary policy shock
    
( i
  t = -0.0025). In all panels, Baseline corresponds to the calibrated economy studied in Sections 3 and 4.
In Panels (a), (c), and (e), High (Low ) corresponds to responses in economies calibrated with 95% (5%) of
households working in home tradable goods sector and 95% (5%) of households' consumption basket is
made up of home tradable goods. In Panels (b), (d), and (f), High (Low ) corresponds to responses in
economies calibrated with 95% (5%) of households with access to international financial markets.


                                                   30
Figure 8: Dispersion of Consumption in Response to Shocks under Alternative Degrees of
International Integration

                           Expansionary Domestic Monetary Policy Shock
            (a) by Degree of Real Integration      (b) by Degree of Financial Integration
              0.45                                      0.45




              0.30                                      0.30




              0.15                                      0.15




              0.00                                      0.00
                  0       4         8        12             0       4         8        12



                                Expansionary Foreign Demand Shock
            (c) by Degree of Real Integration      (d) by Degree of Financial Integration
              7.50                                      7.50




              5.00                                      5.00




              2.50                                      2.50




              0.00                                      0.00
                  0       4         8        12             0       4         8        12



                          Expansionary Foreign Monetary Policy Shock
            (e) by Degree of Real Integration      (f) by Degree of Financial Integration
              4.50                                      4.50




              3.00                                      3.00




              1.50                                      1.50




              0.00                                      0.00
                  0       4         8        12             0       4         8        12




Note: Panels (a) and (b) show the the standard deviation of consumption responses across households,
scaled by the initial response of aggregate consumption, to a 25 bp expansionary monetary policy shock
( m
  t = -0.0025); Panels (c) and (d) responses to a 2 percent expansionary external demand shock
  Y
( t F = 0.02); and Panels (e) and (f) the responses to a 25 bp expansionary foreign monetary policy shock
    
( i
  t = -0.0025). In all panels, Baseline correspondS to the calibrated economy studied in Sections 3 and 4.
In Panels (a), (c), and (e), High (Low ) correspondS to responses in economies calibrated with 95% (5%) of
households working in home tradable goods sector and 95% (5%) of households' consumption basket is
made up of home tradable goods. In Panels (b), (d), and (f), High (Low ) corresponds to responses in
economies calibrated with 95% (5%) of households with access to international financial markets.
                                                   31
6. Conclusion
Motivated by the asymmetric effects of globalization documented over the last three decades,
we study how monetary policy shapes the effects of external shocks in open economies. Ex-
ternal shocks have larger effects on households employed in tradable sectors or that have
access to international capital markets. In confronting these shocks, monetary authorities
might face a trade-off between maintaining aggregate stability and reducing income and con-
sumption inequalities. Fixed-exchange-rate regimes, which typically amplify the aggregate
effects of an external shock, can reduce the consumption inequalities that stem from exter-
nal shocks. Our paper also shows that although lower international integration dampens the
aggregate exposure to external shocks, it also increases the distributional impacts of these
shocks. From this, we conclude that the discontents of globalization might arise, perhaps
paradoxically, from international integration's not being sufficiently generalized. Overall, our
results indicate that redistribution constitutes a relevant consideration for monetary policy
in open economies. This suggests that an important area for future research is the interaction
between monetary and fiscal policies with households' heterogeneity in open economies.




                                              32
References
Aguiar, M. and Bils, M. (2015). Has consumption inequality mirrored income inequality? Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 105 (9), 2725­56.
Attanasio, O., Battistin, E. and Ichimura, H. (2004). What really happened to consumption
  inequality in the US? Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Auclert, A. (2019). Monetary policy and the redistribution channel. American Economic Review,
  109 (6), 2333­67.
--, Rognlie, M., Souchier, M. and Straub, L. (2020). Monetary policy and exchange rates
  with heterogeneous agents: Resurrecting the real income channel.
--, -- and Straub, L. (2018). The intertemporal keynesian cross. Tech. rep., National Bureau of
  Economic Research.
Autor, D. H., Dorn, D. and Hanson, G. H. (2016). The China shock: Learning from labor-
  market adjustment to large changes in trade. Annual Review of Economics, 8, 205­240.
Blanco, A., Drenik, A. and Zaratiegui, E. (2020). Devaluations, inflation, and labor income
  dynamics.
Bowlus, A., Gouin-Bonenfant, E., Liu, H., Lochner, L. and Park, Y. (2020). Four Decades
  of Canadian Earnings Dynamics Across Workers and Firms. Tech. rep.
Broda, C. (2004). Terms of trade and exchange rate regimes in developing countries. Journal of
  International economics, 63 (1), 31­58.
Burstein, A. and Gopinath, G. (2014). International prices and exchange rates. In Handbook of
  international economics, vol. 4, Elsevier, pp. 391­451.
Champagne, J. and Sekkel, R. (2018). Changes in monetary regimes and the identification of
  monetary policy shocks: Narrative evidence from Canada. Journal of Monetary Economics, 99,
  72 ­ 87.
Clarida, R., Gali, J. and Gertler, M. (2001). Optimal monetary policy in open versus closed
  economies: an integrated approach. American Economic Review, 91 (2), 248­252.
Corsetti, G., Crowley, M., Han, L. and Song, H. (2019). Markets and markup: A new
  empirical framework and evidence on exporters from china.
--, Dedola, L. and Leduc, S. (2010). Optimal monetary policy in open economies. In Handbook
  of monetary economics, vol. 3, Elsevier, pp. 861­933.
Cravino, J. and Levchenko, A. A. (2017). The distributional consequences of large devaluations.
  American Economic Review, 107 (11), 3477­3509.
Cugat, G. (2019). Emerging markets, household heterogeneity, and exchange rate policy.
De Ferra, S., Mitman, K. and Romei, F. (2020). Household heterogeneity and the transmission
  of foreign shocks. Journal of International Economics, p. 103303.
Devereux, M. B. and Engel, C. (2003). Monetary policy in the open economy revisited: Price
  setting and exchange-rate flexibility. The Review of Economic Studies, 70 (4), 765­783.
Doepke, M. and Schneider, M. (2006). Inflation and the redistribution of nominal wealth.
  Journal of Political Economy, 114 (6), 1069­1097.
Drenik, A., Pereira, G. and Perez, D. J. (2018). Wealth redistribution after exchange rate
  devaluations. In AEA Papers and Proceedings, vol. 108, pp. 552­56.
Egorov, K. and Mukhin, D. (2020). Optimal Policy Under Dollar Pricing. Tech. rep.
Engel, C. (2006). Equivalence results for optimal pass-through, optimal indexing to exchange


                                              33
  rates, and optimal choice of currency for export pricing. Journal of the European Economic
  Association, 4 (6), 1249­1260.
Fleming, J. M. (1962). Domestic financial policies under fixed and under floating exchange rates.
  Staff Papers, 9 (3), 369­380.
Forbes, K. J. and Rigobon, R. (2002). No contagion, only interdependence: measuring stock
  market comovements. The journal of Finance, 57 (5), 2223­2261.
Gabaix, X. and Maggiori, M. (2015). International liquidity and exchange rate dynamics. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130 (3), 1369­1420.
Gali, J. and Monacelli, T. (2005). Monetary policy and exchange rate volatility in a small open
  economy. The Review of Economic Studies, 72 (3), 707­734.
Giovanni, J. d., Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Ulu, M. F. and Baskaya, Y. S. (2017). International
  spillovers and local credit cycles. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Goldberg, L. S. and Tille, C. (2008). Vehicle currency use in international trade. Journal of
  international Economics, 76 (2), 177­192.
Goldberg, P. K. and Pavcnik, N. (2007). Distributional effects of globalization in developing
  countries. Journal of economic Literature, 45 (1), 39­82.
Gopinath, G. (2015). The international price system. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic
  Research.
--, Boz, E., Casas, C., D´   iez, F. J., Gourinchas, P.-O. and Plagborg-Møller, M. (2020).
  Dominant currency paradigm. American Economic Review, 110 (3), 677­719.
--, Itskhoki, O. and Rigobon, R. (2010). Currency choice and exchange rate pass-through.
  American Economic Review, 100 (1), 304­36.
-- and Neiman, B. (2014). Trade adjustment and productivity in large crises. American Economic
  Review, 104 (3), 793­831.
Gourinchas, P.-O. (2018). Monetary policy transmission in emerging markets: an application to
  chile. Series on Central Banking Analysis and Economic Policies no. 25.
-- and Rey, H. (2007). International financial adjustment. Journal of political economy, 115 (4),
  665­703.
Guntin, R., Ottonello, P. and Perez, D. (2020). The Micro Anatomy of Macro Consumption
  Adjustments. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kaplan, G., Moll, B. and Violante, G. L. (2018). Monetary policy according to hank. Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 108 (3), 697­743.
-- and Violante, G. L. (2018). Microeconomic heterogeneity and macroeconomic shocks. Journal
  of Economic Perspectives, 32 (3), 167­94.
Krueger, D. and Perri, F. (2006). Does income inequality lead to consumption inequality?
  evidence and theory. The Review of Economic Studies, 73 (1), 163­193.
Mendoza, E. G. (1995). The terms of trade, the real exchange rate, and economic fluctuations.
  International Economic Review, pp. 101­137.
Mukhin, D. (2018). An Equilibrium Model of the International Price System. Tech. rep., Society
  for Economic Dynamics.
Mundell, R. A. (1963). Capital mobility and stabilization policy under fixed and flexible ex-
  change rates. The Canadian Journal of Economics and Political Science/Revue canadienne
  d'Economique et de Science politique, 29 (4), 475­485.
Obstfeld, M. and Rogoff, K. (2000). New directions for stochastic open economy models.


                                               34
  Journal of international economics, 50 (1), 117­153.
Quadrini, V. and R´   ios-Rull, J.-V. (2015). Inequality in macroeconomics. In Handbook of Income
  Distribution, vol. 2, Elsevier, pp. 1229­1302.
Reiter, M. (2009). Solving heterogeneous-agent models by projection and perturbation. Journal
  of Economic Dynamics and Control, 33 (3), 649­665.
Rey, H. (2015). Dilemma not trilemma: the global financial cycle and monetary policy indepen-
  dence. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Rotemberg, J. J. (1982). Sticky prices in the united states. Journal of Political Economy, 90 (6),
  1187­1211.
Rouwenhorst, K. G. (1995). Asset Pricing Implications of Equilibrium Business Cycle Models,
  Princeton University Press, pp. 294­330.
Schmitt-Grohe   ´, S. and Uribe, M. (2011). Pegs and pain. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Eco-
  nomic Research.
-- and Uribe, M. (2018). How important are terms-of-trade shocks? International Economic
  Review, 59 (1), 85­111.
Stiglitz, J. E. (2002). Globalization and its Discontents, vol. 500. New York Norton.
-- (2017). Globalization and its discontents revisited. WW Norton & Company, Inc.: New York,
  NY, USA.
Zhou, H. (2020). Open economy, redistribution, and the aggregate impact of external shocks. Tech.
  rep.




                                               35
A. Appendix: Additional Results
A.1. Aggregate Responses to Shocks: Additional Details


                           Figure A.1: Aggregate Effects of Monetary Policy Shocks
                  -3                                -3                             -3                             -3
             10                                10                             10                             10
       6                               7.5                            7.5                            1.5

       4                                 5                              5                              1

       2                               2.5                            2.5                            0.5

       0                                 0                              0                              0

      -2                               -2.5                           -2.5                           -0.5

      -4                                -5                             -5                             -1

      -6                               -7.5                           -7.5                           -1.5
        0              4     8    12       0             4   8   12       0             4   8   12       0             4   8   12
             10 -3                             10 -3                          10 -3                          10 -3
     7.5                               7.5                              3                              3

       5                                 5                              2                              2

     2.5                               2.5                              1                              1

       0                                 0                              0                              0

     -2.5                              -2.5                            -1                             -1

      -5                                -5                             -2                             -2

     -7.5                              -7.5                            -3                             -3
         0             4     8    12       0             4   8   12      0              4   8   12      0              4   8   12
                  -3                                -3                             -3                             -3
             10                                10                             10                             10
     7.5                               7.5                            7.5                            4.5

       5                                 5                              5                              3

     2.5                               2.5                            2.5                            1.5

       0                                 0                              0                              0

     -2.5                              -2.5                           -2.5                           -1.5

      -5                                -5                             -5                             -3

     -7.5                            -7.5                           -7.5                           -4.5
         0             4     8    12     0               4   8   12     0               4   8   12     0               4   8   12
             10 -3                             10 -2                          10 -3                          10 -4
     1.5                               1.5                            1.5                            7.5

       1                                 1                              1                              5

     0.5                               0.5                            0.5                            2.5

       0                                 0                              0                              0

     -0.5                              -0.5                           -0.5                           -2.5

      -1                                -1                             -1                             -5

     -1.5                              -1.5                           -1.5                           -7.5
         0             4     8    12       0             4   8   12       0             4   8   12       0             4   8   12
             10 -3                             10 -4                          10 -4                          10 -3
     1.5                                 9                              9                            4.5

       1                                 6                              6                              3

     0.5                                 3                              3                            1.5

       0                                 0                              0                              0

     -0.5                               -3                             -3                            -1.5

      -1                                -6                             -6                             -3

     -1.5                               -9                             -9                            -4.5
         0             4     8    12      0              4   8   12      0              4   8   12       0             4   8   12




Note: This figure shows impulse responses to a 25 bp expansionary monetary policy shock (i.e., an
innovation to the Taylor rule m
                              t = -0.0025).




                                                                 36
                           Figure A.2: Aggregate Effects of Foreign Demand Shock
                  -3                                -4                             -3                             -2
             10                                10                             10                             10
       3                                 9                              3                            1.5

       2                                 6                              2                              1

       1                                 3                              1                            0.5

       0                                 0                              0                              0

      -1                                -3                             -1                            -0.5

      -2                                -6                             -2                             -1

      -3                                -9                             -3                          -1.5
        0              4    8     12      0              4   8   12      0              4   8   12     0               4   8          12
             10 -4                             10 -3                          10 -3                          10 -3
       9                               4.5                              3                              6

       6                                 3                              2                              4

       3                               1.5                              1                              2

       0                                 0                              0                              0

      -3                               -1.5                            -1                             -2

      -6                                -3                             -2                             -4

      -9                               -4.5                            -3                             -6
        0              4    8     12       0             4   8   12      0              4   8   12      0              4   8          12
                  -3                                -4                             -3                             -3
             10                                10                             10                             10
     4.5                                 9                            4.5                            4.5

       3                                 6                              3                              3

     1.5                                 3                            1.5                            1.5

       0                                 0                              0                              0

     -1.5                               -3                            -1.5                           -1.5

      -3                                -6                             -3                             -3

     -4.5                               -9                            -4.5                           -4.5
         0             4    8     12      0              4   8   12       0             4   8   12       0             4   8          12
             10 -4                             10 -2                          10 -4                          10 -4
       6                               1.5                            7.5                            1.5

       4                                 1                              5                              1

       2                               0.5                            2.5                            0.5

       0                                 0                              0                              0

      -2                               -0.5                           -2.5                           -0.5

      -4                                -1                             -5                             -1

      -6                               -1.5                           -7.5                           -1.5
        0              4    8     12       0             4   8   12       0             4   8   12       0             4   8          12
             10 -4                             10 -5                          10 -4                          10 -3
       6                               7.5                            7.5                            4.5

       4                                 5                              5                              3

       2                               2.5                            2.5                            1.5

       0                                 0                              0                              0

      -2                               -2.5                           -2.5                           -1.5

      -4                                -5                             -5                             -3

      -6                               -7.5                           -7.5                           -4.5
        0              4    8     12       0             4   8   12       0             4   8   12       0             4   8          12



                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                               YF
Note: This figure shows impulse responses to a 2% expansionary external demand shock (i.e.,                                    t    = 0.02).




                                                                 37
                       Figure A.3: Aggregate Effects of Foreign Monetary Policy Shocks
                  -4                                -4                             -4                             -3
             10                                10                             10                             10
       9                                 3                              6                              3

       6                                 2                              4                              2

       3                                 1                              2                              1

       0                                 0                              0                              0

      -3                                -1                             -2                             -1

      -6                                -2                             -4                             -2

      -9                                -3                             -6                             -3
        0              4     8    12      0              4   8   12      0              4   8   12      0              4   8   12
             10 -4                             10 -4                          10 -3                          10 -4
       3                               7.5                            1.5                            4.5

       2                                 5                              1                              3

       1                               2.5                            0.5                            1.5

       0                                 0                              0                              0

      -1                               -2.5                           -0.5                           -1.5

      -2                                -5                             -1                             -3

      -3                               -7.5                           -1.5                           -4.5
        0              4     8    12       0             4   8   12       0             4   8   12       0             4   8   12
                  -4                                -4                             -4                             -4
             10                                10                             10                             10
     1.5                                 3                            7.5                              9

       1                                 2                              5                              6

     0.5                                 1                            2.5                              3

       0                                 0                              0                              0

     -0.5                               -1                            -2.5                            -3

      -1                                -2                             -5                             -6

     -1.5                               -3                            -7.5                            -9
         0             4     8    12      0              4   8   12       0             4   8   12      0              4   8   12
             10 -4                             10 -3                          10 -4                          10 -3
       3                                 3                              3                              3

       2                                 2                              2                              2

       1                                 1                              1                              1

       0                                 0                              0                              0

      -1                                -1                             -1                             -1

      -2                                -2                             -2                             -2

      -3                                -3                             -3                             -3
        0              4     8    12      0              4   8   12      0              4   8   12      0              4   8   12
             10 -4                             10 -5                          10 -5                          10 -4
     1.5                                 6                            4.5                              9

       1                                 4                              3                              6

     0.5                                 2                            1.5                              3

       0                                 0                              0                              0

     -0.5                               -2                            -1.5                            -3

      -1                                -4                             -3                             -6

     -1.5                               -6                          -4.5                              -9
         0             4     8    12      0              4   8   12     0               4   8   12      0              4   8   12




Note: This figure shows impulse responses to a 25 bp expansionary foreign monetary policy shock (i.e., an
                                         
innovation to the foreign interest rate i
                                        t = -0.0025).




                                                                 38
A.2. Aggregate and Distributional Responses under Alternative Exchange-rate
     Regimes


Figure A.4: Aggregate Effects of Foreign Demand Shock under Alternative Exchange-rate
Regimes
                  -3                             -3                             -3                           -3
             10                             10                             10                           10
       3                              3                              3                            3

       2                              2                              2                            2

       1                              1                              1                            1

       0                              0                              0                            0

      -1                             -1                             -1                            -1

      -2                             -2                             -2                            -2

      -3                             -3                             -3                            -3
        0              4   8   12      0              4   8   12      0              4   8   12     0             4   8       12
             10 -3                          10 -3                          10 -3                        10 -4
       3                            1.5                            1.5                            6

       2                              1                              1                            4

       1                            0.5                            0.5                            2

       0                              0                              0                            0

      -1                            -0.5                           -0.5                           -2

      -2                             -1                             -1                            -4

      -3                            -1.5                           -1.5                           -6
        0              4   8   12       0             4   8   12       0             4   8   12     0             4   8       12
                  -3                             -3                             -3                           -4
             10                             10                             10                           10
       3                              3                            1.5                            9

       2                              2                              1                            6

       1                              1                            0.5                            3

       0                              0                              0                            0

      -1                             -1                            -0.5                           -3

      -2                             -2                             -1                            -6

      -3                             -3                            -1.5                           -9
        0              4   8   12      0              4   8   12       0             4   8   12     0             4   8       12
             10 -4                          10 -3                          10 -4                        10 -3
       9                              3                              9                            3

       6                              2                              6                            2

       3                              1                              3                            1

       0                              0                              0                            0

      -3                             -1                             -3                            -1

      -6                             -2                             -6                            -2

      -9                             -3                             -9                            -3
        0              4   8   12      0              4   8   12      0              4   8   12     0             4   8       12
             10 -4                          10 -5                          10 -4                        10 -4
     1.5                              9                            1.5                            9

       1                              6                              1                            6

     0.5                              3                            0.5                            3

       0                              0                              0                            0

     -0.5                            -3                            -0.5                           -3

      -1                             -6                             -1                            -6

     -1.5                            -9                          -1.5                             -9
         0             4   8   12      0              4   8   12     0               4   8   12     0             4   8       12




                                                                                                                          Y
Note: This figure shows impulse responses to a 2% expansionary external demand shock (i.e., t F = 0.02),
under different exchange-rate regimes. Flexible exchange rate, represented by the solid black line,
corresponds to the baseline model (described in Section 2); Fixed exchange rate, represented by the dotted
blue line, corresponds to the equilibrium under which the monetary policy sets the nominal rate to target
 t = 1 in all periods.




                                                              39
Figure A.5: Aggregate Effects of Foreign Monetary Policy Shocks under Alternative
Exchange-rate Regimes
                  -3                             -3                             -3                             -2
             10                             10                             10                             10
       9                              9                            7.5                             1.5

       6                              6                              5                              1

       3                              3                            2.5                             0.5

       0                              0                              0                              0

      -3                             -3                            -2.5                           -0.5

      -6                             -6                             -5                              -1

      -9                             -9                            -7.5                           -1.5
        0              4   8   12      0              4   8   12       0             4   8   12       0             4   8   12
             10 -3                          10 -2                          10 -4                          10 -3
       9                            1.5                              9                              6

       6                              1                              6                              4

       3                            0.5                              3                              2

       0                              0                              0                              0

      -3                            -0.5                            -3                              -2

      -6                             -1                             -6                              -4

      -9                            -1.5                            -9                              -6
        0              4   8   12       0             4   8   12      0              4   8   12       0             4   8   12
                  -2                             -3                             -2                             -3
             10                             10                             10                             10
     1.5                              9                            1.5                             4.5

       1                              6                              1                              3

     0.5                              3                            0.5                             1.5

       0                              0                              0                              0

     -0.5                            -3                            -0.5                           -1.5

      -1                             -6                             -1                              -3

     -1.5                            -9                            -1.5                           -4.5
         0             4   8   12      0              4   8   12       0             4   8   12       0             4   8   12
             10 -3                          10 -16                         10 -3                          10 -4
       3                            1.5                              3                            10.5

       2                              1                              2                              7

       1                            0.5                              1                             3.5

       0                              0                              0                              0

      -1                            -0.5                            -1                            -3.5

      -2                             -1                             -2                              -7

      -3                            -1.5                            -3                         -10.5
        0              4   8   12       0             4   8   12      0              4   8   12     0               4   8   12
             10 -4                          10 -4                          10 -4                          10 -3
     7.5                              3                              9                             4.5

       5                              2                              6                              3

     2.5                              1                              3                             1.5

       0                              0                              0                              0

     -2.5                            -1                             -3                            -1.5

      -5                             -2                             -6                              -3

     -7.5                            -3                             -9                            -4.5
         0             4   8   12      0              4   8   12      0              4   8   12       0             4   8   12




Note: This figure shows impulse responses to a 25 bp expansionary foreign monetary policy shock (i.e., an
                                         
innovation to the foreign interest rate i
                                        t = -0.0025) under different exchange rate regimes. Flexible
exchange rate, represented by the solid black line, corresponds to the baseline model (described in Section
2); Fixed exchange rate, represented by the dotted blue line, corresponds to the equilibrium under which
the monetary policy sets the nominal rate to target t = 1 in all periods.




                                                              40
Figure A.6: Distributional Effects of Foreign Demand Shocks under Alternative Exchange
Rate Regimes

                   Flexible Exchange Rate Regime: Heterogeneous Consumption Response
          (a) Dispersion      (b) by Real Integration (c) by Fin. Integration (d) by Net Worth
   2.00                         0.30                          0.30                         0.30




                                0.20                          0.20                         0.20



   1.00                         0.10                          0.10                         0.10




                                0.00                          0.00                         0.00



   0.00                         -0.10                        -0.10                        -0.10
       0      4    8    12           0   4     8     12           0    4     8     12          0    4     8     12


                    Fixed Exchange Rate Regime: Heterogeneous Consumption Response
          (a) Dispersion     (b) by Real Integration (c) by Fin. Integration (d) by Net Worth
   0.90                         0.90                          0.90                         0.90




                                0.60                          0.60                         0.60
   0.60


                                0.30                          0.30                         0.30


   0.30
                                0.00                          0.00                         0.00



   0.00                         -0.30                        -0.30                        -0.30
       0      4    8    12           0   4     8     12           0    4     8     12          0    4     8     12


Notes : This figure shows the distributional effects of a 1 percent expansionary external demand shock
  Y
( t F = 0.01). The Panel (a) shows the standard deviation of consumption responses across households and
the difference between percentiles 75 and 25 and 90 and 10 of consumption responses, all scaled by the initial
response of aggregate consumption. The Panel (b) shows the consumption responses of households employed
in the home tradable sector (integrated ) and those employed in the nontradable sector (not integrated ).
Panel (c) shows the consumption responses of households that have access to international capital markets
(integrated ) and those that have access to domestically traded financial securities (not integrated ). The Panel
(d) shows consumption responses of households with high and low levels of assets, defined as those with assets
above and below the mean asset position in the economy. Flexible exchange rate regime corresponds to the
baseline model (described in Section 2); Fixed exchange rate regime corresponds to the equilibrium under
which the monetary policy sets the nominal rate to target t = 1 in all periods.




                                                       41
Figure A.7: Distributional Effects of Foreign Monetary Policy Shocks under Alternative
Exchange Rate Regimes

               Flexible Exchange Rate Regime: Heterogeneous Consumption Response
      (A) Dispersion      (B) by Real Integration (C) by Fin. Integration (D) by Net Worth
   6.00                         0.45                          0.45                          0.45




                                0.30                          0.30                          0.30
   4.00


                                0.15                          0.15                          0.15


   2.00
                                0.00                          0.00                          0.00



   0.00                         -0.15                         -0.15                        -0.15
       0    4     8     12           0   4      8     12           0   4      8     12          0    4     8        12


                Fixed Exchange Rate Regime: Heterogeneous Consumption Response
      (A) Dispersion     (B) by Real Integration (C) by Fin. Integration (D) by Net Worth
   2.00                         0.60                          0.60                          0.60




                                0.40                          0.40                          0.40



   1.00                         0.20                          0.20                          0.20




                                0.00                          0.00                          0.00



   0.00                         -0.20                         -0.20                        -0.20
       0    4     8     12           0   4      8     12           0   4      8     12          0    4     8        12


Notes : This figure shows the distributional effects of a 25bp expansionary foreign monetary policy shock
    
( i
  t = -0.0025). The Panel (a) shows the standard deviation of consumption responses across households and
the difference between percentiles 75 and 25 and 90 and 10 of consumption responses, all scaled by the initial
response of aggregate consumption. The Panel (b) shows the consumption responses of households employed
in the home tradable sector (integrated ) and those employed in the nontradable sector (not integrated ).
Panel (c) shows the consumption responses of households that have access to international capital markets
(integrated ) and those that have access to domestically traded financial securities (not integrated ). The Panel
(d) shows consumption responses of households with high and low levels of assets, defined as those with assets
above and below the mean asset position in the economy. Flexible exchange rate regime corresponds to the
baseline model (described in Section 2); Fixed exchange rate regime corresponds to the equilibrium under
which the monetary policy sets the nominal rate to target t = 1 in all periods.




                                                       42
A.3. Aggregate and Distributional Responses to Monetary Policy Shocks under
     Alternative Price Settings


Figure A.8: Aggregate Effects of Monetary Policy Shocks under Alternative Price Settings

             10-3                        10-3                         10-3                        10-3
       6                         7.5                          7.5                           3

       4                           5                            5                           2

       2                         2.5                          2.5                           1

       0                           0                            0                           0

      -2                         -2.5                         -2.5                         -1

      -4                          -5                           -5                          -2

      -6                       -7.5                         -7.5                           -3
        0           4   8   12     0             4   8   12     0            4   8   12      0           4   8   12

             10-3                        10-3                         10-3                        10-3
     7.5                         7.5                          4.5                         7.5

       5                           5                            3                           5

     2.5                         2.5                          1.5                         2.5

       0                           0                            0                           0

     -2.5                        -2.5                         -1.5                        -2.5

      -5                          -5                           -3                          -5

     -7.5                        -7.5                         -4.5                        -7.5
         0          4   8   12       0           4   8   12       0          4   8   12       0          4   8   12

             10-3                        10-3                         10-3                        10-3
     7.5                         7.5                          7.5                         4.5

       5                           5                            5                           3

     2.5                         2.5                          2.5                         1.5

       0                           0                            0                           0

     -2.5                        -2.5                         -2.5                        -1.5

      -5                          -5                           -5                          -3

     -7.5                        -7.5                         -7.5                        -4.5
         0          4   8   12       0           4   8   12       0          4   8   12       0          4   8   12

             10-3                        10-17                        10-3                        10-4
     1.5                         1.5                          1.5                         7.5

       1                           1                            1                           5

     0.5                         0.5                          0.5                         2.5

       0                           0                            0                           0

     -0.5                        -0.5                         -0.5                        -2.5

      -1                          -1                           -1                          -5

     -1.5                      -1.5                         -1.5                        -7.5
         0          4   8   12     0             4   8   12     0            4   8   12     0            4   8   12

             10-3                        10-3                         10-3                        10-3
       3                         1.5                          4.5                         4.5

       2                           1                            3                           3

       1                         0.5                          1.5                         1.5

       0                           0                            0                           0

      -1                         -0.5                         -1.5                        -1.5

      -2                          -1                           -3                          -3

      -3                         -1.5                         -4.5                        -4.5
        0           4   8   12       0           4   8   12       0          4   8   12       0          4   8   12




Note: This figure shows impulse responses to a 25 bp expansionary monetary policy shock (i.e., an
innovation to the Taylor rule m t = -0.0025) under alternative price settings. Producer currency pricing,
represented by the solid black line, corresponds to the baseline model (described in Section 2), in which
firms face a cost of adjusting their price in local currency; Dollar currency pricing, represented by the
dotted blue line, corresponds to a variant of the model in which firms face a cost of adjusting their price in
foreign currency (described in Section 4.3).




                                                         43
Figure A.9: Distributional Effects of Domestic Monetary Policy Shocks under Alternative
Price Systems

                      Producer Currency Pricing: Heterogeneous Consumption Response
          (a) Dispersion      (b) by Real Integration (c) by Fin. Integration  (d) by Net Worth
   0.75                        0.75                         0.75                        0.75




                               0.50                         0.50                        0.50
   0.50


                               0.25                         0.25                        0.25


   0.25
                               0.00                         0.00                        0.00



   0.00                        -0.25                        -0.25                       -0.25
       0      4     8   12          0   4     8     12           0   4     8     12          0   4     8     12


                       Dollar Currency Pricing: Heterogeneous Consumption Response
          (a) Dispersion       (b) by Real Integration (c) by Fin. Integration (d) by Net Worth
   0.90                        0.45                         0.45                        0.45




                               0.30                         0.30                        0.30
   0.60


                               0.15                         0.15                        0.15


   0.30
                               0.00                         0.00                        0.00



   0.00                        -0.15                        -0.15                       -0.15
       0      4     8   12          0   4     8     12           0   4     8     12          0   4     8     12


Notes : This figure shows the distributional effects of a 25 bp expansionary monetary policy shock (i.e., an
innovation to the Taylor rule m   t = -0.0025). The Panel (a) shows the standard deviation of consumption
responses across households and the difference between percentiles 75 and 25 and 90 and 10 of consumption
responses, all scaled by the initial response of aggregate consumption. The Panel (b) shows the consump-
tion responses of households employed in the home tradable sector (integrated ) and those employed in the
nontradable sector (not integrated ). Panel (c) shows the consumption responses of households that have
access to international capital markets (integrated ) and those that have access to domestically traded finan-
cial securities (not integrated ). The Panel (d) shows consumption responses of households with high and
low levels of assets, defined as those with assets above and below the mean asset position in the economy.
Producer currency pricing corresponds to the baseline model (described in Section 2), in which firms face a
cost of adjusting their price in local currency; Dollar currency pricing corresponds to a variant of the model
in which firms face a cost of adjusting their price in foreign currency (described in Section 4.3).




                                                     44
A.4. Aggregate Responses under Alternative Degrees of Real Integration


Figure A.10: Aggregate Effects of Monetary Policy Shocks with Different Degrees of Real
Integration
             -3                             -3                             -2                             -3
        10                             10                             10                             10
  9                              9                            1.5                              3

  6                              6                              1                              2

  3                              3                            0.5                              1

  0                              0                              0                              0

 -3                             -3                            -0.5                            -1

 -6                             -6                             -1                             -2

 -9                             -9                            -1.5                            -3
   0              4   8   12      0              4   8   12       0             4   8   12      0              4   8   12
             -3                             -2                             -3                             -3
        10                             10                             10                             10
  9                            1.5                              3                              9

  6                              1                              2                              6

  3                            0.5                              1                              3

  0                              0                              0                              0

 -3                            -0.5                            -1                             -3

 -6                             -1                             -2                             -6

 -9                            -1.5                            -3                             -9
   0              4   8   12       0             4   8   12      0              4   8   12      0              4   8   12
        10 -3                          10 -3                          10 -2                          10 -3
  9                              9                            1.5                            7.5

  6                              6                              1                              5

  3                              3                            0.5                            2.5

  0                              0                              0                              0

 -3                             -3                            -0.5                           -2.5

 -6                             -6                             -1                             -5

 -9                             -9                            -1.5                           -7.5
   0              4   8   12      0              4   8   12       0             4   8   12       0             4   8   12
        10 -3                          10 -2                          10 -3                          10 -3
1.5                            1.5                              3                            1.5

  1                              1                              2                              1

0.5                            0.5                              1                            0.5

  0                              0                              0                              0

-0.5                           -0.5                            -1                            -0.5

 -1                             -1                             -2                             -1

-1.5                           -1.5                            -3                            -1.5
    0             4   8   12       0             4   8   12      0              4   8   12       0             4   8   12
        10 -3                          10 -4                          10 -3                          10 -3
  3                              9                            1.5                            7.5

  2                              6                              1                              5

  1                              3                            0.5                            2.5

  0                              0                              0                              0

 -1                             -3                            -0.5                           -2.5

 -2                             -6                             -1                             -5

 -3                             -9                          -1.5                           -7.5
   0              4   8   12      0              4   8   12     0               4   8   12     0               4   8   12




Notes: This figure shows impulse responses to a 25 bp expansionary monetary policy shock
( m
  t = -0.0025). Baseline, represented with the solid black line, corresponds to the calibrated economy
studied in Sections 3 and 4. High, represented with the dashed blue line, corresponds to responses in
economies calibrated with 95% of households working in home tradable goods sector and 95% of
households' consumption basket is made up of home tradable goods. Low, represented with the dotted red
line, corresponds to responses in economies calibrated with 5% of households working in home tradable
goods sector and 5% of households' consumption basket is made up of home tradable goods.




                                                         45
Figure A.11: Aggregate Effects of Foreign Demand Shock with Different Degrees of Real
Integration
             -3                             -3                            -3                             -2
        10                             10                            10                             10
4.5                            4.5                              3                            1.5

  3                              3                              2                             1

1.5                            1.5                              1                            0.5

  0                              0                              0                             0

-1.5                           -1.5                            -1                           -0.5

 -3                             -3                             -2                             -1

-4.5                         -4.5                              -3                         -1.5
    0             4   8   12     0               4   8   12      0             4   8   12     0               4   8   12
        10 -3                          10 -3                         10 -3                          10 -3
4.5                            4.5                              6                            7.5

  3                              3                              4                             5

1.5                            1.5                              2                            2.5

  0                              0                              0                             0

-1.5                           -1.5                            -2                           -2.5

 -3                             -3                             -4                             -5

-4.5                         -4.5                              -6                         -7.5
    0             4   8   12     0               4   8   12      0             4   8   12     0               4   8   12
        10 -3                          10 -3                         10 -3                          10 -3
  6                            4.5                            4.5                            4.5

  4                              3                              3                             3

  2                            1.5                            1.5                            1.5

  0                              0                              0                             0

 -2                            -1.5                           -1.5                          -1.5

 -4                             -3                             -3                             -3

 -6                          -4.5                           -4.5                          -4.5
   0              4   8   12     0               4   8   12     0              4   8   12     0               4   8   12
        10 -3                          10 -2                         10 -3                          10 -4
1.5                            1.5                              3                           10.5

  1                              1                              2                             7

0.5                            0.5                              1                            3.5

  0                              0                              0                             0

-0.5                           -0.5                            -1                           -3.5

 -1                             -1                             -2                             -7

-1.5                           -1.5                            -3                        -10.5
    0             4   8   12       0             4   8   12      0             4   8   12     0               4   8   12
        10 -3                          10 -4                         10 -4                          10 -3
1.5                              3                              6                            4.5

  1                              2                              4                             3

0.5                              1                              2                            1.5

  0                              0                              0                             0

-0.5                            -1                             -2                           -1.5

 -1                             -2                             -4                             -3

-1.5                            -3                             -6                           -4.5
    0             4   8   12      0              4   8   12      0             4   8   12       0             4   8   12




Notes: This figure shows impulse responses to a 1 percent expansionary external demand shock
  Y
( t F = 0.01). Baseline, represented with the solid black line, corresponds to the calibrated economy
studied in Sections 3 and 4. High, represented with the dashed blue line, corresponds to responses in
economies calibrated with 95% of households working in home tradable goods sector and 95% of
households' consumption basket is made up of home tradable goods. Low, represented with the dotted red
line, corresponds to responses in economies calibrated with 5% of households working in home tradable
goods sector and 5% of households' consumption basket is made up of home tradable goods.




                                                         46
Figure A.12: Aggregate Effects of Foreign Monetary Policy Shocks with Different Degrees
of Real Integration
             -4                            -4                             -3                            -3
        10                            10                             10                            10
  9                            7.5                           1.5                            4.5

  6                              5                             1                              3

  3                            2.5                           0.5                            1.5

  0                              0                             0                              0

 -3                            -2.5                          -0.5                           -1.5

 -6                             -5                            -1                             -3

 -9                          -7.5                          -1.5                           -4.5
   0              4   8   12     0              4   8   12     0               4   8   12     0              4   8   12
        10 -4                         10 -3                          10 -3                         10 -3
7.5                            4.5                             3                            4.5

  5                              3                             2                              3

2.5                            1.5                             1                            1.5

  0                              0                             0                              0

-2.5                           -1.5                           -1                            -1.5

 -5                             -3                            -2                             -3

-7.5                         -4.5                             -3                          -4.5
    0             4   8   12     0              4   8   12      0              4   8   12     0              4   8   12
        10 -4                         10 -4                          10 -3                         10 -3
  3                            7.5                           4.5                              3

  2                              5                             3                              2

  1                            2.5                           1.5                              1

  0                              0                             0                              0

 -1                            -2.5                          -1.5                            -1

 -2                             -5                            -3                             -2

 -3                          -7.5                          -4.5                              -3
   0              4   8   12     0              4   8   12     0               4   8   12      0             4   8   12
        10 -4                         10 -3                          10 -4                         10 -3
  3                              3                             3                              3

  2                              2                             2                              2

  1                              1                             1                              1

  0                              0                             0                              0

 -1                             -1                            -1                             -1

 -2                             -2                            -2                             -2

 -3                             -3                            -3                             -3
   0              4   8   12      0             4   8   12      0              4   8   12      0             4   8   12
        10 -4                         10 -5                          10 -4                         10 -3
  3                              9                           4.5                              3

  2                              6                             3                              2

  1                              3                           1.5                              1

  0                              0                             0                              0

 -1                             -3                           -1.5                            -1

 -2                             -6                            -3                             -2

 -3                             -9                           -4.5                            -3
   0              4   8   12      0             4   8   12       0             4   8   12      0             4   8   12




Notes: This figure shows impulse responses to a 25bp expansionary foreign monetary policy shock
    
( i
  t = -0.0025). Baseline, represented with the solid black line, corresponds to the calibrated economy
studied in Sections 3 and 4. High, represented with the dashed blue line, corresponds to responses in
economies calibrated with 95% of households working in home tradable goods sector and 95% of
households' consumption basket is made up of home tradable goods. Low, represented with the dotted red
line, corresponds to responses in economies calibrated with 5% of households working in home tradable
goods sector and 5% of households' consumption basket is made up of home tradable goods.




                                                        47
A.5. Aggregate Responses under Alternative Degrees of Financial Integration


Figure A.13: Aggregate Effects of Monetary Policy Shocks with Different Degrees of Fi-
nancial Integration
             -3                             -3                             -3                             -3
        10                             10                             10                             10
7.5                              9                              9                              3

  5                              6                              6                              2

2.5                              3                              3                              1

  0                              0                              0                              0

-2.5                            -3                             -3                             -1

 -5                             -6                             -6                             -2

-7.5                            -9                             -9                             -3
    0             4   8   12      0              4   8   12      0              4   8   12      0              4   8   12
             -3                             -3                             -3                             -3
        10                             10                             10                             10
  9                            7.5                              3                              3

  6                              5                              2                              2

  3                            2.5                              1                              1

  0                              0                              0                              0

 -3                            -2.5                            -1                             -1

 -6                             -5                             -2                             -2

 -9                            -7.5                            -3                             -3
   0              4   8   12       0             4   8   12      0              4   8   12      0              4   8   12
        10 -3                          10 -3                          10 -3                          10 -3
7.5                              9                            7.5                            4.5

  5                              6                              5                              3

2.5                              3                            2.5                            1.5

  0                              0                              0                              0

-2.5                            -3                            -2.5                           -1.5

 -5                             -6                             -5                             -3

-7.5                            -9                            -7.5                           -4.5
    0             4   8   12      0              4   8   12       0             4   8   12       0             4   8   12
        10 -3                          10 -2                          10 -3                          10 -4
  3                            1.5                              3                            7.5

  2                              1                              2                              5

  1                            0.5                              1                            2.5

  0                              0                              0                              0

 -1                            -0.5                            -1                            -2.5

 -2                             -1                             -2                             -5

 -3                            -1.5                            -3                            -7.5
   0              4   8   12       0             4   8   12      0              4   8   12       0             4   8   12
        10 -3                          10 -4                          10 -4                          10 -3
1.5                              9                              9                            4.5

  1                              6                              6                              3

0.5                              3                              3                            1.5

  0                              0                              0                              0

-0.5                            -3                             -3                            -1.5

 -1                             -6                             -6                             -3

-1.5                            -9                             -9                          -4.5
    0             4   8   12      0              4   8   12      0              4   8   12     0               4   8   12




Notes: This figure shows impulse responses to a 25 bp expansionary monetary policy shock
( m
  t = -0.0025). Baseline, represented with the solid black line, corresponds to the calibrated economy
studied in Sections 3 and 4. High, represented with the dashed blue line, corresponds to responses in
economies calibrated with 95% of households with access to international financial markets. Low,
represented with the dotted red line, corresponds to responses in economies calibrated with with 5% of
households with access to international financial markets.




                                                         48
Figure A.14: Aggregate Effects of Foreign Demand Shock with Different Degrees of Fi-
nancial Integration
             -3                             -3                             -3                             -2
        10                             10                             10                             10
  3                            1.5                              3                            1.5

  2                              1                              2                              1

  1                            0.5                              1                            0.5

  0                              0                              0                              0

 -1                            -0.5                            -1                            -0.5

 -2                             -1                             -2                             -1

 -3                          -1.5                              -3                          -1.5
   0              4   8   12     0               4   8   12      0              4   8   12     0               4   8   12
        10 -3                          10 -3                          10 -3                          10 -3
1.5                              9                              3                            7.5

  1                              6                              2                              5

0.5                              3                              1                            2.5

  0                              0                              0                              0

-0.5                            -3                             -1                            -2.5

 -1                             -6                             -2                             -5

-1.5                            -9                             -3                          -7.5
    0             4   8   12      0              4   8   12      0              4   8   12     0               4   8   12
        10 -3                          10 -3                          10 -3                          10 -3
  6                            1.5                              9                            4.5

  4                              1                              6                              3

  2                            0.5                              3                            1.5

  0                              0                              0                              0

 -2                            -0.5                            -3                            -1.5

 -4                             -1                             -6                             -3

 -6                            -1.5                            -9                            -4.5
   0              4   8   12       0             4   8   12      0              4   8   12       0             4   8   12
        10 -3                          10 -2                          10 -3                          10 -3
  3                            1.5                            1.5                            1.5

  2                              1                              1                              1

  1                            0.5                            0.5                            0.5

  0                              0                              0                              0

 -1                            -0.5                           -0.5                           -0.5

 -2                             -1                             -1                             -1

 -3                            -1.5                           -1.5                           -1.5
   0              4   8   12       0             4   8   12       0             4   8   12       0             4   8   12
        10 -4                          10 -4                          10 -4                          10 -3
7.5                            4.5                              6                            4.5

  5                              3                              4                              3

2.5                            1.5                              2                            1.5

  0                              0                              0                              0

-2.5                           -1.5                            -2                            -1.5

 -5                             -3                             -4                             -3

-7.5                           -4.5                            -6                            -4.5
    0             4   8   12       0             4   8   12      0              4   8   12       0             4   8   12




Notes: This figure shows impulse responses to a 1 percent expansionary external demand shock
  Y
( t F = 0.01). Baseline, represented with the solid black line, corresponds to the calibrated economy
studied in Sections 3 and 4. High, represented with the dashed blue line, corresponds to responses in
economies calibrated with 95% of households with access to international financial markets. Low,
represented with the dotted red line, corresponds to responses in economies calibrated with with 5% of
households with access to international financial markets.




                                                         49
Figure A.15: Aggregate Effects of Foreign Monetary Policy Shocks with Different Degrees
of Financial Integration
             -3                             -3                             -3                             -3
        10                             10                             10                             10
  3                            1.5                              3                            7.5

  2                              1                              2                              5

  1                            0.5                              1                            2.5

  0                              0                              0                              0

 -1                            -0.5                            -1                            -2.5

 -2                             -1                             -2                             -5

 -3                          -1.5                              -3                          -7.5
   0              4   8   12     0               4   8   12      0              4   8   12     0               4   8   12
        10 -3                          10 -3                          10 -3                          10 -3
1.5                              3                              3                              3

  1                              2                              2                              2

0.5                              1                              1                              1

  0                              0                              0                              0

-0.5                            -1                             -1                             -1

 -1                             -2                             -2                             -2

-1.5                            -3                             -3                             -3
    0             4   8   12      0              4   8   12      0              4   8   12      0              4   8   12
        10 -3                          10 -3                          10 -3                          10 -3
1.5                            1.5                              3                            4.5

  1                              1                              2                              3

0.5                            0.5                              1                            1.5

  0                              0                              0                              0

-0.5                           -0.5                            -1                            -1.5

 -1                             -1                             -2                             -3

-1.5                           -1.5                            -3                            -4.5
    0             4   8   12       0             4   8   12      0              4   8   12       0             4   8   12
        10 -3                          10 -3                          10 -3                          10 -3
  6                              3                              6                              3

  4                              2                              4                              2

  2                              1                              2                              1

  0                              0                              0                              0

 -2                             -1                             -2                             -1

 -4                             -2                             -4                             -2

 -6                             -3                             -6                             -3
   0              4   8   12      0              4   8   12      0              4   8   12      0              4   8   12
        10 -3                          10 -3                          10 -3                          10 -3
  3                              3                            1.5                            4.5

  2                              2                              1                              3

  1                              1                            0.5                            1.5

  0                              0                              0                              0

 -1                             -1                            -0.5                           -1.5

 -2                             -2                             -1                             -3

 -3                             -3                            -1.5                           -4.5
   0              4   8   12      0              4   8   12       0             4   8   12       0             4   8   12




Notes: This figure shows impulse responses to a 25bp expansionary foreign monetary policy shock
    
( i
  t = -0.0025). Baseline, represented with the solid black line, corresponds to the calibrated economy
studied in Sections 3 and 4. High, represented with the dashed blue line, corresponds to responses in
economies calibrated with 95% of households with access to international financial markets. Low,
represented with the dotted red line, corresponds to responses in economies calibrated with with 5% of
households with access to international financial markets.




                                                         50
