                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        WHO VALUES FUTURE ENERGY SAVINGS?
                         EVIDENCE FROM AMERICAN DRIVERS

                                          Arik Levinson
                                           Lutz Sager

                                       Working Paper 28219
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28219


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020




The authors thank Georgetown University's McCourt School of Public Policy Massive Data
Institute and the Georgetown Environmental Initiative for research funds, Sally Atwater, Spencer
Banzhaf, Antonio Bento, Mary Ann Bronson, Meghan Busse, Raphael Calel, Ken Gillingham,
and Shaun McRae for constructive suggestions, and Kevin Ankney and Juan Margitic for
research assistance. Sager gratefully acknowledges financial support by the Grantham Foundation
for the Protection of the Environment and the UK's Economic and Social Research Council. We
are especially grateful to Ben Leard and Joshua Linn at Resources for the Future, for sharing with
us calculations based on the MaritzCX data. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w28219.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Arik Levinson and Lutz Sager. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Who Values Future Energy Savings? Evidence from American Drivers
Arik Levinson and Lutz Sager
NBER Working Paper No. 28219
December 2020
JEL No. Q48,Q58,R48

                                          ABSTRACT

Regulators attest that tightened energy efficiency standards save consumers money. Efficient
light bulbs, appliances, and vehicles cost more upfront but reduce energy expenses by more than
enough to compensate. We use survey data on American cars and their drivers to examine
whether individual drivers have indeed underinvested in fuel economy, given the gas prices they
face and the miles they drive. We find that may be true, but only on average. Some drivers could
likely have saved money by spending more upfront for efficient cars. But many others could have
saved money purchasing less expensive, less fuel-efficient cars. In fact we find little correlation
between individual drivers' annual fuel expenditures and their fuel economy choices: a driver's
income, sex, age, and education are far more closely associated with their vehicle's fuel
economy. We can rule out several explanations for the disconnect. Rich car purchasers do not
seem to consider fuel expenses any more than poorer ones, undermining arguments that
borrowing constraints prevent low-income consumers from investing in fuel efficiency. And the
disconnect between fuel expenses and vehicle choice holds whether we examine anticipated or
realized mileage, ruling out mistaken expectations about future driving as an explanation.


Arik Levinson
Department of Economics ICC 571
Georgetown University
3700 O St., NW
Washington, DC 20057
and NBER
Arik.Levinson@georgetown.edu

Lutz Sager
Georgetown University
37th & O St NW
Old North 408
Washington, DC 20057
lutz.sager@georgetown.edu
       Who Values Future Energy Savings? Evidence from American Drivers


       US regulators attest that energy efficiency standards--for light bulbs, appliances,
buildings, and vehicles--save consumers money. The products themselves cost more to
manufacture and purchase but quickly pay for themselves in energy savings. In the case
of vehicles, the Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards for cars sold in
2012 through 2016 were expected to raise the average cost of a new car by $950 but
promised to save drivers enough gasoline to pay for that incremental cost in just the first
three years of driving.1 The CAFE standards for 2017 through 2025 were expected to add
another $1,800 to the cost of a new car but save more than $5,000 in gasoline costs over
its useful life.2 And the March 2020 relaxation of those same standards is now projected
to reduce vehicle costs by $800 but add $900 to $1,200 in lifetime gas costs.3 Across
administrations, US regulators have projected that even if external costs from pollution,
congestion, and accidents are ignored, stricter fuel economy standards pay for
themselves.
       For that story to be true--obliging manufacturers to increase the fuel-efficiency of
their products benefits their consumers--there must be some type of market failure. If
efficient appliances or cars would save their owners money, buyers should be willing to
pay more for them than their incremental manufacturing costs. Manufacturers in turn
should be glad to produce and sell them at a profit. No regulation would be necessary.
The fact that regulations are needed for manufacturers to sell products that buyers should
prefer suggests that these markets for energy-using durables do not work efficiently.
       Proffered explanations for that market failure include consumers' borrowing
constraints, information asymmetries, and behavioral factors such as inattention, present



1
  In 2007 dollars. US EPA, "EPA and NTSA Finalize Historic National Program to
Reduce Greenhouse Gases and Improve Fuel Economy for Cars and Trucks," EPA-420-
F-10-014, April 2010. Link here.
2
  In 2007 dollars. US EPA, "EPA and NHTSA Set Standards to Reduce Greenhouse
Gases and Improve Fuel Economy for Model Years 2017-2025 Cars and Light Trucks,"
EPA-420-F-12-051, August 2012. Link here.
3
  In 2018 dollars. US EPA "Final Regulatory Impact Analysis: The Safer Affordable
Fuel-Efficient (SAFE) Vehicles Rule", March 2020. Link here.
bias, and mistaken estimation of future energy expenditures.4 All of these share a
common empirical implication. Consumers would be better off paying higher upfront
purchase prices in exchange for lower annual energy expenses. And evidence for those
lost opportunities for savings should be apparent in data.
       In what follows we look for evidence for those lost opportunities in data
describing individual American drivers, their demographic characteristics, the cars they
own, and how many miles they drive those cars. We use the US National Household
Travel Survey (NHTS) to study drivers' actual mileage, effectively asking whether
drivers' car choices turn out to have been mistakes, given how much they later use those
cars. In follow-up comparisons, we examine used-car prices, effectively asking whether
drivers would be better off exchanging their current cars for vehicles that are more (or
less) efficient, and we examine time-of-purchase survey data to ask whether car buyers'
fuel economy choices make sense, given the distances those buyers expect to be driving.
In each case, we find nearly as many drivers who could have saved money by purchasing
less expensive, less fuel-efficient vehicles as those who could be saving money in more
expensive, more efficient ones. Drivers' characteristics such as income, sex, age, and
education are far more closely associated with their vehicles' fuel economy than their
fuel expenses.
       Here's an example, a particular respondent to the 2017 NHTS. Albert (our
pseudonym) was in his 40s, lived in the Southeast, and had annual household income
between $35,000 and $50,000. He had a new(ish) gasoline-powered Toyota Camry,
which he drove nearly 30,000 miles a year. If Albert had purchased a hybrid gas-electric
version of the same Toyota Camry, he would have saved more than $650 per year on gas.
       Did Albert make a mistake? Perhaps. The hybrid cost about $3,800 more than the
least expensive gas-powered Camry, so he would have recouped the extra expenditure in
a bit less than six years. That's longer than the three-year payback promised by the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the National Highway Traffic Safety




4
  See, for example, Allcott (2011), Allcott and Knittel (2018), Allcott and Wozny (2014),
Ankney (2020), Busse et al. (2013), Leard et al. (2017), Sallee (2014), Sallee et al.
(2016), and Gillingham et al. (2019).
                                             2
Administration (NHTSA), but still respectable. Albert's failure to buy the hybrid might
be just the type of mistake EPA and NHTSA used to justify the CAFE regulations.
       Other car buyers appear to have made the opposite choice, by buying efficient
cars when the energy savings don't compensate for the extra upfront costs. Betty (another
pseudonym) drives the hybrid version of Albert's Toyota Camry. In 2017 she was in her
70s, lived in the West, and had household income between $25,000 and $35,000. She
only drove 4,500 miles a year. Had she been driving the standard Camry, those miles
would have cost her $120 more per year. At that rate it will take her more than 30 years
to recover the extra $3,800 cost of her hybrid. Buying the hybrid could be seen as a
mistake, at least from her own, self-interested, purely financial perspective.
       Of course, these two car owners might have good reasons, unrelated to fuel
expenditures, for preferring the gas or hybrid versions of their cars. Some drivers might
be concerned about local pollution or climate change, or might want to display that
concern to neighbors. Other drivers might like the quiet of the electric engine, or worry
that it poses a danger to pedestrians or bicyclists. Or their commute distances or gas
prices might have changed since they purchased their cars, and thus their vehicle
decisions were financially optimal at the time of purchase but not with hindsight. These
decisions are mistakes only in a personal, purely financial, ex post sense.
       Those other external, nonfinancial, ex ante considerations are also omitted from
the analyses used to justify the US fuel efficiency standards. By noting that the typical
driver could save money by purchasing a more expensive but more fuel-efficient car,
those regulatory analyses find that, from the perspective of private fuel expenses alone,
American car buyers choose insufficiently efficient vehicles. If that's true, in the data we
should expect to see more Alberts who could benefit from more fuel efficiency than
Bettys who could have saved money by purchasing less fuel efficiency.
       In the 2009 and 2017 rounds of the NHTS, there are 24,362 drivers of vehicles
available in either a gas or hybrid version.5 For each driver, we can calculate the annual
fuel cost difference between the two alternative versions of the car:



5
 This total is limited to those NHTS observations with complete data on household
demographics.
                                             3
                                                        1 1 
                          Annual fuel cost difference     mi  pg ,                              (1)
                                                         n e 
where  n is the fuel economy in miles per gallon (mpg) of the less efficient (gas) car,  e is

the mpg for the more efficient (hybrid) car, mi is miles driven per year, and pg is the price

of gasoline. Equation (1) differs for every driver depending on miles driven (mi), gas
prices paid (pg), and the difference between the gas and hybrid fuel economies for the
particular car (). For drivers of hybrid cars, (1) represents their annual savings, relative
to driving the same number of miles in the gas version. For drivers of gas cars, (1)
represents unrealized annual savings from not driving a hybrid.
       Figure 1 plots two distributions of the annual fuel cost differences in (1). The
outlined, unshaded bars plot the distribution for drivers of the 22,025 gas vehicles. Cases
farther to the right in that distribution are more likely to represent (personal, purely
financial, ex post) mistakes. They are gas car owners who miss out on the large annual
savings of driving the hybrid version of their cars. The shaded bars plot the distribution of
(1) for drivers of the 2,337 hybrids. Cars farther to the left are more likely to represent
mistakes. Those drivers own hybrids but save little, either because they do not drive
much or their gas prices are low. Accordingly, we should expect to see the shaded
histogram (hybrids) to the right of the outlined histogram (gas powered), and that is
exactly what Figure 1 shows.
       Two points need to be made here. First, the shift of the hybrid distribution to the
right of the gas-powered distribution could represent decisions by car purchasers based
on their pre-purchase expected driving. People expecting to drive more miles could
purchase the hybrids, although we show later, using different data collected at the time
vehicles are purchased, that this does not seem to be the case. Alternatively, the shift in
Figure 1 could represent post-purchase reactions by drivers to the relative differences in
driving costs. If we randomly assigned cars to drivers, the recipients of hybrids would
find driving less expensive and might drive more, realizing more savings.6 In other


6
 If drivers choose cars based on other attributes, such as trunk space or perceived
environmental awareness, and those are uncorrelated with demand for travel, then the car
choice is equivalent to random assignment and the hybrid drivers will find driving less
expensive, drive more, and realize more savings.
                                               4
words, drivers facing higher costs could choose to buy hybrids, or hybrid owners could
respond to the lower cost by driving more miles. Either way, hybrid owners will exhibit
greater annual savings in Figure 1.
       The post-purchase reaction to the different price of driving represents the
"rebound" effect (Gillingham et al. 2016). Purchasers of efficient cars drive them more,
making their investment in the efficiency appear smarter. Purchasers of less efficient cars
drive them less, making them seem smart not to have invested in the costlier efficient
version. Any analysis we do comparing drivers' actual annual costs with costs that would
be incurred driving the same distance in an alternative car will produce an underestimate
of mistakes. Drivers' post-purchase driving behavior will rationalize their vehicle
choices.
       The second point involves the complex set of assumptions necessary to figure out
which drivers could be saving money in a different vehicle. To know whether an efficient
hybrid car is worth the upfront investment, we need to compare the annual fuel savings in
equation (1) with the annualized difference in the fixed costs of the two cars. That, in
turn, depends on three things: (i) the difference in sales prices, net of any rebates or
subsidies for buying an efficient car, (ii) the discount rate used to annualize the price
difference, and (iii) the depreciation rate of the extra expenditure on the fuel efficient
version.
       Because that calculation is so complex and requires so many assumptions, we
take a simple and intuitive approach. Whatever the values of those three variables, for
each pair of car models there is some level of annual cost differences that would justify
the investment in fuel economy. Think of it as a vertical line drawn in Figure 1. Any
driver to the right of that line in a standard gas car has underinvested in fuel efficiency.
Any driver to the left in a hybrid car has overinvested. We pick a value for that line for
each car model, test the sensitivity of our findings to that value, and examine the
demographics of drivers on either side.
       To frame that empirical approach, we describe the intuition in a simple theoretical
model in which cars differ only in their price and fuel economy. The model incorporates
the trade-off between upfront efficiency costs and future gas savings. And the model
helps us to develop two straightforward empirical tests of car buyer mistakes. Both tests


                                              5
are designed to overcome the chief obstacle to assessing drivers' car choices: cars differ
along many dimensions that are correlated with price and fuel efficiency, so any
empirical test needs to control for car characteristics missing from the theoretical model.
Our two empirical tests represent alternative approaches to that.
       The first test controls for car characteristics correlated with price and fuel
economy by examining only those car models, depicted in Figure 1, that can be
purchased in either a gas or a hybrid version. We assume those pairs differ only in their
fuel economy, as in the theory model, and we compare the fraction of drivers in the gas
versions who would have been better off paying more for the hybrids with the fraction
owning hybrids who could have saved money by purchasing the gas versions.
       That gas-hybrid comparison depends on the strong assumption that the alternative
versions do not differ in other respects, such as trunk space, acceleration, or maintenance
costs. Because we know that assumption to be false in some cases, our second empirical
approach uses all the cars in the 2009 and 2017 NHTS surveys and controls for other car
characteristics statistically, rather than by comparing cars in gas-hybrid pairs. We
estimate the average fuel economy premium--the incremental upfront cost of purchasing
a vehicle with one extra mpg of efficiency--controlling statistically for other observed
car characteristics correlated with efficiency and price. We then calculate each driver's
actual annual driving costs, given the gas prices they face and their annual mileage, and
what they would save annually in a slightly more fuel-efficient car with one extra mpg. If
those annual savings exceed the fuel economy premium (annuitized appropriately), the
driver would have been better off choosing a more efficient vehicle. If those savings are
less than the fuel economy premium, the driver would have been better off paying less up
front for a less efficient car. As with the gas-hybrid comparison, we calculate the
proportion of drivers making both types of personal, purely financial, ex post mistakes.
       Both empirical tests rely on assumptions. We assume we have controlled for other
car characteristics, either in our gas-hybrid comparison or statistically. We follow the
EPA and NHTSA regulatory analyses, which assume that cars last 14 years and discount
future fuel savings at 3 and 7 percent.7 In the main part of the analyses, when we examine


7
 For comparison, the real, inflation-adjusted, dealer-provided new-car loans studied by
Busse et al. (2013) range from -0.9 to 9.0 percent.
                                              6
actual, post-purchase fuel costs using the NHTS, we assume drivers paid the
manufacturer's suggested retail price (MSRP) when they purchased their vehicles,
adjusted for inflation. Later, we demonstrate the stability of our results when we consider
each driver's annual decision to keep or sell a car at concurrent used-car market prices or,
using a different survey, when we consider each car buyer's actual transaction cost at the
time of purchase and expected annual mileage.
       Our approach departs from existing work in important ways. We assess the actual,
driver-specific fuel savings by individual drivers. Until now, with few exceptions, the
evidence for whether drivers appropriately value future fuel savings has come from
expected savings of typical drivers. Some researchers using that strategy have found the
fuel economy premium to be less than the present discounted value of expected future
savings, suggesting that on average, car buyers make mistakes by purchasing
insufficiently fuel-efficient cars (Allcott and Wozny 2014; Gillingham et al. 2019;
Grigolon et al. 2018). Others find the premium approximately equal to the discounted
future savings, suggesting that on average, buyers are not mistakenly purchasing too little
or too much fuel efficiency (Busse et al. 2013; Sallee et al. 2016).
       Most prior analyses compare the fuel economy premium with the expected fuel
savings at the time of purchase. At best, those expectations are based on miles driven by
the average driver of a particular car model. As Bento et al. (2012) note, some individual
drivers put many more miles on their cars each year than the average, and others drive
less. The high-mileage drivers should be willing to pay more for fuel economy than low-
mileage drivers, and that heterogeneity will bias the results toward suggesting that
consumers undervalue future savings.
       One recent exception that does examine individual drivers' vehicle choices is
Banzhaf and Kasim (2019). They use the 2001 and 2009 versions of the NHTS to show
that when gas prices increase, high-mileage drivers are more likely to choose efficient
cars, and low-mileage drivers, less efficient cars. Like us, Banzhaf and Kasim also find a
large mismatch between driving distances and car efficiency. According to their rough
calculation, US gas consumption is 15 percent higher because of this mismatch. Without
accounting for upfront vehicle costs or car characteristics other than mpg, though, there's
no way to know whether that rematching would make individual drivers better off. We


                                             7
take an entirely different approach, explicitly modeling the trade-off between upfront
costs and fuel savings, controlling for a range of vehicle characteristics in addition to
mpg.
       Instead of comparing gas price elasticities by high- and low-mileage drivers, our
approach compares the premium paid for fuel-efficient cars with the actual realized fuel
savings of those cars' drivers, based on how far they drive each year and the gas prices
they pay. This allows us to contribute to the literature in several ways. We estimate the
fraction of drivers who underinvest and overinvest in fuel efficiency, retrospectively
based on actual miles driven and, later in the paper, prospectively based on drivers'
reported expected mileage at the time of purchase. We find lots of drivers who could
have saved money by purchasing fuel-efficient cars. Those drivers undervalued future
savings, as suggested by US regulators and by some of the previous work using average
mileage. But we also find nearly as many drivers who could have saved money by
purchasing less efficient cars, spending less to buy the cars but more each year to drive
them. Similar to Banzhaf and Kasim, we find that even if the right share of drivers owns
fuel-efficient cars, the wrong types of drivers own them. Of the people who have
relatively efficient cars, many drive relatively few annual miles; of those with inefficient
cars, many drive relatively more.
       Because we use household survey data, we know details about the demographics
of the drivers and can assess which particular groups are more likely to undervalue or
overvalue future savings: male or female, rich or poor, educated or less educated, old or
young. In general, we find that these demographic characteristics play a much larger role
in predicting car fuel economy than fuel costs. We find that women and younger drivers
are less likely to underinvest in fuel economy in general, but that men and older drivers
are more likely to overinvest in hybrid cars relative to equivalent gas vehicles. Other
groups that are less likely to underinvest are drivers living in urban rather than rural areas
and drivers with graduate degrees. After controlling for those demographic differences,
individual drivers' cost-saving potential has little influence on investments in fuel
economy.




                                              8
        Before describing those analyses in detail, we recount the evidence on these
issues so far, and then sketch a theory that frames our thinking as well as some
comparative statics that demonstrate normative implications derived from the analyses.


I.      Evidence to date comparing fuel economy premiums and expected annual
        savings

        Our paper is not the first--by a large margin--to model the trade-off between
upfront costs and future energy savings or to try to measure empirically consumers'
willingness to pay for future energy savings. Much of that research studies cars, in part
because good data are available and in part because vehicle fuel economy has been a
focus of regulatory attention. Allcott and Greenstone (2012) synthesize that research in a
model that frames the main issues. In their model, relabeled here for consistency with our
terminology, consumers choose among durable goods, such as cars, with different energy
intensities, labeled µ. Think of cars with two different mpg ratings, efficient µ and
inefficient µ , where µ > µ . Efficient cars cost more to purchase, all else being equal.
Label that incremental upfront capital cost pµ. Holding all other vehicle attributes
constant, a driver will be better off buying the efficient car if that incremental cost is less
than the discounted energy savings:

                                    p   pg m       
                                              1  1  F .                                           (2)
                                               n  e


In equation (2), p represents the price difference between the equivalent efficient and

inefficient cars, m is consumption of the energy service (miles driven),  is the price of
energy (gas), and future cost savings are collapsed into present values by factor F.8
        The ad hoc parameter  in equation (2) describes the weight consumers appear to
assign to discounted future energy costs. If =1, consumers make rational trade-offs
between current costs and future energy savings. If <1, some behavioral anomaly or
market failure impedes consumers from purchasing cars or appliances that would save
them money.


8
 For example, applying NHTSA's assumption that cars last 14 years, if future savings
are discounted at 3 percent, F is 11.3. If savings are discounted at 7 percent, F is 8.7.
                                               9
        Estimating  requires comparing cars that are identical in all respects other than
efficiency. That difficulty--separately identifying preferences for fuel economy from
other car attributes--is the big challenge. Many car characteristics, like size and power,
are associated with more expensive, less fuel-efficient vehicles. As a result, efficient
vehicles are not typically more expensive; they are cheaper. Only after controlling
statistically for other observable car characteristics does the relationship between price
and fuel economy become positive. But that leaves open concern about other car
characteristics omitted from the analysis. Finding that buyers undervalue fuel savings
could simply mean that car buyers have disutility from some unobserved characteristic of
the efficient cars.
        Five recent studies have taken creative steps to address the omitted variables
problem.9 Allcott and Wozny (2014) use monthly data on new vehicle registrations in the
United States. They test whether fuel-efficient cars command higher prices when gas
prices rise. In other words, they identify  using variation in  . Because their results are
identified by price changes for specific car models, fixed effects can account for
unobserved model characteristics. Allcott and Wozny estimate moderate undervaluation
of future fuel savings ( = 0.76).
        Sallee et al. (2016) examine used-car auctions in the United States. Cars with
fewer miles on their odometers have more expected remaining useful years and therefore
a higher payoff to fuel efficiency. When gas prices increase, the price of fuel-efficient
used cars increases, and it increases more for used cars with lower odometer readings.
Sallee et al. identify  using joint variation in    . Their estimates suggest that vehicle

prices move approximately one-for-one with discounted future fuel savings, or that ^  1.
As with Allcott and Wozny (2014), the identification is within model type, so unobserved
differences between models pose less of a problem.
        Grigolon et al. (2018) use European car sales data. They compare different
variants of the same model, as in our gas-hybrid example. These variants differ in their
suggested retail prices and fuel economies. Grigolon et al. exploit changes in market



9
 Allcott and Greenstone (2012), Greene (2010), and Helfland and Wolverton (2011)
contain thorough reviews of earlier papers.
                                             10
shares of new-vehicle registrations of these variants. Their main estimate is that =
0.91, implying that consumers only moderately undervalue discounted fuel savings.
       Busse et al. (2013) take a different approach. They estimate the discount rate that
would justify the price premium consumers pay for efficient cars. If that rate is
implausibly large, it would suggest consumers undervalue future savings (i.e., that <1).
Busse et al. find implied discount rates in line with market interest rates for car loans, and
therefore consumers do fully value future savings.
       Gillingham et al. (2019) exploit the fact that in 2012 Hyundai and Kia corrected
the reported fuel economy for 13 car models. Those cars' fuel economies had previously
been exaggerated. The authors find little decline in willingness to pay for the cars,
suggesting a value of  in the range of 0.16­0.39. Their result amounts to a joint test of
consumers' willingness to pay for future savings and the degree to which consumers get
their information about savings from official reports or vehicle labels.
       All of those papers calculate future savings based on the typical miles driven by
the average driver. But Bento et al. (2012) remind us that the heterogeneity in mileage
will result in underestimates of the value of future fuel savings ( ^ ). Grigolon et al.
(2018) attempt to estimate the size of this bias by simulating the distribution of driving
patterns based on actual mileage data from the United Kingdom in 2007. Their main
result ( = 0.91) accounts for heterogeneity. But their analysis remains at the level of car
models, not individual consumers, and their results are identified by fluctuations in
market shares of variants of similar models.
       Our approach differs from prior work in that we explicitly examine the realized,
post-purchase mileage for each driver. We don't ask whether the price premium for a
hybrid Toyota Camry is justified given the average annual mileage for all drivers, or even
the average for Toyota Camry drivers. We examine the actual annual miles driven and
gas prices paid for each driver. In the context of equation (2), our paper focuses on
variation in individual mileage ( ) across drivers, whereas much of the existing work
focuses on variation in cost across products faced by the average driver ( ). Our
approach is most similar to that of Banzhaf and Kasim (2019), who find imperfect
matching between drivers who drive many miles and vehicles that are more fuel efficient.
But imperfect matching does not in itself show that consumers make mistakes, because

                                              11
the fuel-efficient cars cost more to purchase. Fuel savings have to be weighed against the
extra cost of buying a more fuel-efficient vehicle. And both fuel economy and vehicle
prices may correlate with vehicle specifications that influence vehicle choice. We directly
account for those differences to see whether each individual driver would have been
better off paying more up front for a more efficient car, or paying less for a less efficient
car.10 To help frame the empirical analysis, we start with a simple model, following
Levinson (2019).


II.    A theoretical sketch

       Consider a representative consumer or household, with utility over two goods:
miles driven, m, and a numeraire, x. Consumers don't purchase miles directly but instead
purchase cars and gasoline, g. Miles driven is the product of gasoline and the car's energy
efficiency, , expressed as miles per gallon, or mpg: m=µg. Utility is then
                                        U (m, x)  U (  g , x) .                                 (3)
       Driving requires two expenditures: gasoline g at price pg and a vehicle at price Pv.
For simplicity, assume the car price is annuitized, or equivalently that the car is leased
and Pv represents the annual rental cost. Higher-efficiency cars with higher  cost more to
buy or lease. Call that premium p as in equation (2). Here p is the cost of one extra

mpg of fuel economy. The full fixed cost of purchasing a car is Pv  p  , the base price

plus an increment for extra fuel economy. A car owner's budget constraint is thus
                                       Y  x  pg g  Pv  p  .                                     (4)
This budget constraint can be represented by a plane in three dimensions: x, g, and µ.
Those are the three purchases: the numeraire (x), gallons of gasoline (g), and fuel
economy for the car (µ). But that's not the most instructive representation because miles
m are in the utility function, not gasoline g.


10
  Although it is not the focus of our paper, we do generate estimates of , the
undervaluation parameter in equation (2). We estimate that, on average, drivers value $1
of future fuel savings at approximately equal to $0.10­0.50 in upfront costs (see Table 3).
That is at the lower end relative to prior results, and it depends on the discount rate,
whether we use cars' sticker prices or actual sales prices, and whether we examine
anticipated or realized miles.
                                                 12
       For a clearer view of the trade-offs, rewrite (4) replacing g with m/µ, and in a
more familiar, graphable form with the numeraire on the left:
                                                 m
                                   x  Y  Pv   pg    p  .                                      (5)
                                                 
That's a budget surface in which two of the dimensions are goods in the utility function:
the numeraire x and miles m. The third dimension is fuel economy, µ.
       Maximizing utility in (3) with respect to the budget constraint (4), paired with a
typical convexity assumption, results in two first-order conditions:
                                                           pg
                                       i      Um
                                                   Ux
                                                        
                                                                
                                                                                              (6)
                                              Um           p
                                      (ii)                          .
                                                   Ux           g
The first condition in (6) indicates that the marginal rate of substitution between the two
goods in the utility function, miles and the numeraire, should equal the cost of going one
more mile by purchasing more gasoline. That cost is pg  , the price of gas divided by

the car's mpg. The second condition in (6) indicates that the same marginal rate of
substitution should also equal the cost of going one more mile by purchasing a more
efficient car. That cost is p g , the price of fuel economy divided by the number of

gallons being used.
       The intuition is simple. Drivers have two ways to travel an extra mile. They can
buy more gasoline at price pg for a car with any fixed fuel economy µ. That's the first

condition in (6). For any given fuel economy , there's a linear trade-off between miles
traveled (m) and the numeraire (x). Figure 2 plots that trade-off for two cars: a solid
budget line for an inefficient car with mpg 1 and a dashed budget line for an efficient

car with mpg  2 . The first condition in (6) is represented in Figure 2 by a tangency

between an indifference curve (with slope U m U x ) and a budget line (with slope pg  ).

       The second way that drivers can travel an extra mile is by purchasing a car with
better fuel economy at price p for a fixed amount of gasoline g. That represents a

lowering of the vertical axis in Figure 2, as from 1 to  2 . To show that, Figure 3

sketches two different trade-offs between fuel economy and the numeraire, drawn for two

                                             13
particular mileages, 1 and 2 . A driver can minimize the cost of driving 1 miles by
purchasing fuel economy  until the cost of an extra unit of fuel economy p equals the

savings from that extra efficiency. The savings is just the derivative of the total cost of
driving, mp g  , with respect to . So in the optimum, the cost of that extra mpg, p,

equals those savings:
                                                   mpg
                                             p           .                                      (7)
                                                   2
That is just another way of writing the combined first-order conditions in (6), replacing
gallons g with m/. The optimum is depicted in Figure 3 as * for a car owner driving m1

miles per year. A car owner driving m2 miles per year will have different trade-offs,

represented by the dashed line with lower possible expenditures on the numeraire x and
higher optimal fuel economy.11
       The two first-order conditions in (6), and their representations in Figure 2 and
Figure 3, motivate our two empirical tests. Given two cars with efficiencies 1 and  2 ,

like the gas and hybrid Toyota Camrys in the introduction, drivers' choices will depend
on their willingness to trade off miles traveled for other goods in the numeraire. Given
the indifference curve depicted in Figure 2, the driver would be best served choosing the
inefficient car and driving m* miles. Given those same budget constraints, however, a
driver with a flatter indifference curve might be better off choosing the efficient car and
driving more than m0 miles. Because we cannot observe utility, we cannot identify all of
the cases where a driver would be better off in a more or less efficient vehicle. A different
driver might be making a mistake choosing to drive m* miles in the inefficient car.
       We can, however, identify some cases that clearly cannot be optimal--they are
personal, purely financial, ex post mistakes--while holding other vehicle attributes
constant, even without knowing utility. In Figure 2 any car owner driving more than m0

11
  Or, consider a third way of looking at the trade-offs. For any given expenditure on the
numeraire, there's a quadratic relationship between miles (m) and mpg (). A household
can spend more on energy efficiency to travel more miles, up to a certain point, holding
the total budget and expenditures on x constant. Beyond that point, purchasing more
efficiency doesn't pay off and results in fewer miles traveled. At the optimum
 *   Y  P   V  x  2 p .


                                              14
miles per year in a vehicle with efficiency 1 , choosing a point on the solid budget line to

the right of m0, is making a mistake. Albert in our introduction may be in that position.
He could drive that same number of miles at lower total cost, including the upfront price
of the car, in the more efficient vehicle  2 . Similarly, anybody driving fewer than m0

miles per year in a vehicle with efficiency  2 , the dashed budget line, is making a
mistake. That may be Betty. She could have saved money by purchasing the less efficient
car.
       Our first empirical test examines pairs of cars that come in both standard gas and
hybrid gas-electric versions. We look for people with low annual gas expenses who have
purchased the hybrids, and people with high annual expenses in the gas models. Our
second empirical test focuses on the second first-order condition in (6) and on Figure 3.
For each driver in our sample, we can calculate the annual gas savings from purchasing a

slightly more efficient car, a model with one more mpg: mpg  . If that is higher than
                                                                   2



the cost of an extra mpg, the driver has underinvested in fuel economy and could be
saving money in a more efficient car. If those annual savings are lower than the cost of an
extra mpg, the driver has overinvested in fuel economy and would have been better off
purchasing a less expensive, less efficient car.
       To reiterate, the mistakes identified by both approaches are errors only in that the
upfront cost of fuel efficiency does or does not exceed the associated future fuel savings.
That is the calculation the Obama administration used to show that tightening fuel
economy standards would save drivers money, and that the Trump administration used to
show that relaxing the standards would cost drivers money.12 The calculation ignores
externalities such as pollution, other omitted vehicle attributes correlated with efficiency,
and deviations from drivers' expected mileage. That's why we keep referring to the
mistakes as personal, purely financial, and ex post. And so in the next section we assess
which drivers in practice are driving more miles in cars that could be saving them money
if they had spent more on fuel efficiency, and which are driving relatively few miles in
cars that could have saved them money had they spent less on fuel efficiency.

12
   Bento et al. (2018) and Bento et al. (2019) discuss the assumptions underlying the
findings by the consecutive administrations.
                                             15
III.   Identifying mistakes in practice: Comparing gas and hybrid cars

       For post-purchase data on the annual miles people drive, and the cars in which
they do that driving, we rely on the 2009 and 2017 waves of the National Household
Travel Survey. It includes household demographics, the annual mileage in each vehicle,
and the make, model, and model year of those vehicles. We match that information with
WardsAuto data for each make and model year to get vehicle characteristics, including
size, engine power, and the EPA estimated combined city-highway fuel economy.13
       Table 1 presents some summary statistics. The first two columns contain data for
only those vehicle models that come in both gas and hybrid versions. Drivers of hybrid
cars get more miles per gallon of gas and travel more miles, as expected. The mileage
difference translates to a 7 percent increase (relative to the midpoint of the two values).
That's the rightward shift in the shaded, hybrid distribution in Figure 1.
       That simple 7 percent difference illustrates our central finding. Compare it with
the fuel economy difference in the second row of Table 1, which translates to a 30.4
percent drop in the cost of traveling each mile.14 The ratio of those two numbers, 0.23, is
not an arc elasticity because it combines both the ex post response by hybrid owners to
the lower cost of driving and the ex ante selection of hybrids by high-mileage drivers. By
including selection, 0.23 overstates the true price elasticity. Labandeira et al. (2017)
survey economic estimates of the true elasticity of driving with respect to the cost. Their
meta-analysis has an average short-run price elasticity of demand for gas of 0.20 and an
average long-run elasticity of 0.53. In other words, if we randomly assigned drivers to

13
   The two waves of the NHTS have data on 294,409 households that own 776,731 cars
and light trucks. We restrict our sample to those households in the NHTS for which we
have information on miles driven and a complete set of covariates (income, age of
household head, education, rural or urban). We further limit the sample to those vehicles
that we successfully matched (by make, model, and year of production) to engineering
characteristics (mpg, length, width, height, weight, liters, valves, horsepower, and
revolutions per minute, rpm) from WardsAuto. This final sample contains 157,403
household-vehicle observations. A subsample of 24,362 comprises vehicle models that
come with either a gas-powered or a hybrid engine, and for which both are present in the
NTHS sample.
14
   The cost of traveling one mile is  /. The price of gas cancels, and the percentage
difference in the cost of driving a mile in columns 1 and 2 of Table 1 is
              
1 e 1 n  1 e  1 n  2 .         
                                             16
gas and hybrid cars, the mileage difference we see in Table 1 between the alternative
models, 7 percent, is at the low end of what we should expect to see based on those
drivers' responses to their driving costs alone. In aggregate, selection of fuel-efficient
cars by high-mileage drivers appears to play little or no role in the cars people drive.15
        To examine the choices by individual drivers, we start with the simplest strategy
that matches the introductory intuition and the first empirical test from Section II,
comparing gas and hybrid versions of the same make and model, as in the first two
columns of Table 1. For each driver with a car that comes in both versions, we calculate
the annual value of the fuel cost difference between the gas and hybrid models. That cost
difference, in equation (1), differs for every driver, depending on miles driven (mi), gas
prices  p g  , and the difference between the gas and hybrid fuel economies for the

particular car. It is plotted in Figure 1 for two groups: the black-outlined bars for drivers
of gas vehicles, and the shaded bars for hybrids.
       As a way of comparing the two distributions in Figure 1, we note that for each
gas-hybrid pair, there is some benchmark value of annual fuel savings above which
driving a hybrid would make sense for personal financial reasons. Figure 4 sketches the
distributions of drivers in Figure 1 as frequencies rather than densities, to emphasize that
the hybrid market share is smaller. The benchmark cost difference is depicted as a starred
vertical line. Drivers of standard gas cars spending more than the benchmark could have
saved money by spending more upfront on the hybrid. The share of gas drivers in that
position is B/(A+B). Drivers of hybrids spending less than the benchmark could have
saved money by purchasing the less expensive gas car. That share is C/(C+D).
       Finding the true benchmark annual cost difference is difficult. It requires knowing
all the various parameters of equation (2), including the price premium for the hybrid, the
cars' lifespans, and consumers' discount rates. Accordingly, as our main approach, we
calculate the benchmark annual cost difference by assuming that the hybrid price
premium for each model pair is the difference in the two cars' MSRPs. That may


15
  Recent contributions have highlighted another margin for fuel savings, namely how a
given number of miles are driven (Langer and McRae, 2017; Knittel and Tanaka, 2019).
We focus only on the number of miles driven and gas prices paid, assuming constant fuel
use per mile across drivers in the same car.
                                              17
overstate the cost of fuel economy if consumers receive tax incentives or other rebates for
purchasing the fuel-efficient versions, and that overstatement may be different for
different model pairs. In a follow-up approach below, we will show that our main
conclusions with regard to the demographics of drivers who make different fuel economy
choices do not differ when we use the actual sales prices or used car prices in place of
MSRPs.


Calculating mistakes using the assumptions behind the CAFE analyses
       In 2012, EPA and NHTSA issued new fuel economy rules for cars to be produced
in model years 2017 through 2025. That ruling was accompanied by a regulatory impact
analysis (RIA) predicting that the new rules would add $1,800 to the cost of an average
new vehicle and save more than $5,000 in gas costs over the life of the car.16 The EPA
and NHTSA analyses hinge on vehicle depreciation rates and discount rates. They
assume various lifespans for cars based on model-specific calculations. The average
lifespan is 14 years, and we apply that to all the cars in our sample. EPA and NHTSA
then apply either a 3 percent or a 7 percent discount rate to future fuel savings, following
standard US government guidance.17
       Our version of that analysis can be found in Table 2. The 2009 and 2017 NHTS
data contain 24,362 cars that come in gas or hybrid versions, 2,337 of which are hybrids.
We start by assuming those cars sell for their MSRP and last 14 years.18 If we discount
future fuel savings at 3 percent, then 3,646 of the 22,025 owners of gas vehicles would be
saving money in the hybrid version of their model pair. That's 17 percent, the fraction
B/(A+B) in Figure 4. Given their driving mileage and gas prices, their discounted future
fuel savings would more than cover the price premium for the hybrid version. The
aggregate statistics comport with prior results that car buyers undervalue savings: 4,120
drivers would be better off in hybrids, and only 2,337 are driving hybrids.


16
   See footnote 2.
17
   US Office of Management and Budget, Circular A-4, 68 FR 58366, October 9, 2003.
18
   Technically, EPA and NHTSA's 14-year lifespan is for vehicles assumed to be
identical in every respect other than fuel economy, but we know that gas and hybrid
models differ in some respects. That is why in the next section we present an alternative
approach controlling statistically for vehicle differences.
                                             18
       With the NHTS data on post-purchase driving by individual drivers, however, we
can see not just the share of drivers in hybrids but which drivers are in hybrids. Of the
4,120 drivers in column 3 of Table 2 who would be better off in hybrids, only 12 percent
(474) are actually driving hybrids. That's fraction D/(B+D) in Figure 4. The other 88
percent are making the apparent mistake of underinvesting in fuel economy.
       Again, these are mistakes only in an ex post financial sense, ignoring concerns
about externalities due to pollution, traffic, or accidents, and assuming the gas and hybrid
versions are identical. The drivers of gas cars who forgo savings from not buying the
presumably identical hybrid version of their vehicles may simply favor attributes of the
gas vehicles that differ from the hybrids, and the hybrid drivers who could have saved
money in a standard gas version may prefer features of the hybrid.
       If we discount future fuel savings at 7 percent, the aggregate statistics comport
with prior results that car buyers fully value savings. There are 2,430 who would save
money in hybrids, and nearly precisely that many, 2,337, actually drive hybrids. But
again, our data show those are mostly the wrong 2,337 drivers. Of the 2,430 for whom a
hybrid would save money, only 12 percent (286) actually drive hybrids. Increasing the
discount rate reduces the number of drivers predicted to be better off in a hybrid but
doesn't significantly change the share of those who actually do so, 12 percent.
       Table 2 also reports the other type of mistake, overinvestment in fuel efficiency.
Of the 20,242 drivers predicted to be saving money in gas cars, with future savings
discounted at 3 percent, 18,379 are driving gas cars. The other 1,863, or 9 percent, are
making an apparent mistake by driving hybrids: these low-expense drivers would be
better off in less fuel-efficient, less expensive gas cars. Or, looked at another way, of the
2,337 drivers actually in hybrids, 1,863 (80 percent) would have saved money in gas cars.
That's C/(C+D) in Figure 4. They are making the apparent mistake of overinvesting in
fuel economy.
       And again, if we discount future fuel savings more, at 7 percent, the proportions
are the same. More drivers would save money in the gas cars, 21,932. Of those, 91
percent do choose the gas versions. The other 2,051, or 9 percent, are making the
apparent mistake of driving hybrids, overinvesting in fuel efficiency.



                                              19
       Why don't the shares of apparent mistakes change much, even though the
discount rate substantially cuts the value of driving a hybrid? An obvious explanation is
that drivers' gas-hybrid decisions are not based on potential fuel savings. Look again at
Figure 1. The two distributions mostly overlap. Raising the discount rate from 3 to 7
percent shifts to the right the cutoff annual fuel savings that would make choosing the
hybrid worthwhile. That shrinks the share of drivers for whom we consider choosing a
hybrid to be optimal. But it also shrinks the share of drivers who have chosen to drive a
hybrid by almost the same amount.
       More concretely, if cars were randomly assigned to drivers in our sample,
regardless of gas prices or annual mileage, then changing the discount rate would have no
effect on observed apparent mistakes in car choice. That seems to be the case. Table 2 is
just one more way of demonstrating the main takeaway from Figure 1: drivers' choices of
fuel-efficient cars are unrelated to the cars' annual fuel costs.
       It turns out, as we can show with these data, the association between drivers'
demographic characteristics and their cars' fuel efficiency is far closer than the
association between drivers' potential or realized fuel savings and their cars' fuel
efficiency. Using the NHTS survey data, we can examine whether the failure to consider
fuel savings differs across demographic characteristics of drivers.


Demographic characteristics and the choice between gas and hybrid cars
       The natural place to begin examining demographic differences is with income.
Figure 5 illustrates how the proportions of drivers who would likely be better off in
different versions of their same vehicles differ by household income, given their annual
mileage and the gas prices they pay.19 The figure uses the cutoff corresponding to 14
years of driving discounted at 3 percent, as in the left panel of Table 2. The upper line
depicts the share of households who have annual expenses above the cutoff but are
driving gas cars, B/(B+D) in Figure 4. That is the mistake justifying fuel economy
regulations: people don't invest enough in efficiency. Higher-income households are less
likely to fit that pattern. The lower line in Figure 5 depicts the share of drivers with


19
  The categories of household income in the 2009 and 2017 NHTS data are not directly
comparable. We use the 2017 NHTS for this example.
                                              20
annual expenses below the cutoff but who drive hybrids, C/(A+C) in Figure 4. That's the
opposite mistake: these people are likely to have overinvested in fuel efficiency. Higher-
income households are more likely to have made that apparent mistake.
       Hybrids make up only about 10 percent of the overall market share of these gas-
hybrid pairs. What's interesting is not the shares themselves but how those shares differ
by income. To normalize for the different market shares, we subtract from each income
group's share the average market share for that vehicle type. Figure 6 plots versions of
the two lines from Figure 5 adjusted for those market shares.20 The left axis reports the
difference between the share of the group likely to be making the particular mistake--
under- or overinvesting in fuel economy--and the overall market share of that version of
car. The differences in Figure 6 by income are based entirely on the propensity of
different income groups to choose hybrid or gas cars, conditional on their annual mileage
and gas prices, and factoring out aggregate market shares of vehicle types. Poorer
households are relatively more likely to be missing out on annual fuel savings from
driving hybrids, and richer households are more likely to have spent too much upfront for
hybrids.
       Figure 6 does not suggest that poor or rich households systematically make more
mistakes. Rather, they make different types of mistakes. Poorer households are more
likely to have chosen a gas car when a hybrid would be saving them money, and richer
households are more likely to do the opposite.
       In Figure 7 we conduct the same exercise for other household characteristics: sex,
age, education, and rural versus urban. Unlike income, these other demographic variables
are reported consistently across NHTS survey waves, so we include both 2009 and 2017
data here. We calculate the shares of apparent mistakes for each demographic group,
normalized by the market shares for the two types of cars. The open circles represent the
shares of drivers with high expenses who drive the gas versions of their vehicles. They
could be saving money in a hybrid. The solid diamonds represent the opposite mistake,
drivers with low annual expenses who drive the hybrid version. They could have saved
money by purchasing the gas version.


20
  In the context of Figure 4, the top line in Figure 6 is B(B+D)-(A+B)/(A+B+C+D). The
bottom line is C(A+C)-(C+D)/(A+B+C+D).
                                            21
       At the top of Figure 7, among drivers with high annual expenses, men are less
likely than women to make the apparent mistake of choosing a gas car. But among
drivers with low annual expenses, men are more likely than women to make the opposite
apparent mistake, driving hybrids.
       For drivers younger than 40, a higher proportion with high annual expenses drive
gas cars even though they would be better off in hybrids. For drivers older than 40, that
pattern is reversed.
       Drivers who have not been to college look like the younger drivers. Fewer drive
hybrids but would likely be better off in standard gas-powered cars, and more drive gas
cars who would likely be better off in hybrids.
       One final distinction in Figure 7 is worth noting. Rural and urban drivers appear
less dissimilar in their propensity to make each type of apparent mistake. Our analysis
controls for miles driven and gas prices, so those distinctions should not matter here. If
the choices between hybrid and gas variants of the same model are determined by social
or cultural differences, we would have expected to find more pronounced differences
between rural and urban drivers.
       The demographic analyses in Figure 6 and Figure 7 examine the sample according
to single demographic characteristics, one at a time: income, gender, age, location,
education. However, these characteristics covary. We cannot be certain, for example,
whether differences between education groups are really due to differences across income
levels, or vice versa. To examine how all five demographic characteristics together are
associated with the fuel economy of the cars people drive, we estimate linear probability
models of whether drivers have chosen the hybrid or gas versions of their car models.


Hybrid choice and driver demographics
       Table 3 regresses the choice of each driver (1 for hybrid, 0 for gas) on the
cumulative discounted value of future fuel savings (in $1000s) from the hybrid relative to
the gas version of the same model, given each driver's annual miles driven and fuel
prices. The regressions also include the upfront incremental cost of the hybrid car. They
control for all five demographic characteristics, vehicle characteristics that affect fuel
economy, and a full set of make and year-by-type fixed effects. We also include state


                                              22
fixed effects to account for regional differences, such as availability of hybrids or local
tax rebates. The calculated fuel savings again mirror the assumptions from the CAFE
analysis, summing annual savings over 14 years, discounted at 3 and 7 percent. Because
income groups are not comparable between the 2009 and 2017 NHTS waves, we limit the
analysis here to the larger 2017 survey.
       To demonstrate the range of outcomes for our analysis, we calculate two
extremes. The first pairs the lower discount rate of 3 percent with a low estimate of the
upfront investment cost, using half of the difference in MSRPs between the two vehicles
in each model pair. That combination tilts the choice sharply in favor of choosing the
hybrid: its upfront cost is low and future savings are highly valued. The other extreme
pairs the higher discount rate of 7 percent with a high estimate of the upfront investment
cost, twice the MSRP difference. That tilts the choice against the hybrid.
       Start with the low option, favorable to the hybrid cars. Column 1 of Table 3
suggests that an additional $1,000 in discounted fuel savings is associated with an
increase in the probability of driving a hybrid by 0.38 percent. By comparison, a $1,000
increase in the incremental cost of the hybrid is associated with a 4.3 percent reduction in
the probability of driving a hybrid. If consumers fully valued future energy costs--that is,
if =1--the two coefficients would be equal. A dollar's worth of discounted future fuel
savings would have about the same association with car choices as a dollar's worth of
upfront costs. But our estimates in column 1 suggest significant undervaluation of future
fuel savings relative to upfront investment cost: ^ from equation (2) is about 0.09.
       Demographic characteristics of drivers are strongly associated with the
probability of driving a hybrid, even after controlling for fuel savings potential, upfront
investment cost, and vehicle specifications. Drivers with higher incomes are more likely
to own hybrids. This could be for many reasons, some nonfinancial. Perhaps high-income
drivers have altruistic concern for the environment or want to signal that concern to
neighbors (Sexton and Sexton, 2014). But other reasons rich drivers might own hybrids
are financial. Perhaps they have less trouble affording or borrowing to buy the more
expensive hybrids. Or perhaps they are more likely to do the math and get closer to
choosing their optimal level of fuel economy.



                                             23
        Column 2 of Table 3 tests these financial explanations, that richer drivers are
more likely purchase a hybrid when the gas savings justify the investment. The
specification in column 2 includes an interaction between the cumulative fuel savings and
an indicator for households with annual incomes above $50,000. Although the coefficient
on the interaction term is not quite statistically significant at 5 percent, its point estimate
suggests that high-income drivers' propensity to own a hybrid is more responsive to fuel
savings potential, though only to a small degree. Their estimated trade-off between future
fuel savings and upfront investment costs is only marginally higher than for households
with lower incomes ( ^ of about 0.10, compared with 0.05). That difference suggests that
rich households are not significantly more likely to do the math, and that poor households
are not more likely to be credit constrained. Higher-income drivers are on average more
likely to own a hybrid, but evidently not for reasons of economic cost. Some other
reason--altruism or environmental virtue signaling--must explain the income effect.
        The regressions in Table 3 also show that some demographic traits are
significantly more powerful predictors of observed vehicle choice than are the economic
considerations that we would have expected to motivate the decision--fuel savings
potential and upfront cost. Possessing a graduate degree or being older than 60 is
associated with an increase in the probability of owning a hybrid that is seven or eight
times larger than from a $1,000 increase in fuel savings.
        Columns 3 and 4 of Table 3 use the other extremes of our assumptions: a 7
percent discount rate and a price premium for hybrid vehicles equal to twice the MSRP
difference. That makes purchasing a hybrid less financially worthwhile. The different
assumptions have a predictable and mechanical effect on the regressions. We've
discounted cumulative future fuel savings, so its coefficient grows, and we've quadrupled
upfront costs, so its coefficient falls by three-fourths. But even with these exaggerated
disincentives to drive a hybrid, fuel costs predict very little of the hybrid choice, and only
half as much as upfront costs ( ^ =0.46). Richer drivers are not statistically significantly
more likely to take fuel costs into account, and having a graduate degree has 10 times the
predictive power for hybrid ownership as $1,000 of future fuel savings.
        The results so far demonstrate that drivers' choices of fuel economy do not seem
to be determined by future fuel savings. One possible explanation is that the gas-hybrid

                                               24
model pairing is not the best way of controlling for other differences between less
efficient and more efficient cars. Some hybrid vehicles clearly identify themselves as
such, perhaps signaling the environmental concerns of their drivers. Battery life may limit
the resale value of hybrid vehicles. Hybrids may have less interior room or cargo space.
And the on-the-road performance of gas and hybrid vehicles may differ. For those
reasons, in a second approach, based on the second condition in (6) and Figure 3, we
expand the sample to include all cars, not just the models that come in gas and hybrid
versions.


IV.    Identifying mistakes in practice: A regression approach using all car models

       Instead of controlling for other car characteristics with a simple gas-hybrid
comparison, in this section we use the full sample of cars and a calculation of the
incremental costs and benefits of purchasing a more efficient vehicle. A car owner i who
drives mi miles each year could save a little money on gasoline each year by purchasing a
slightly more fuel-efficient car, with higher mpg (). Annual gas costs ci are
                                                   mi pg
                                             ci            .                                    (8)
                                                    i
And the savings from buying a more efficient car, given mi, are
                                             ci mi pg
                                                2 .                                             (9)
                                             i   i
The right-hand side of (9) is the same as the right-hand side of the first-order condition in
equation (7). That incremental benefit from fuel economy is easy to calculate for each of
the drivers in the data because we know how much they drive (mi), what they pay for gas
(pg), and their cars' mpg (i).
       A rational, informed car buyer will purchase fuel economy until the present
discounted savings in (9) are equal to the capital cost of purchasing a vehicle with an
additional mpg, p, holding all other attributes constant. So in equilibrium,
                                               mp       
                                           p   2g       F                                       (10)
                                                        



                                             25
where F is the multiple that translates annual fuel savings into a present discounted value.
Any car owner for whom the right-hand side of equation (10) is larger than the left-hand
side will be making a (personal, financial, ex post) mistake and should have purchased a
more efficient car, with higher mpg (). Any owner for whom the left side is larger than
the right will be making the opposite mistake and should have purchased a less efficient,
less expensive car.
         The annual savings--the bracketed term in (10)--are simple to calculate using the
NHTS data, but the other two terms, pµ and F, are mostly unknown. As in our gas-hybrid
comparison, for any particular values of pµ and F there is some benchmark value for

savings, mpg  , above which it would be worthwhile to pay for a more efficient car.
             2



All drivers with annual savings greater than that benchmark will be more likely to have
underinvested in fuel efficiency, and all drivers with savings smaller than the benchmark
will be more likely to have overinvested. We will test the robustness of our findings to
the choice of the benchmark savings level, but we are primarily interested in the
demographic characteristics of drivers with savings above or below that benchmark, and
those turn out to be insensitive to the choice.
         What is pµ? Before they were rolled back in March 2020, the CAFE standards
were projected to raise fleetwide fuel economy from 35.5 mpg in model year 2016 to
54.5 in 2025, at an average cost of $2,017 per vehicle in 2017 dollars.21 That is $106 per
mpg. The previous round of CAFE standards raised the fleetwide fuel economy from
below 30 mpg to 35.5 mpg by 2016, at a projected cost of $1,140 per vehicle, or $207 per
mpg.22
         To get a sense for what p might be in the NHTS data, we regress car prices on

car characteristics, using the MSRPs from the WardsAuto price data:
                            MSRPtmk      tmk  bXtmk  mk   tmk .                                (11)




21
   Converted from 2010 dollars used in the RIA using the Consumer Price Index. See
footnote 2.
22
   Converted from 2007 dollars. See footnote 1.
                                              26
The price of trim t of model m and make k is a function of its fuel economy tmk as well

as a range of other vehicle characteristics Xtmk . We also include either make or model

fixed effects.
        Table 4 presents estimates of (11) for the 14,789 cars in the WardsAuto data set.
Column 1 has means and standard errors. Column 2 regresses price on fuel economy
alone, without other characteristics, demonstrating the omitted variable problem. Cars
with one extra mpg sell for $1,420 less on average, not more. In column 3, we control for
other car characteristics. In that specification, each extra mpg is associated with an extra
$197 in upfront vehicle costs. Column 4 adds make fixed effects, and column 5 adds
model fixed effects. Our estimates for the marginal cost of fuel economy, pµ, range
between $110 and $340. This is similar to estimates from hedonic pricing methods used
to estimate the contribution of fuel economy to vehicle prices and consumers' willingness
to pay, though these vary widely (Greene et al. 2018).
        For comparison, the mean annual savings from one extra mpg from equation (9) is
$56, and the median is $42. Earned annually, discounted at 3 percent for 14 years, and
summed, that's $618. Discounted at 7 percent, it would be $479. Both savings are larger
than the coefficients on fuel economy in Table 4, consistent with the idea that car buyers
undervalue future fuel savings, on average.
        We start by using two estimates of pµ, $110 and $340 from columns 4 and 5 of
Table 4. Those are, respectively, slightly smaller and larger than the back-of-the-envelope
calculations based on NHTSA's analysis of recent CAFE standard changes. But again, all
we really care about is showing the demographic differences between drivers with
savings larger and smaller than the benchmark, and as we show below, those
demographic differences are not sensitive to the choice of pµ.
        The next step is to choose the discount and depreciation rates. We again follow
the assumptions used in the EPA and NHTSA regulatory impact analyses, discounting
future fuel savings for 14 years at 3 and 7 percent, which is equivalent to multiplying
savings by F=11.3 and 8.75 in equation (10). We construct two cutoffs, one favorable to
fuel economy investments, one less favorable. The first uses the low discount rate (3
percent) paired with the low price for fuel economy ($110); the second uses the high
discount rate (7 percent) paired with the high price for fuel economy ($340). That leads to

                                              27
two benchmark annual fuel savings level cutoffs, above which it would make sense for
drivers to purchase one more mpg worth of energy efficiency: $10 and $39 per year.23
          We use these benchmark annual savings, $10 and $39, to classify all drivers as
having purchased either too little fuel economy--because the marginal discounted
lifetime savings from one more mpg outweigh the cost--or too much fuel economy. The
first, $10, means that any driver who would save more than $10 per year in a vehicle with
one more mpg of fuel economy has underinvested in fuel economy, and any driver who
would pay less than $10 more in fuel costs in a vehicle with one less mpg of fuel
economy has overinvested. This classification is shown in Table 5.
          When we discount future fuel savings at 3 percent and impose the low fuel
economy price of $110 per mpg, the analysis in Table 5 suggests that 142,924 (92
percent) of the 155,572 drivers in our sample bought cars with too little fuel economy.
Their discounted lifetime savings from buying one more unit of mpg would outweigh the
cost. The other 12,648 drivers (8 percent) overinvested in fuel savings. More than 10
times as many underinvest as overinvest. The fact that most drivers would benefit
financially from investing more in fuel efficiency supports the argument in the benefit-
cost analyses done for the US fuel economy rules. Those rules purportedly pay for
themselves by requiring manufacturers to sell more cars that cost more but save fuel.
          The bottom row of Table 5 shows not only the fraction of drivers who appear to
underinvest in fuel efficiency, but also the magnitude of the average underinvestment.
The 142,924 drivers who underinvested incur $6,000 more in total lifetime average
driving costs, relative to cars with the optimal level of fuel economy, whereas the 12,648
who overinvested lose only $400.
          Table 5 suggests that when we discount future fuel savings by 7 percent and
impose the high fuel economy price of $340 per mpg, the two types of mistakes are about
equally likely: 53 percent underinvest and 47 percent overinvest. In other words, the $39
cutoff is close to the $42 median savings from an additional unit of mpg. And not only
are the shares of mistakes more similar with the high discount rate and cost, the financial
magnitudes of those mistakes are also closer. The average driver who underinvested



23
     For the first cutoff, $10=$115/11.3. For the second, $39=$340/8.75.
                                             28
incurs an extra $2,400 in total lifetime driving costs, whereas the average driver who
overinvested loses about $1,300.
       Both the shares and the magnitudes of mistakes depend on discount rates and our
estimates of pµ. We are more interested in the types of people likely to under- or
overinvest in fuel efficiency, which turn out to be relatively independent of those
assumptions. Figure 8 begins to describe these distinctions, plotting the share deemed to
have underinvested in fuel efficiency as a function of household income, again limited to
the 2017 wave of the NHTS. It uses the high-cost combination: 7 percent discount rate
and $340 per mpg. Interestingly, this works in the opposite direction as our gas-hybrid
comparison. Here the probability that a household underinvests in fuel efficiency
increases with income, whereas the probability that a high-expense driver purchases a
gas car decreases with income (Figure 6).
       In this case, however, most of the distinction in Figure 8 results from the fact that
richer households drive more miles. As there is little association between fuel savings
potential and fuel economy choices, groups that drive more have higher fuel savings
potential and are therefore more likely to appear to underinvest. In our gas-hybrid
comparison, we controlled for driving by examining the share of high-expense drivers
who drive the gas or hybrid cars, compared with those shares for low-expense drivers.
We cannot do that in this case because we are classifying all drivers as likely to make one
of the two mistakes, depending on whether their annual potential savings from an extra
mpg are larger or smaller than our benchmark values.
       To factor out these group differences in mileage, we construct a counterfactual
version of Figure 8 where we assign to all drivers the median fuel economy (mpg) in the
2017 NHTS data. This erases differences in fuel economy choice between groups and
instead identifies the shares of apparent mistakes based solely on group differences in
miles driven and gas prices. We then subtract these counterfactual shares calculated with
median fuel economies from the actual ones depicted in Figure 8. The remaining share
differences are plotted in Figure 9. They are entirely due to differences in fuel economy
choices between groups, after having controlled for differences in mileage and gas prices.




                                            29
       Figure 9 shows that the share of drivers who could benefit financially from an
extra mpg, given their driving expenses, is larger for drivers with higher incomes.24
Recall that the shares are a function of our assumed price of fuel economy (pµ) and
discount and depreciation rates. So we aren't focused on the level of mistakes per se, only
on how they change with income. Higher-income households are distinctly more likely to
choose cars that could be more cost-effective, even after factoring out their propensity to
drive more miles. Presumably those households focus on other costly car features.
       Figure 10 reports the results of the same exercise for other driver characteristics.
As in Figure 7, we include both 2009 and the 2017 NHTS data. We calculate the share of
households in each demographic group deemed likely to be driving cars with too little
fuel efficiency, given their annual expenses and our assumptions about pµ and
depreciation and discount rates. We then calculate the counterfactual shares for each
group as if every driver were assigned the median fuel economy. Then we report the
difference.
       Figure 10 shows that given their annual mileage and gas prices, men are more
likely than women to be driving vehicles that are not optimal: they could be saving
money in higher-mpg cars. Again, this is the opposite result from our gas-hybrid
comparison, which found that low-expense men were more likely to be driving hybrids.
People older than 60, with graduate degrees, and living in urban areas are less likely,
given their mileage and gas prices, to be driving cars with too little fuel efficiency.
        In some cases, the gas-hybrid comparison and the regression-based analysis of all
cars lead to similar results. In particular, drivers with less education are more likely to be
driving vehicles with too little fuel economy, after controlling for group-level differences
in mileage and gas prices. But comparisons by gender, age, and region yield different
results. In the gas-hybrid comparison in Figure 7, men are less likely than women to
choose a gas version when they have high individual fuel savings potential. In the
regression-based analysis involving all types of cars in Figure 10, men are significantly



24
  Group differences in Figure 10 are relative to shares calculated using group median
mpg. Differences close to zero indicate a complete lack of sorting, while more negative
numbers indicate better sorting of drivers in each group into appropriate fuel economy
levels.
                                              30
more likely to have underinvested in fuel economy. Similarly, drivers younger than 40
are more likely to own the gas cars in Figure 7, but less likely to underinvest in fuel
economy in Figure 10. And in the gas-hybrid comparison in Figure 7, rural and urban
drivers are surprisingly similar. Here, rural drivers appear much more likely to be driving
cars with too-little fuel economy, given their mileage and gas prices.
       Of course, the two analyses are based on very different samples. Owners of
vehicles with both gas and hybrid versions represent a small subset of all drivers and cars.
And in both samples and across methods, we see a common pattern: there are frequent
mistakes in both directions among all demographic groups, as well as a weak relationship
between fuel savings potential and observed fuel economy choice.


Regression-based approach to demographic analysis: All vehicles
       As with the gas-hybrid comparison, this second approach so far has examined
demographic characteristics one by one. To examine how all five demographic
characteristics together are associated with the fuel economy of the cars people drive, we
take a regression approach in Table 6. We restrict our analysis to the 110,231 drivers in
the 2017 wave of the NHTS, within which income groups are comparable.
       We start by calculating the optimal fuel economy for each driver, given annual
mileage and gas prices, as represented in theory by equation (7) or Figure 3. Rewrite
equation (10) to include the coefficient  that captures the degree to which consumers
value future fuel savings:
                                               mp        
                                          p    2g        F .                                   (12)
                                                         
Equation (12) is just the all-cars version of the gas-hybrid comparison in equation (2).
Solving (12) for  yields

                                                   mpg
                                                         F.                                    (13)
                                                   p

The optimal choice of fuel economy, *, is just the  in (13) where =1.
       The first column of Table 6 regresses each driver's car's actual fuel economy ()
on the optimal fuel economy for each driver (*), given miles driven and gas prices. It
controls for all five demographic characteristics, vehicle characteristics that affect fuel

                                              31
economy, and a full set of make, year-by-type, and state fixed effects.25 We find a
statistically significant but tiny positive association between  and *. For each additional
mpg that drivers should purchase, based on mileage and gas prices, their cars have actual
mpg that is only 0.003 higher. There is almost no economically meaningful relationship
between drivers' optimal level of fuel economy and the observed fuel economy of their
vehicles.
       We can again interpret these regression results as evidence for the significance of
future fuel savings relative to the upfront cost of fuel efficiency. The regressions in Table
6 estimate  as a function of *, so the coefficient on * can be interpreted as an estimate

of  from equation (13). Or, ^  ^ 2 . The ^ in column 1 of Table 6 is 0.003. If we

square that, it shrinks to even less relevance, suggesting that drivers all but ignore fuel
savings when choosing the energy efficiency of their vehicles. Or to be more precise,
drivers appear to ignore their individual cost savings from fuel efficiency. Perhaps drivers
choose cars based on other vehicle attributes, though we control for some of the most
salient ones. Or maybe drivers act in a way akin to internalizing the cost savings for the
average driver, but certainly not their own. Either way, we find close to no relationship
between individual drivers' annual mileage and the fuel economy of their cars.
       Meanwhile, demographic characteristics of drivers are clearly associated with
observed fuel economy levels, even after controlling for optimal fuel economy levels and
vehicle specifications. As in the gas-hybrid comparison in Table 3, drivers with higher
incomes own cars that are more fuel efficient. This could be for reasons other than
personal financial cost, such as altruistic concern for the environment or signaling
environmental sentiment to neighbors. Or maybe the distinction has financial
explanations, if rich drivers have less trouble affording or borrowing to buy the more
expensive, more fuel-efficient vehicles. Or maybe they are more likely to do the
calculations necessary to estimate their optimal level of fuel economy.



 The optimal fuel economy, *, is just level of  that solves the equation
25

p  F mpg  2 , where F is the multiplication factor 11.3 corresponding to cumulative
savings over 14 years, discounted at 3 percent and the price of fuel economy is $110 per
additional mpg.
                                              32
       Column 2 of Table 6 examines whether high-income households are more
responsive to their optimal fuel economy. It includes in the regression an interaction
between the optimal level of fuel economy ( i* ) and an indicator for households with

annual incomes above $50,000. The small and insignificant coefficient (0.0018) suggests
that the observed fuel economy choices of high-income drivers are not much more
responsive to the economically optimal level, if at all. Rich households are not
significantly more likely to choose a vehicle's fuel economy based on financial
calculations of mileage and gas prices. Higher-income drivers do on average choose
higher levels of fuel economy, just as they are more likely to drive hybrids, but evidently
not for reasons related to fuel savings. There is close to no meaningful association
between the cost-minimizing level of fuel economy and observed choices for either rich
or poor households. As with the gas-hybrid comparison, rich households are not more
likely to do the math, and poor households are not more likely to be credit constrained.26


V.     Possible explanations for lack of attention to energy efficiency

       Our analysis finds widespread apparent mistakes in both directions: many
households don't drive sufficient miles but still own relatively fuel-efficient vehicles, and
vice versa. What can explain this seeming absence of economic calculation? We have
already seen, via the interaction terms in Table 3 and Table 6, that the responsiveness of
fuel economy choices to economic incentives does not vary by income. That rules out
credit constraints and other household characteristics correlated with income. Below we
investigate further explanations: mistaken expectations about driving costs and
systematic bias in vehicle prices.




26
  In the Appendix tables, we estimate a version of Table 6 that replaces the dependent
variable with the difference between observed mpg and optimal mpg. That specification
asks which households end up with a level of fuel economy that, given their driving, is
further away from the economically optimal level. We estimate that drivers with higher
incomes and more education, drivers under 40 years of age, male drivers, and drivers in
rural areas own vehicles that have lower fuel economy relative to the level that would be
economically optimal.
                                             33
Possible differences between realized ex post mileage and ex ante expectations
       Our main analyses in Sections III and IV rely on fuel expenses calculated using
data on actual miles driven in the NHTS survey years, 2009 and 2017. But this may differ
from how much drivers expected they would drive at the time they bought their cars.
Although vehicle choices may seem to indicate mistakes ex post, they could have been in
line with what car buyers expected. We repeat our analysis using alternative data for
vehicle owners' expected annual mileage at the time of purchase, using data from the
MaritzCX monthly surveys of vehicle buyers, conducted between 2010 and 2017.27
       The time-of-purchase surveys average a 9 percent response rate and represent
approximately 1 percent of US car purchases. As with the NHTS data, we match those
vehicles to characteristics from WardsAuto. The time-of-purchase sample differs a bit
from the post-purchase NHTS data in Table 1. The time-of-purchase survey respondents
are wealthier and more educated, more urban, and own larger, more powerful, and
slightly less fuel-efficient cars. The vehicles in the time-of-purchase data are also
newer--cars purchased between 2009 and 2017 rather than cars driven in 2009 and 2017.
       Despite those differences, the time-of-purchase survey has two distinctions that
make it a useful comparison with our post-purchase evidence. First, annual mileage
comes from responses to a survey question about how many miles the car buyer intends
to drive each year. That time-of-purchase expectation eliminates concerns that the NHTS
calculations do not display a relationship between fuel economy and driving because car
buyers inaccurately forecast their future driving. Second, the time-of-purchase data report
the actual transacted sales price rather than the MSRP.
       As a first step, we replicated Figure 1 using annual cost differences between
hybrid and equivalent gas cars, based on expected miles at the time of purchase. The two
distributions are indistinguishable, and so we have not reproduced the time-of-purchase
version here.28 Hybrid and gas purchasers expect to drive the same amount, supporting
the finding that hybrids are not chosen for their expected fuel savings, and that the post-


27
   See Leard, Linn, and Zhou (2017), and Leard, Linn, and Springel (2019, 2020).
Appendix Table 1 contains summary statistics for the MaritzCX data, the analog to Table
1. MaritzCX was acquired by another market research company, InMoment, in March
2020.
28
   See Appendix Figure 1.
                                             34
purchase differences seen in Figure 1 are the result of rebound--drivers' reactions to the
hybrids' low driving cost--not selection.
       Second, in Panel A of Table 7 we have reproduced the evaluation of gas-hybrid
choices from Table 2 but with time-of-purchase expected miles rather than post-purchase
actual miles. The results are qualitatively similar, though a larger share of the cars are
hybrids. Much of that difference is surely due to the growth in hybrid market share, but
some may stem from the sample selection, for example if hybrid purchasers are more
likely to respond to this survey.
       Of 59,671 purchasers of cars that came in gas and hybrid versions, our
calculations suggest that 23,111 would be better off choosing a hybrid, given their
expected mileage, the sales price premium over the gas version, a 14-year life
expectancy, and a 3 percent discount rate. Nearly as many do, 20,344. But as with the
post-purchase driving evidence in Table 2, it's mostly the wrong car buyers. Of the
23,111 who would better off purchasing a hybrid, only 8,924 do (39 percent). And as in
Table 2, switching to a 7 percent discount rate dramatically drops the estimated number
who would be better off choosing a hybrid, but it barely nudges the fraction of those who
actually do (40 percent).
       Table 7 also addresses a second concern about our main analyses in Sections III
and IV: our use of MSRPs reported in WardsAuto to calculate the upfront premium paid
for a more efficient vehicle. That MSRP may impart a bias if hybrid cars sell at a larger
discount relative to MSRPs. The MaritxCX survey data contain the actual transacted
sales prices. The qualitative results in Table 7 using sales prices are similar to those in
Table 2 using MSRP--around 60 to 70 percent of drivers own gas vehicles, whether that
appears optimal given their fuel expenses or not.
       As a third step, in Table 8 we replicate Table 3 with the time-of-purchase data,
estimating linear probability models of hybrid choice as a function of expected fuel
savings, and using actual vehicle sales prices rather than MSRPs. The results are similar.
The coefficients on fuel savings are slightly larger, and the coefficients on upfront costs
smaller, so the implied  is a little larger. But as before, other demographics play a larger
role than fuel savings in determining hybrid choice. A graduate degree still has 10 times
the predictive power as $1,000 of savings. Being older than 60 has seven times the


                                              35
predictive power, and earning more than $150,000 instead of less than $50,000 per year
has 20 times the predictive power. Drivers' demographics, rather than expected fuel
expenses, predict fuel economy choices.
       Finally, in the last two columns of Table 8 we replicate Table 6 using the time-of-
purchase data. Column 6 regresses actual fuel economy () on our calculated optimal fuel
economy (*) for each driver, given expected annual mileage and local gas prices. As
with the post-purchase NHTS data in Table 6, here we also find a statistically significant
but tiny positive association between  and *. Each additional mpg that would be
optimal is associated with actual mpg purchased that is only 0.007 higher. Squaring that
coefficient to recover ^ , it shrinks to nothing, indicating that car buyers ignore their own
expected future fuel savings when purchasing vehicles.
       Again, demographic characteristics of car buyers have a much larger association
with the fuel economy of the vehicles they purchase than their expected fuel savings.
Columns 2 and 4 of Table 8 add the interaction with income. Rich households are not
more likely to be calculating fuel savings, and poor households do not seem more credit
constrained.


Possible difference in depreciation rates and used car prices
       The main analyses in Sections III and IV explore whether, retrospectively, given
their actual mileage in 2009 and 2017, drivers would have been better off had they
purchased more efficient or less efficient cars. Above, we pose a different hypothetical
and ask whether, prospectively, given their expected future mileage, car buyers would be
better off by purchasing more efficient or less efficient cars. But there's a third way to
frame the question, using data on used-car prices. Every driver who drives a lot of miles
in an inefficient vehicle, like Albert in our introduction, has the option, in theory, to trade
in his inefficient car for a more efficient one. The fuel savings would justify the upgrade.
And every driver who owns an efficient vehicle but doesn't drive much, like Betty, could,
in theory, downgrade her fuel economy and pocket the difference.
       More generally, not all cars are purchased new and not all cars are held by the
same owner for their entire lifespans. Any systematic difference in depreciation rates and



                                              36
used-car prices between cars with different fuel economy levels could be responsible for
at least some of the absence of sorting based on fuel savings potential that we find.
       To frame the question this way, as a choice to keep or trade in one's current car,
and to account for possible differences in depreciation rates, we complement our analysis
with used-car prices for about 1 million vehicles listed in September 2017 on the website
TrueCar.com.29 We match those prices to each make, model, and year for vehicles in the
2017 NHTS. Only a relatively small subset of the relevant models had a matching listing
on TrueCar.com, but even with that limited sample, we again see similar patterns. Panel
B of Table 7 replicates Table 2 based on used-car prices and suggests two insights. First,
more drivers would be better off in hybrids, presumably because the used hybrid price
premium is smaller than the new one. Second, optimal and observed choices are again
only weakly related. In other words, differences in depreciation and resale value cannot
explain the observed lack of sorting into what looks like the cost-minimizing vehicle
choice based on individual drivers' circumstances.

VI.    Conclusion

       Do drivers undervalue future fuel savings when they buy cars? Or do they
appropriately balance the additional upfront cost of investing in fuel economy with the
cumulative future fuel savings? Previous work in this area finds mixed evidence but
suggests that vehicle prices and market shares respond to the cost savings from higher
levels of fuel economy, at least partially and on average. We instead ask a related but
somewhat different question: do individual drivers respond to their personal savings
potential from higher levels of fuel economy based on their driving behavior and the fuel
prices they face? We find very little evidence that they do.
       Of the more than 150,000 car owners in the 2009 and 2017 NHTS survey waves,
we find that a large portion have made what appear to be mistakes. Some own inefficient
cars but drive them a lot, while others paid a premium for fuel-efficient cars that they
drive very little. This disconnect between individual fuel economy and driving holds


29
  The used-car listings data from TrueCar.com are available under "CCO: Public
Domain" license from the following website: https://www.kaggle.com/jpayne/852k-used-
car-listings.
                                             37
whether we look at ex post realized mileage or ex ante expected mileage at the time of
purchase. It holds whether we use MSRPs or actual purchase prices when the cars were
new, or used-car prices in 2017. And it holds whether we use the price premium for
hybrid versions of car models that also come in a standard gas version or estimate the
price premium for an extra unit of fuel economy, controlling for other car features
statistically.
        Our findings contain a puzzle: how can the market as a whole seemingly
internalize the value of fuel economy while individual consumers mostly ignore it? One
possible explanation might be that consumers respond to average incentives--they act as
if they expect to drive the average number of miles--and ignore their individual
deviation from the mean. Another explanation could be that fuel economy plays a less
important role in vehicle choice than previously suggested.
        Whatever the explanation, the observed lack of sorting into levels of fuel
economy based on individual economic incentives suggests a significant, previously
overlooked source of market inefficiency. Fuel policy discussions revolve around
improving fleet-wide fuel economy levels, as with the CAFE standards. But we find
many drivers already own cars for which the upfront premium they paid for fuel economy
exceeds their annual savings. Any fleet-wide policy would make those drivers worse off.
        Instead of a fleet-wide policy, more targeted policies might achieve the same fuel-
conservation objectives and make more drivers better off. Consider two stylized
alternatives: (1) increase every car's fuel economy by one mpg, or (2) keep all the cars
the same but swap them among drivers so that the cars driven more than the median
annual mileage have one mpg of additional fuel economy, and the cars driven less than
the median annual mileage have one mpg less. In the 2017 NHTS sample, a fleet-wide
increase in fuel economy of one mpg would save the average driver about $50 per year.
Merely swapping cars among drivers to increase high-mileage cars' efficiency by one
mpg would save an average of $30 per driver per year. In other words, better sorting at
constant technologies achieves 60 percent of the savings from a fleet-wide fuel economy
improvement. Banzhaf and Kasim (2019) show that higher fuel prices may trigger such
sorting, but there may also be other policies to do so. Our analysis shows that this would
have significant savings potential.


                                            38
       Although financial incentives linked to fuel costs seem to play a minor role in
drivers' vehicle choices, we identify important differences across demographic groups.
Why this is important depends on how we interpret the apparent mistakes. If the choices
reflect underlying unobserved preferences, then perhaps richer people have a higher
willingness to pay for hybrids for some reason unrelated to fuel savings. And perhaps
poorer drivers have higher discount rates, preferring to pay less up front in exchange for
higher future costs. A policy that subsidizes hybrid cars would be an inframarginal
transfer to rich drivers. A policy that penalizes gas-powered cars would impose a
regressive burden on poorer drivers.
       On the other hand, if the observed pattern is the result of some market failure--
say, the liquidity constraints faced by poorer households--then the policy implication is
different. A subsidy for efficient cars could enable poorer households to afford their
upfront costs and save them future fuel expenses. Our analysis suggests that drivers'
failure to consider fuel costs does not appear to be due either to financial constraints or to
erroneous expectations about future driving.




                                              39
References

Allcott, Hunt. 2011. Consumers' perceptions and misperceptions of energy costs.
        American Economic Review 101(3): 98­104.
Allcott, Hunt, and Christopher Knittel. 2018. Are consumers poorly informed about fuel
        economy? Evidence from two experiments American Economic Journal:
        Economic Policy 11(1): 1­37.
Allcott, Hunt, and Michael Greenstone. 2012. Is there an energy efficiency gap? Journal
        of Economic Perspectives 26(1): 3­28.
Allcott, Hunt, and Nathan Wozny. 2014. Gasoline prices, fuel economy, and the energy
        paradox. Review of Economics and Statistics 96(5): 779­95.
Ankney, Kevin. 2020. Do credit constraints explain the energy efficiency Gap? Working
      paper. Georgetown University, Washington, DC.
Banzhaf, H. Spencer, and M. Taha Kasim. 2019. Fuel consumption and gasoline prices:
      The role of assortative matching between households and automobiles. Journal of
      Environmental Economics and Management 95: 1-25.
Bento, Antonio M., Shanjun Li, and Kevin Roth. 2012. Is there an energy paradox in fuel
       economy? A note on the role of consumer heterogeneity and sorting bias.
       Economics Letters 115(1): 44­48.
Bento, Antonio M., Kenneth Gillingham, Mark R. Jacobsen, Christopher R. Knittel,
       Benjamin Leard, et al. 2018. Flawed analyses of U.S. auto fuel economy
       standards. Science 362(6419): 1119­21.
Bento, Antonio, Mark Jacobsen, Christopher Knittel, and Arthur van Benthem. 2019.
       Estimating the costs and benefits of fuel-economy standards. Working paper
       26309. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Busse, Meghan R., Christopher R. Knittel, and Florian Zettelmeyer. 2013. Are consumers
       myopic? Evidence from new and used car purchases. American Economic Review
       103(1): 220­56.
Gillingham, Kenneth, David Rapson, and Gernot Wagner. 2016. The rebound effect and
       energy efficiency policy. Review of Environmental Economics & Policy 10(1):
       68­88.
Gillingham, Kenneth, Sébastien Houde, and Arthur van Benthem. 2019. Consumer
       myopia in vehicle purchases: Evidence from a natural experiment. Working paper
       25845. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Greene, David L. 2010. How consumers value fuel economy: A literature review. US
      Environmental Protection Agency, Oak Ridge, TN. March.
Greene, David L., Hossain, Anushah, Hofmann, Julia, Helfand, Gloria, and Robert
      Beach. 2018. Consumer willingness to pay for vehicle attributes: What do we
      know? Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 118: 258­79.



                                          40
Grigolon, Laura, Mathias Reynaert, and Frank Verboven. 2018. Consumer valuation of
       fuel costs and tax policy: Evidence from the European car market. American
       Economic Journal: Economic Policy 10(3): 193­225.
Helfand, Gloria, and Ann Wolverton. 2011. Evaluating the consumer response to fuel
       economy: A review of the literature. International Review of Environmental and
       Resource Economics 5(2): 103­46.
Labandeira, Xavier, José M. Labeaga, and Xiral López-Otero. 2017. A meta-analysis on
      the price elasticity of energy demand. Energy Policy 102: 549­68.
Langer, Ashley, and Shaun McRae. 2017. Step on it: A new approach to improving
       vehicle fuel economy. Working paper. University of Arizona, Tucson.
Leard, Benjamin, Joshua Linn, and Katalin Springel. 2019. Pass-through and welfare
       effects of regulations that affect product attributes. Resources for the Future,
       Washington, DC.
------. 2020. Have US Fuel Economy and Greenhouse Gas Emissions Standards
      Improved Social Welfare? Report. Resources for the Future, Washington, DC.
Leard, Benjamin, Joshua Linn, and Christy Zhou. 2017. How much do consumers value
       fuel economy and performance? Evidence from technology adoption. Report.
       Resources for the Future, Washington, DC.
Levinson, Arik. 2019. Energy efficiency standards are more regressive than energy taxes:
       Theory and evidence. Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource
       Economists, 6(S1): S7-S36.
Knittel, Christopher R., and Shinsuke Tanaka. 2019. Driving behavior and the price of
        gasoline: evidence from fueling-level micro data. Working paper 26488. National
        Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Sallee, James. 2014. Rational inattention and energy efficiency. Journal of Law and
        Economics 57(3): 781­820.
Sallee, James, Sarah West, and Wei Fan. 2016. Do consumers recognize the value of fuel
        economy? Evidence from used car prices and gasoline price fluctuations. Journal
        of Public Economics 134: 61­73.
Sexton, Steven E., and Alison L. Sexton. 2014. Conspicuous conservation: The Prius
       Halo and willingness to pay for environmental bona fides. Journal of
       Environmental Economics and Management 67(3): 303­17.




                                            41
 Table 1. Summary statistics
                                                  Gas-hybrid pairs
                                                Gas            Hybrid                      All cars
                                                (1)               (2)                         (3)
Annual miles                                  12,350            13,251                      12,428
                                              (74.55)          (219.0)                      (29.01)
Combined city-highway mpg                      27.72             37.67                       25.72
                                             (0.0233)          (0.149)                     (0.0154)
Household income (2017 $)
    Less than $25k                            0.0850                 0.0345                0.0891
    $25k­$50k                                  0.186                  0.102                 0.181
    $50k­$75k                                  0.199                  0.129                 0.187
    $75k­$100k                                 0.165                  0.165                 0.161
    $100k­$150k                                0.217                  0.271                 0.216
    More than $150k                            0.148                  0.299                 0.166
Age                                            52.73                  54.58                 53.22
                                              (0.118)                (0.311)               (0.042)
Education:
    High school                                0.169                 0.0980                 0.184
    Some college                               0.544                  0.485                 0.550
    Graduate                                   0.242                  0.380                 0.235
Rural                                          0.213                  0.199                 0.245

Length                                         186.4                  186.0                  186.7
                                             (0.0442)                (0.138)               (0.0312)
Width                                          71.63                  71.59                  72.60
                                             (0.0136)               (0.0408)              (0.00868)
Height                                         59.80                  60.55                  62.54
                                             (0.0325)                (0.113)               (0.0156)
Weight                                         3,279                  3,630                  3,527
                                              (4.068)                (11.64)                (1.686)
Liters                                         2.417                  2.464                  2.776
                                            (0.00355)               (0.0180)              (0.00217)
Valves                                         3.949                  3.914                  3.793
                                            (0.00213)              (0.00837)              (0.00153)
Horsepower                                     171.9                  162.4                  195.6
                                              (0.230)                (1.025)                (0.151)
Rpm                                            6,014                  5,850                  5,927
                                              (1.753)                (4.756)                (1.280)

Observations                                  22,025                  2,337                155,572
Sources: 2009 and 2017 NHTS, limited to households with cars and complete demographic information.
Vehicle characteristics from Wardsauto.com. 24,362 gas-hybrid models in columns 1 and 2, and 155,572
observations for all cars in column 3. The income variables in columns 1­3 are only for the 2017 NHTS.
Standard errors in parentheses.



                                                    42
    Table 2. Two types of mistakes: Models with gas-hybrid choice


                                                 Optimal vehicle                      Optimal vehicle
                          Actual               (3% discount rate,                   (7% discount rate,
                          vehicle                  14-year life)                         14-year life)
                           Total               Gas           Hybrid                 Gas            Hybrid
                            (1)                 (2)             (3)                  (4)              (5)
Total                       24,362            20,242           4,120               21,932            2,430

Gas                         22,025            18,379              3,646            19,881              2,144
(% of row)                                       (83%)              (17%)             (90%)              (10%)
(% of column)                                    (91%)              (88%)             (91%)              (88%)

Hybrids                       2,337             1,863                474             2,051               286
(% of row)                                        (80%)              (20%)             (88%)             (12%)
(% of column)                                      (9%)              (12%)              (9%)             (12%)

Sources: 2009 and 2017 NHTS. Model years 2005­2017. All cars with complete data on prices and incomes
and that come in gas and hybrid versions. The shaded boxes represent "mistakes"--drivers who would be
financially better off in the alternative version of the same vehicle. Calculations assume a 14-year lifetime with
discount rates of 3% and 7%. Note: The 14-year lifetime roughly replicates the CAFE 2017­2025 RIA. EPA
and NHTSA use model year­specific lifetime estimates, which average 14 years.




                                                          43
Table 3. Characteristics of hybrid vehicle drivers
                                                                       NHTS data
                                                  "Low" cutoff                            "High" cutoff
                                             (3% discount, ½ price)                 (7% discount, 2 price)
Dependent variable = 1 if hybrid              (1)                  (2)                (3)                (4)
Cumulative fuel savings ($1,000)           0.0038*              0.0023*           0.0049*             0.0029*
                                           (0.0005)            (0.0010)           (0.0007)            (0.0013)
Fuel savings                                                     0.0020                                0.0026
 ×(Income>$50,000)                                             (0.0011)                               (0.0014)
Upfront investment cost ($1,000)           -0.0429*            -0.0429*           -0.0107*            -0.0107*
                                           (0.0021)            (0.0021)           (0.0005)            (0.0005)
Income:       $25k­$50k                    0.0140*              0.0144*
                                           (0.0077)            (0.0070)
               $50k­$75k                   0.0170*               0.0108
                                           (0.0069)            (0.0077)
               $75k­$100k                  0.0427*              0.0364*                    coefficients
                                          (0.00727)            (0.0080)                     same as
               $100k­$150k                 0.0484*              0.0419*                     columns
                                           (0.0070)            (0.0078)                    (1) and (2)
               Over $150k                  0.0841*              0.0776*
                                           (0.0075)            (0.0084)
Education: Some college                    0.0099*              0.0101*
                                           (0.0048)            (0.0048)
              Graduate                     0.0332*              0.0334*
                                           (0.0054)            (0.0054)
Age:          40­60 years                  0.0175*              0.0172*
                                           (0.0043)            (0.0043)
              Over 60 years                0.0287*              0.0283*
                                           (0.0043)            (0.0043)
Male                                       0.00292              0.00293
                                           (0.0034)            (0.0034)
Rural                                       0.0074               0.0074
                                           (0.0043)            (0.0043)
Includes car characteristics: length, width, height, weight, liters, valves, horsepower, and rpm
Includes fixed effects by state, year-by-type, and make
Implied                                      0.09                                    0.46
( for income < $50,000)                                           0.05                                  0.27
( for income > $50,000)                                           0.10                                  0.52

Observations                              17,586             17,586           17,586           17,586
R-squared                                   0.37              0.37             0.37             0.37
Sources: See Table 1. Calculations for cumulative (and discounted) fuel savings assume a 14-year lifetime
with discount rates of 3% and 7%. Sample using the 17,586 observations from the 2017 NHTS wave
(because of different income classification in 2009 wave). * p<0.05.




                                                      44
     Table 4. Fuel economy and vehicle prices
                                    Means                                 Regressions
Dependent variable =                 (1)               (2)               (3)          (4)              (5)
MSRP
mpg µ                                  22.4          -1,420*            197.0*         339.7*        109.9*
                                       (5.5)           (32)             (37.3)         (33.1)         (37.6)
Length (ins.)                         192.4                            -214.0*         -99.3*           17.7
                                      (20.8)                             (9.0)          (8.6)         (11.2)
Width (ins.)                           73.7                            -231.6*        -214.1*        237.4*
                                       (4.0)                            (58.4)         (52.7)         (70.0)
Height (ins.)                          64.7                            -794.6*        -235.5*        -271.8*
                                       (7.7)                            (31.0)         (30.2)         (64.7)
Weight (lbs.)                         3,988                              9.50*          6.02*          5.06*
                                     (855.5)                            (0.42)         (0.39)         (0.43)
Liters                                 3.38                            -3,767*        -1,752*        -2,436*
                                      (1.22)                             (258)          (241)          (245)
Valves                                 3.64                               271         -1,295*        -1,898*
                                      (0.76)                             (221)          (224)          (262)
Horsepower                            248.7                             227.5*         170.2*        158.8*
                                      (84.6)                             (3.1)          (2.9)          (2.8)
Rpm                                   5,844                             -4.12*         -2.67*         -2.86*
                                     (603.8)                            (0.24)         (0.23)         (0.23)

Observations                                           14,789            14,789        14,789         14,789
R-squared                                               0.120             0.587         0.712          0.811
Make fixed effects                                        No               No            Yes            Yes
Model fixed effects                                       No               No            No             Yes
Sources: Authors' calculations from Wardsauto.com data. Prices are MSRP. Mpg is EPA's combined for city and
highway driving. Each observation is a single make, model, and year combination.




                                                      45
   Table 5. Two types of mistakes: All models

                                            Fuel economy level                    Fuel economy level
                                        (3% discount rate, 14-year             (7% discount rate, 14-year
                                            life, $110 per mpg)                   life, $340 per mpg)
                           Total        Too much         Too little             Too much       Too little
                            (1)            (2)              (3)                    (4)            (5)
NHTS 2009                   45,291        2,717          42,574                  17,599          27,692
                                                 (6%)            (94%)                 (39%)             (61%)
NHTS 2017                  110,281          9,931            100,350               55,959            54,322
                                                 (9%)            (91%)                 (51%)             (49%)
Total NHTS                 155,572         12,648            142,924               73,558            82,014
                                                 (8%)            (92%)                 (47%)             (53%)
Avg. forgone
                                             $417             $6,008               $1,294            $2,383
savings (14 years)
Sources: See Table 1. Calculations assume a 14-year lifetime with discount rates of 3% and 7%. The cumulative
(and discounted) monetary value of one more unit of mpg (according to equation 12) is compared with the
marginal cost of mpg estimated in Table 4, columns 4 and 5 ($110 and $340). Forgone savings are the cumulative
discounted cost difference over the 14-year vehicle lifetime relative to the cost-minimizing choice according to
equation (13). The 14-year lifetime roughly replicates the CAFE 2017­2025 RIA. EPA and NHTSA use model-
year-specific lifetime estimates, which average 14 years.




                                                        46
Table 6. Determinants of individual fuel economy choice
  Dependent variable: mpg ()                          (1)                            (2)
  Optimal mpg µi*                                  0.0030*                         0.0017
                                                   (0.0005)                       (0.0009)
  (µi*)                                                                            0.0018
   ×(Income > $50k)                                                               (0.0011)
  Income: $25k­$50k                                 0.101*                         0.103*
                                                    (0.039)                        (0.039)
           $50k­$75k                                0.199*                          0.112
                                                    (0.039)                        (0.064)
           $75k­$100k                               0.336*                         0.248*
                                                    (0.041)                        (0.065)
           $100k­$150k                              0.436*                         0.347*
                                                    (0.040)                        (0.065)
           Over $150k                               0.580*                         0.490*
                                                    (0.043)                        (0.067)
  Education: Some college                           0.107*                         0.107*
                                                    (0.027)                        (0.027)
          Graduate                                  0.420*                         0.420*
                                                    (0.032)                        (0.032)
  Age:    40­60 years                               0.0422                         0.0410
                                                    (0.025)                        (0.025)
          Over 60 years                             0.094*                        0.0922*
                                                    (0.025)                        (0.025)
  Male                                               0.038                          0.039
                                                    (0.020)                        (0.020)
  Rural                                            0.0586*                        0.0584*
                                                   (0.0238)                        (0.024)

  Other car covariates: length, width, height, weight, liters, valves, horsepower

  Observations                                     110,231                         110,231
  R-squared                                          0.72                            0.72
  Sources: See Table 1. Calculations for optimal mpg assume a 14-year lifetime with a discount rate of
  3%. The cumulative (and discounted) monetary value of one more unit of mpg (according to
  equation 12) is compared with the marginal cost of mpg estimated in Table 4, column 5 ($110).
  Dependent variable is observed mpg. See Appendix Tables A2 and A3 for full results. * p<0.05.




                                                  47
    Table 7. Time-of-purchase and used-car price analysis: Models with gas-hybrid
    choice



                                                 Optimal vehicle                     Optimal vehicle
                          Actual               (3% discount rate,                  (7% discount rate,
                          vehicle                  14-year life)                        14-year life)
                           Total               Gas           Hybrid                Gas            Hybrid
                            (1)                 (2)             (3)                 (4)              (5)

                                      Panel A: Time-of-purchase analysis (MaitzCX)
Total                       59,671         36,260        23,111         42,963                      16,078

Gas                         39,327            24,840            14,187            29,251            10,076
(% of row)                                       (63%)             (36%)             (74%)             (26%)
(% of column)                                    (69%)             (61%)             (68%)             (60%)

Hybrids                     20,344            11,420             8,924            13,712              6,632
(% of row)                                       (56%)             (44%)             (67%)              (33%)
(% of column)                                    (31%)             (39%)             (32%)              (40%)

                                 Panel B: Used price analysis (NHTS + TrueCar.com)
Total                        3,254          921          2,333         1,162       2,092

Gas                          2,999               874             2,125              1,098             1,901
(% of row)                                       (29%)             (71%)              (37%)             (63%)
(% of column)                                    (95%)             (91%)              (94%)             (91%)

Hybrids                         255                47               208                64               191
(% of row)                                        (18%)             (82%)             (25%)             (75%)
(% of column)                                      (5%)              (9%)              (6%)              (9%)

Sources: Panel A: MaritzCX survey years 2010­2017, vehicle characteristics from Wardsauto.com. Panel B:
NHTS 2017 survey, limited sample with available used-car prices from TrueCar.com. All cars with complete
data on prices and incomes and that come in gas and hybrid versions. The shaded boxes represent "mistakes"--
drivers who would be financially better off in the alternative version of the same vehicle. Calculations assume a
14-year lifetime with discount rates of 3% and 7%. Note: The 14-year lifetime roughly replicates the CAFE
2017­2025 RIA. EPA and NHTSA use model-year-specific lifetime estimates, which average 14 years.




                                                         48
   Table 8. Time-of-purchase fuel economy choice

                                             Dependent variable = 1 if hybrid               Dependent variable: mpg
                                         "Low" cutoff            "High" cutoff
                                     (3% discount, ½ price) (7% discount, 2 price)
                                               (1)                      (2)                   (3)                (4)
Cumulative fuel savings                    0.00446*                 0.00576*
     ($1000)                               (0.00124)                (0.00160)
Fuel savings                              -0.00268*                -0.00346*
     ×(Income>$50,000)                     (0.00127)                (0.00164)
Optimal mpg µi*                                                                            0.00715*            0.00726*
                                                                                          (0.000271)         (0.000719)
(µi*)                                                                                                         -0.000120
 ×(Income > $50k)                                                                                            (0.000758)
Upfront investment cost ($1000)             -0.0180*                -0.00451*
                                           (0.00138)               (0.000345)
Income:
          $25k­$50k                         0.00783                                          0.161*            0.162*
                                            (0.0150)                                        (0.0607)          (0.0607)
          $50k­$75k                         0.0401*                                          0.381*            0.388*
                                            (0.0158)                                        (0.0605)          (0.0748)
          $75k­$100k                        0.0609*            coefficients same as          0.490*            0.497*
                                            (0.0158)                column (1)              (0.0606)          (0.0750)
          $100k­$150k                       0.0800*                                          0.603*            0.610*
                                            (0.0158)                                        (0.0603)          (0.0748)
          Over $150k                         0.102*                                          0.793*            0.800*
                                            (0.0158)                                        (0.0606)          (0.0751)
Education:
         Some college                           0.0160*                                            0.142*        0.142*
                                               (0.00339)                                          (0.0136)      (0.0136)
          Graduate                              0.0432*                                            0.463*        0.463*
                                               (0.00370)                                          (0.0152)      (0.0152)
Age:      40­60 years                           0.0128*                                            0.118*        0.118*
                                               (0.00286)                                          (0.0114)      (0.0114)
          Over 60 years                         0.0322*                                            0.294*        0.294*
                                               (0.00298)                                          (0.0122)      (0.0122)
Male                                            0.0175*                                            0.0134        0.0134
                                               (0.00216)                                         (0.00932)     (0.00932)
Rural                                         -0.00652*                                           -0.0310*      -0.0310*
                                               (0.00317)                                          (0.0126)      (0.0126)
Includes car characteristics: length, width, height, weight, liters, valves, horsepower, and rpm
Includes fixed effects by state, year-by-type, and make
Observations                                     59,671                      59,671               607,024       607,024
R-squared                                         0.736                      0.736                  0.752         0.752
Sources: MaritzCX survey years 2010­2017, vehicle characteristics from Wardsauto.com. Calculations for cumulative (and
discounted) fuel savings in columns 1 and 2 assume a 14-year lifetime with discount rates of 3% and 7%. Calculations for
optimal mpg in columns 3 and 4 assume a 14-year lifetime with a discount rate of 3%. The cumulative (and discounted)
monetary value of one more unit of mpg (according to equation 12) is compared with the marginal cost of mpg estimated in
Table 4, column 5 ($110). See Appendix Tables A2 and A4 for full results. * p<0.05.




                                                       49
Figure 1. Annual fuel cost differences, gas versus hybrid




Notes: For each vehicle in the 2009 and 2017 NHTS that comes in both gas and hybrid
versions, we calculate the annual fuel cost difference between the two versions, given
mileage and gas prices. The shaded bars represent the cost savings for hybrid drivers
relative to driving a gas version of the same car; the outlined bars represent the extra
annual costs borne by gas drivers.




                                            50
Figure 2. One view of the budget constraint




Notes: Illustration of the budget trade-off between miles driven (m) and other
consumption (x), comparing a less efficient vehicle purchased at a lower price (solid
budget line) and a more efficient vehicle purchased at a higher price (dashed budget line).




                                            51
Figure 3. A different view of the budget constraint




Notes: Graph illustrates the optimal choice of fuel economy (MPG) that minimizes fuel
expenditure and thus maximizes consumption of the numeraire (x), holding miles driven
(m) constant. Comparison between a driver with low mileage (solid budget line) and one
with higher mileage (dashed budget line).




                                          52
Figure 4. Benchmark annual savings, gas versus hybrid




Notes: Graphs illustrate a cutoff value in counterfactual annual fuel cost savings for
switching from a gas to a hybrid version of the same car model. These savings are
forgone by owners of gas vehicles (left) and realized by owners of hybrid vehicles (right).
Hybrid owners saving less than the cutoff (area C) would have saved money by buying
the gas version; owners of gas vehicles with savings exceeding the cutoff (area B) would
have saved money by buying the hybrid.




                                            53
Figure 5. Car-buying mistakes, by income




Notes: Based on the 2017 NHTS, a 7% discount rate, and a price of efficiency (pµ) of
$340. The top line plots the share of high-expense drivers, who would be financially
better off in hybrids but are driving gas cars. The bottom line plots the share of low-
expense drivers in hybrids. Shaded areas represent 95% confidence intervals of the
shares.




                                            54
Figure 6. Car-buying mistakes, by income and adjusted for market shares




Notes: A version of Figure 5, adjusted for the relative difference in market shares
between gas and hybrid models. The downward-sloping line plots the share of high-
expense drivers in gas cars, net of the overall market share of gas cars. The upward-
sloping line plots the share of low-expense drivers in hybrids, net of the market share of
hybrids. Shaded areas represent 95% confidence intervals of the shares.




                                            55
Figure 7. Car-buying mistakes, by other demographics




Notes: Data from 2009 and 2017 NHTS. The open circles plot the share of each
demographic with high expenses who would be financially better off in hybrids but are
driving gas cars, minus the overall market share of gas cars. The solid diamonds plot the
share of each group with low expenses driving hybrids, minus the market share of
hybrids. Lines represent 95% confidence intervals of the shares.




                                            56
Figure 8. Probability of having too little fuel economy, by income




Notes: Data from 2017 NHTS. Each point represents the share of each income group that
could be financially better off by driving a car with one more mpg of fuel economy.
Assumes a 7% discount rate and a price of efficiency (pµ) of $340. Shaded areas
represent 95% confidence intervals of the shares.




                                         57
Figure 9. Probability of having too little fuel economy, accounting for mileage and
gas price




Notes: A version of Figure 8. Actual shares of each group deemed to have underinvested
in fuel economy, minus what that share would be if all drivers were assigned the median
fuel economy. Those counterfactual shares depend only on mileage and gas prices, so the
probabilities reported here are versions of those in Figure 8, adjusted for those income-
group differences. Shaded area represents 95% confidence intervals of the shares.




                                           58
Figure 10. Probability of having too little fuel economy, accounting for mileage and
gas price




Notes: Data from 2009 and 2017 NHTS. Actual share of each demographic group
deemed to be driving cars with too little fuel economy, minus that same share calculated
under the counterfactual assumption that each driver's car had the median mpg for each
wave of the NHTS. Assumes a 7% discount rate and a price of efficiency (pµ) of $340.
Lines represent 95% confidence intervals of the shares.




                                           59
Appendix




  60
Appendix Table A1. Summary statistics for time-of-purchase data
                                    Gas-hybrid pairs
                                   Gas             Hybrid                         All cars
                                   (1)              (2)                             (3)
   Annual miles                            12,515              13,201              12,189
                                           (32.45)             (46.69)             (8.196)
   Combined city-highway mpg                24.41               36.65               23.97
                                          (0.0280)            (0.0453)            (0.00838)
   Household income
       Less than $25k                      0.006                0.002              0.005
       $25k­$50k                           0.122               0.0542              0.108
       $50k­$75k                           0.160                0.105              0.143
       $75k­$100k                          0.163                0.131              0.149
       $100k­$150k                         0.268                0.282              0.265
       Over $150k                          0.282                0.426              0.330
   Age                                     53.97                56.33              53.12
                                          (0.0782)            (0.0990)            (0.0192)
   Education:
        High school                        0.141                0.060               0.122
        Some college                       0.005               0.0018               0.005
        Graduate                           0.282                0.462               0.303
   Rural                                   0.143               0.0973               0.143

   Length                                    193.4               188.3               189.5
                                           (0.0709)            (0.0451)            (0.0225)
   Width                                     73.63               72.63               73.63
                                           (0.0166)            (0.0118)           (0.00490)
   Height                                    62.66               61.08               64.11
                                           (0.0354)            (0.0347)           (0.00905)
   Weight                                    3,786               3,818               3,861
                                            (4.035)             (3.760)             (1.061)
   Liters                                    3.134               2.539               3.146
                                          (0.00615)           (0.00467)           (0.00161)
   Valves                                    3.997                 4                 3.908
                                         (0.000413)               (0)            (0.000537)
   Horsepower                                233.0               169.7               243.5
                                            (0.338)             (0.295)             (0.111)
   Rpm                                       5,985               5,828               5,919
                                            (2.614)             (1.752)             (0.686)

   Observations                                39,327               20,344          607,024
   Sources: MaritzCX survey years 2010­2017, vehicle characteristics from Wardsauto.com. Limited
   to households with cars and complete nonmissing demographic information. Vehicle
   characteristics from WardsAuto. 59,671 gas-hybrid models in columns 1 and 2, and 607,024
   observations for all cars in column 3. Standard errors in parentheses.




                                                61
Appendix Table A2. Alternative columns for Table 3, with model-specific fixed
effects

                                                                     MartizCX time-of-purchase
                                          NHTS postpurchase data                data
                                        "Low" cutoff "High" cutoff "Low" cutoff "High" cutoff
   Dependent variable = 1 if hybrid           (1)         (2)            (3)              (4)
   Cumulative fuel savings ($1000)        0.0020*      0.0026*       0.00261*         0.00337*
                                          (0.0005)     (0.0006)     (0.000362)       (0.000467)
   Upfront investment cost ($1000)        -0.0487*     -0.0122*       -0.0132*        -0.00331*
                                          (0.0025)     (0.0006)      (0.00189)       (0.000474)
   Income:      $25k­$50k                   0.0092                     0.0232
                                          (0.0066)                    (0.0139)
                 $50k­$75k                  0.0111                    0.0382*
                                          (0.0066)                    (0.0138)
                 $75k­$100k               0.0317*                     0.0531*
                                          (0.0068)                    (0.0138)
                 $100k­$150k              0.0373*     coefficients    0.0699*        coefficients
                                          (0.0066)      same as       (0.0137)         same as
                 Over $150k               0.0634*     column (1)      0.0858*        column (3)
                                          (0.0071)                    (0.0138)
   Education:   Some college              0.0104*                     0.0160*
                                          (0.0045)                   (0.00314)
                Graduate                  0.0333*                     0.0383*
                                          (0.0052)                   (0.00342)
   Age:         40­60 years               0.0165*                     0.00470
                                           (0.0041                   (0.00265)
                Over 60 years             0.0210*                     0.0175*
                                          (0.0041)                   (0.00277)
   Male                                     0.0032                    0.0132*
                                          (0.0032)                   (0.00200)
   Rural                                    0.0049                   -0.00628*
                                          (0.0041)                   (0.00293)

   Includes car characteristics: length, width, height, weight, liters, valves, horsepower, and rpm
   Includes fixed effects by state, year-by-type, and model

   Implied                                  0.04             0.21            0.56             1.02

   Observations                           17,586          17,586        59,671         59,671
   R-squared                               0.43             0.43         0.775          0.775
   Sources: See Table 1 and Appendix Table A1. Calculations for cumulative (and discounted) fuel
   savings assume a 14-year lifetime with a discount rate of 3% ("Low") and 7% ("High"). * p<0.05.




                                                    62
         Appendix Table A3. Full version of Table 6, using NHTS data
                                                     Actual mpg: µ                    Actual ­ optimal mpg: µ-µ*
                                            (1)                       (2)                          (3)
Optimal mpg µi*                          0.0030*                    0.0017
                                        (0.0005)                  (0.0009)
(µi*) x (Income > $50k)                                             0.0018
                                                                  (0.0011)
Income:           $25k­$50k                 0.101*                  0.103*                      -1.304*
                                           (0.039)                 (0.039)                       (0.240)
                  $50k­$75k                 0.199*                   0.112                      -1.860*
                                           (0.039)                 (0.064)                       (0.242)
                  $75k­$100k                0.336*                  0.248*                      -2.540*
                                           (0.041)                 (0.065)                       (0.251)
                  $100k­$150k               0.436*                  0.347*                        -2.94*
                                           (0.040)                 (0.065)                        (0.24)
                  Over $150k                0.580*                  0.490*                        -2.60*
                                           (0.043)                 (0.067)                        (0.26)
Education:        Some college              0.107*                  0.107*                        -1.82*
                                           (0.027)                 (0.027)                        (0.16)
                  Graduate                  0.420*                  0.420*                        -2.41*
                                           (0.032)                 (0.032)                        (0.19)
Age:              40­60 years               0.0422                  0.0410                         1.47*
                                           (0.025)                 (0.025)                        (0.16)
                  Over 60 years             0.094*                 0.0922*                         8.80*
                                           (0.025)                 (0.025)                        (0.15)
Male                                         0.038                   0.039                        -1.37*
                                           (0.020)                 (0.020)                        (0.12)
Rural                                      0.0586*                 0.0584*                        -3.09*
                                          (0.0238)                 (0.024)                        (0.15)
Length (ins.)                             -0.0127*                -0.0127*                      -0.121*
                                          (0.0016)                (0.0016)                       (0.010)
Width (ins.)                               -0.263*                 -0.263*                      -0.228*
                                           (0.007)                 (0.007)                       (0.048)
Height (ins.)                              -0.182*                 -0.182*                      -0.413*
                                           (0.004)                 (0.004)                       (0.026)
Weight (lbs.)                             0.00106*                0.00106*                    0.000736*
                                         (0.00004)               (0.00004)                    (0.000260)
Liters                                      -2.46*                  -2.46*                        -1.49*
                                            (0.04)                  (0.04)                        (0.27)
Valves                                     -0.0061                 -0.0061                        -0.302
                                          (0.0276)                (0.0275)                       (0.169)
Horsepower                                -0.0199*                -0.0199*                     -0.00952*
                                         (0.00057)               (0.00057)                     (0.00347)
Rpm                                      -0.00179*               -0.00179*                     -0.00200*
                                         (0.00003)               (0.00003)                     (0.00019)

Observations                              110,231                110,231                       110,231
R-squared                                  0.72                   0.72                          0.13
Sources: See Table 1. Calculations for optimal mpg assume a 14-year lifetime with a discount rate of 3%. The
cumulative (and discounted) monetary value of one more unit of mpg (according to equation 12) is compared with the
marginal cost of mpg estimated in Table 4, Column 5 ($110). Dependent variable is observed mpg in columns (1) and
(2) and difference between observed mpg and optimal mpg in column (3). * p<0.05




                                                        63
Appendix Table A4. Full version of Table 6, using MartizCX data
                                                 Actual mpg:                   Actual ­ optimal mpg:  - 
                                         (1)                    (2)                         (3)
             
 Optimal mpg                           0.00715*                0.00726*
                                      (0.000271)             (0.000719)
  
 ( ) x (Income > $50k)                                        -0.000120
                                                             (0.000758)
 Income:          $25k­$50k               0.161*                 0.162*                        -1.943*
                                        (0.0607)               (0.0607)                        (0.292)
                  $50k­$75k               0.381*                 0.388*                        -3.432*
                                        (0.0605)               (0.0748)                        (0.291)
                  $75k­$100k              0.490*                 0.497*                        -4.477*
                                        (0.0606)               (0.0750)                        (0.291)
                  $100k­$150k             0.603*                 0.610*                        -5.641*
                                        (0.0603)               (0.0748)                        (0.290)
                  Over $150k              0.793*                 0.800*                        -6.803*
                                        (0.0606)               (0.0751)                        (0.291)
 Education:       Some college            0.142*                 0.142*                        -1.645*
                                        (0.0136)               (0.0136)                       (0.0652)
                  Graduate                0.463*                 0.463*                        -1.066*
                                        (0.0152)               (0.0152)                       (0.0728)
 Age:             40­60 years             0.118*                 0.118*                         1.651*
                                        (0.0114)               (0.0114)                       (0.0546)
                  Over 60 years           0.294*                 0.294*                         6.174*
                                        (0.0122)               (0.0122)                       (0.0579)
 Male                                     0.0134                 0.0134                        -1.239*
                                       (0.00932)              (0.00932)                       (0.0447)
 Rural                                  -0.0310*               -0.0310*                        -4.582*
                                        (0.0126)               (0.0126)                       (0.0603)
 Length (ins.)                           0.0282*                0.0282*                        -0.115*
                                      (0.000682)             (0.000682)                      (0.00327)
 Width (ins.)                           -0.0450*               -0.0450*                         0.0232
                                       (0.00273)              (0.00273)                       (0.0131)
 Height (ins.)                           -0.204*                -0.204*                        -0.533*
                                       (0.00200)              (0.00200)                      (0.00958)
 Weight (lbs.)                        -0.000136*             -0.000136*                     -0.000928*
                                       (2.02e-05)             (2.02e-05)                     (9.70e-05)
 Liters                                  -0.683*                -0.683*                         0.368*
                                        (0.0104)               (0.0104)                       (0.0498)
 Valves                                  -1.148*                -1.148*                        -0.757*
                                        (0.0135)               (0.0135)                       (0.0647)
 Horsepower                             -0.0407*               -0.0407*                       -0.0183*
                                      (0.000132)             (0.000132)                     (0.000633)
 Rpm                                  -0.000779*             -0.000779*                     -0.000989*
                                       (1.01e-05)             (1.01e-05)                     (4.86e-05)

 Observations                          607,024                607,024                        607,024
 R-squared                              0.752                  0.752                          0.294
 Sources: See Appendix Table 1. Calculations for optimal mpg assume a 14-year lifetime with discount rates of 3
 percent. The cumulative (and discounted) monetary value of one more unit of mpg (according to equation 12) is
 compared to the marginal cost of mpg estimated in Table 4, Column 6 ($110). Dependent variable is observed mpg in
 columns (1) and (2) and difference between observed mpg and optimal mpg in column (3). * p<0.05.




                                                    64
Appendix Figure A1. Time-of-purchase evidence for annual fuel costs, gas versus
hybrid




Notes: Replicates Figure 1 but uses time-of-purchase data from the 2010­2017 MaritzCX
survey years. For each vehicle that comes in both gas and hybrid versions, we calculate
the annual fuel cost difference between the two models, given expected mileage and gas
prices at the time of purchase. The shaded bars represent the cost savings for hybrid
drivers relative to driving a gas version of the same car; the outlined bars represent the
extra annual costs borne by gas drivers.




                                           65
