                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            ISSUANCE AND INCIDENCE:
                     SNAP BENEFIT CYCLES AND GROCERY PRICES

                                          Jacob Goldin
                                        Tatiana Homonoff
                                        Katherine Meckel

                                       Working Paper 28221
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28221


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020


We gratefully acknowledge Amanda Agan, Phil Armour, Lisa Barrow, Marianne Bitler, Sarah
Cohodes, Julie Cullen, Janet Currie, Stefano DellaVigna, Alex Gelber, Matt Gentzkow, Justine
Hastings, Janna Johnson, Nirupama Rao, Betsey Stevenson, Jesse Shapiro, Ebonya Washington,
and seminar participants at Cornell, Columbia, Duke, Williams College, George Mason, NYU-
Wagner, UT-Austin, UCSD, UBC, University of Chicago-Booth, RAND Corporation, and NBER
Summer Institute and the NBER Conference on Food Security for conversations and suggestions
that have greatly improved the quality of this project. Lawrence Jin, Katherine Rittenhouse, Jason
Somerville, and Vedant Vohra provided excellent research assistance. Researchers own analyses
calculated (or derived) based in part on data from The Nielsen Company (US), LLC and
marketing databases provided through the Nielsen Datasets at the Kilts Center for Marketing Data
Center at The University of Chicago Booth School of Business. The conclusions drawn from the
Nielsen data are those of the researchers and do not reflect the views of Nielsen. Nielsen is not
responsible for, had no role in, and was not involved in analyzing and preparing the results
reported herein. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Jacob Goldin, Tatiana Homonoff, and Katherine Meckel. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Issuance and Incidence: SNAP Benefit Cycles and Grocery Prices
Jacob Goldin, Tatiana Homonoff, and Katherine Meckel
NBER Working Paper No. 28221
December 2020
JEL No. H0,H53,I38

                                        ABSTRACT

Many safety-net programs issue benefits as monthly lump-sum payments. We investigate how the
timing of Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) benefit issuance affects food
purchases and the incidence of the transfer. Using retail scanner data from a large sample of
grocery stores and state and time variation in SNAP issuance schedules, we document large,
SNAP-induced intra-month cycles in food expenditures. However, we find that retailers do not
adjust prices based on these predictable patterns of demand. Our results therefore suggest that
reforming issuance schedules reduce costs from SNAP-induced demand surges but are unlikely to
affect the incidence of SNAP benefits.

Jacob Goldin                                   Katherine Meckel
Stanford Law School                            Department of Economics
559 Nathan Abbott Way                          Econ 210
Stanford, CA 94305                             University of California at San Diego
and NBER                                       9500 Gilman Drive #0508
jsgoldin@law.stanford.edu                      LaJolla, CA 92093
                                               and NBER
Tatiana Homonoff                               kmeckel@ucsd.edu
New York University
Robert F. Wagner School of Public Service
295 Lafayette Street, 2nd Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
tatiana.homonoff@nyu.edu
1        Introduction

The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) is one of the largest antipoverty
programs in the United States, serving roughly 1 in 8 Americans in fiscal year 2018 (USDA-
FNS 2019). Participating households receive a monthly lump sum benefit that can be spent
on most food products in participating grocery stores. SNAP constitutes a large share of
the retail grocery market ­ in 2010, for example, SNAP purchases accounted for 14% of
grocery sales in the United States (Wilde 2012). As such, decisions about how the program
is implemented have the potential to affect a substantial share of consumers and grocery
markets nationwide.
        In this paper, we investigate the effects of state decisions about the timing of SNAP
issuance. Previous research finds that food consumption and expenditures by SNAP recip-
ients track monthly benefit cycles (Wilde and Ranney 2000; Shapiro 2005; Hastings and
Washington 2010). Because SNAP benefits are redeemed in-kind through a larger market
involving private firms and both beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries, SNAP-induced variation
in aggregate customer demand can affect the purchasing power of the benefit. In particular,
in states with compressed issuance schedules,1 grocery stores face predictable, intra-month
fluctuations in the nature and volume of customer demand. In response, retailers may strate-
gically adjust food prices over the course of the month in stores where SNAP beneficiaries
shop. Such pricing behavior shapes the incidence of the transfer, with the ultimate effect
depending on whether retailers are induced to raise or lower their prices during the parts of
the month associated with peak SNAP demand. The magnitude ­ and even direction ­ of
these pricing responses are theoretically ambiguous, making it difficult to predict in advance
how they shape the welfare effects of in-kind transfer programs like SNAP.
        To investigate this question, we use a panel of transaction-level data that covers over
10,000 retail grocery stores in the U.S. from 2006-2014. With this data, we explore the effect
    1
    For example, in Nevada all SNAP participants receive their benefits on the first of the month. In contrast,
in Missouri, the day on which SNAP participants receive their benefits varies by person ­ a Missourian's
issuance day may fall anywhere between the first and the 22nd of the month.


                                                      1
of SNAP issuance on food expenditures and prices by leveraging differences in the share of
SNAP participants that receive benefits in a given week. Specifically, we employ two main
identification strategies. The first uses cross-sectional variation in SNAP issuance schedules,
within and across states. The second identification strategy estimates the effect of SNAP
issuance exclusively from within-state changes to the issuance schedule over time. Unlike
much of the prior research on the effect of SNAP issuance timing, both of these approaches
allow us to control for secular week-of-the-month effects, thus distinguishing the effect of
SNAP from other regularly occurring monthly events that may influence food purchases,
such as receiving a paycheck, utility bills, or the issuance of other benefits.
   We first establish that SNAP issuance generates predictable intra-month fluctuations in
shopper demand. Focusing initially on variation across states, we find that food sales increase
5.6% for the average grocer in a week in which all SNAP benefits are issued, compared to a
week in which no benefits are issued. This effect is more pronounced in low-income areas: food
sales rise 19.2% in ZIP codes in which more than 20% of households participate in SNAP.
In addition, twelve states changed SNAP issuance schedules during our sample period. We
find that limiting our analysis to this source of variation yields similar results: in our full
sample, food sales are 6.3% higher in weeks in which all benefits are issued, compared to a
week in which no benefits are issued, and 16.9% higher in high-SNAP stores. In contrast, we
find much smaller and largely statistically insignificant effects of SNAP issuance on sales of
SNAP-ineligible grocery purchases.
   We next investigate the relationship between the timing of SNAP issuance and within-
month cyclicality in grocery store food prices. Notwithstanding the predictable variation in
consumer demand that SNAP issuance generates, we find evidence against retailers adjusting
food prices in response by an economically meaningful degree. Across specifications and
samples, our point estimates are near-zero and not statistically significant. Our preferred
specification yields a 95% confidence interval that excludes average price changes larger
than 0.1% in magnitude in all stores and 0.2% in high-SNAP stores. This finding is striking


                                               2
because it allows us to rule out SNAP-induced, intra-month pricing responses an order of
magnitude smaller than what has been found in prior research (Hastings and Washington
2010).
   Finally, we conduct a range of exploratory analyses to better understand the lack of pric-
ing response to SNAP issuance. In particular, to shed light on how the observed fluctuations
in customer demand affect grocery pricing incentives, we investigate how SNAP issuance
affects within-month patterns in the aggregate price elasticity of demand faced by retailers.
Instrumenting product prices with prices of the same product from same-chain stores in
other markets (Hausman 1996; Nevo 2001; DellaVigna and Gentzkow 2019), we estimate the
effect of SNAP issuance on within-month changes in customer demand elasticity. We find
that average demand elasticity declines by approximately 1% in weeks in which all benefits
are issued, suggesting that, on average, customers shopping in such weeks are slightly more
price sensitive than customers shopping in other weeks of the month.
   Using a simple model of grocery store behavior, we predict that these small changes
in elasticity should induce only modest reductions in grocery store prices, approximately
0.1% to 0.8%. Thus, perhaps surprisingly in light of the large changes in consumer behavior
we observe, we do not find evidence of large incentives for retailers to adjust prices over
the course of the month. In addition, although we document heterogeneity in the size of
the within-month elasticity changes across individual products and chains, we observe no
systematic relationship between the magnitude of these changes and the price response to
SNAP issuance. We interpret these results to suggest that the effect of SNAP issuance on
food prices may also be limited due to frictions that would increase the costs to grocers of
making such adjustments (e.g., managerial inertia of the form explored in DellaVigna and
Gentzkow (2019)).
   Our paper contributes to a large literature on the incidence of redistributive transfers
(Duggan and Scott Morton 2006; Rothstein 2010; Meckel 2020; Handbury and Moshary
2020). Our setting highlights a potentially important but under-explored mechanism through


                                             3
which institutional design can shape the incidence of a redistributive program; namely, when
the benefit is provided in-kind through a private market and where the timing of issuance
generates regular and predictable variation in the nature of demand.2 Prior research in the
SNAP context suggests the timing of issuance may affect the purchasing power of the benefits;
using data from three grocery stores from one chain located in a single state, Hastings and
Washington (2010) find that food prices were approximately 3% higher in the first week of the
month (when the state issued its SNAP benefits) than at the end of the month (when SNAP
expenditures were relatively low). We build on this analysis by using a dataset with broad
national coverage to dramatically expand the number of stores and retail chains considered.
In so doing, we increase the likelihood that our results reflect the national grocery store
market, rather than the pricing decisions of a single retailer.
       Our second contribution is primarily methodological. A number of influential papers
study the effects of SNAP issuance on the timing of food purchases (Wilde and Ranney
2000; Shapiro 2005; Hastings and Washington 2010; Castner and Henke 2011; Todd 2015)
and other related outcomes (Seligman et al. 2014; Gennetian et al. 2016; Gregory and Smith
2019). Because the vast majority of such studies identify the effect of SNAP issuance from
intra-month patterns in behavior, they risk conflating the effects of SNAP issuance with
other regularly occurring monthly events that also affect behavior such as timing of rent
payments or other bills, paycheck receipt (Stephens Jr. 2006), or receipt of other monthly
benefit programs such as TANF or Social Security (Stephens Jr. 2003; Mastrobuoni and
Weinberg 2009).3 In contrast, by exploiting variation in issuance schedules within and across
   2
     For example, Social Security or TANF issuance policies are likely to affect the timing of the benefit use;
however, since these benefits are cash instead of in-kind, we may not expect to see a price response by a
specific retail industry. In contrast, changes to Medicare Part D may induce price responses by prescription
drug providers, but the irregular timing of these benefits is unlikely to affect the use of these benefits.
   3
     Some prior research investigating the cyclicality of SNAP benefit use, including Todd (2015), Smith
et al. (2016), Hamrick and Andrews (2016), and Castellari et al. (2017), partially address this concern by
including in their sample multiple states that vary in their SNAP issuance schedules. Bias may persist in
such designs, however, because in all states SNAP issuance dates tend to be concentrated in the earlier
part of the calendar month (Appendix Table A.1). An important exception is Shapiro (2005), which uses
states that vary in their issuance dates while also controlling for calendar day fixed effects. Finally, Beatty
et al. (2019) directly study interactions between SNAP issuance and two of the possible confounding factors,
paycheck receipt and the issuance of other social insurance benefits, by comparing SNAP cyclicality across


                                                      4
states, our identification strategy allows us to control for monthly patterns in individuals'
behavior that are unrelated to SNAP issuance.4 Similarly, this innovation allows us to more
confidently attribute retailer pricing responses to SNAP issuance rather than other "first of
the month" effects that have been the focus of prior work (Hastings and Washington 2010).5
    More generally, our paper also contributes to a growing literature on grocery pricing
strategies. For example, DellaVigna and Gentzkow (2019) document uniform pricing of prod-
ucts across grocery stores belonging to the same chain, despite wide variation in customer
demographics and degree of market competition. By contrast, other recent work finds that
retailer pricing responds to local demand conditions (Stroebel and Vavra 2019). Rather than
focusing on differences in price-setting across stores, our focus is on variation within a single
store over time, for which the constraints on price-setting may operate differently. Our find-
ing that retailers do not adjust prices in response to predictable variation in demand caused
SNAP issuance is similar to that of DellaVigna and Gentzkow (2019); however, an important
difference is that such price responses appear less likely to be optimal in our setting ­ even
absent managerial decision costs or other frictions. Our analysis is also related to the litera-
ture that studies grocer responses to seasonal demand fluctuations. For example, Chevalier,
Kashyap, and Rossi (2003) finds that grocers compete to capture seasonal demand shocks
by offering a high-demand product (e.g., turkey on Thanksgiving) below cost. Although this
finding might suggest that retailers would lower food prices following SNAP issuance to get
SNAP beneficiaries "in the door," we find no evidence supporting this hypothesis.
    Finally, we contribute to broader literature that studies the effects of SNAP policy on
prices. This literature investigates how the size and generosity of the SNAP program affects
food prices as well as the effects of other state and federal policy changes in program enroll-
individuals likely to be affected in different ways by these non-SNAP monthly income cycles.
   4
     Apart from the difference in outcomes we focus on (retailer-level sales and prices versus caloric intake
and individual expenditures), this aspect of our identification strategy builds on Shapiro (2005) by avoiding
potential biases from correlations between state issuance schedules and within-month purchasing patterns.
   5
     Notably, an earlier working paper version of Hastings and Washington (2010) includes an additional four
stores from the same retailer located in states that stagger benefit issuance across the first 10 days of the
month and finds that prices decline beginning in the third week of the month, consistent with the issuance
schedule driving the change in behavior (Hastings and Washington 2008).


                                                     5
ment rules (Jaravel 2018; Makioka 2018; Leung and Seo 2019). Whereas these papers study
the effect of SNAP on average food prices during some interval of time, our focus is on how
SNAP shapes short-term price fluctuations around that average over the course of a month.
Because both of these channels shape the food prices faced by SNAP recipients and hence
the real purchasing power of the SNAP benefits, both are relevant for understanding the
incidence of the program.
    The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the institutional background.
Section 3 describes our data and the construction of the variables used in the analysis.
Section 4 presents our results related to food sales. Section 5 presents our results related
to food prices. Section 6 explores potential explanations for the observed retailer pricing
response. Section 7 concludes.

2    Institutional Background

SNAP served roughly 40 million individuals in an average month of fiscal year 2018 with a
federal budget for that year of $65 billion (USDA-FNS 2019). SNAP purchases comprise a
sizable share of the retail grocery market. Wilde (2012) estimates that 10-15% of food sales
were purchased through SNAP and Wal-Mart estimates 4% of its total sales revenue comes
from the SNAP program (Clark 2020).
    Eligibility for SNAP varies by state but federal law requires participating households to
have gross monthly income below 130% of the Federal Poverty Line ($2,183 per month for
a family of four in 2020). A number of states also limit eligibility based on the value of a
household's assets (for details, see Center on Budget and Policy Priorities (2018)).
    SNAP benefits are issued via debit-like Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT) cards that
can be used to purchase most food products at participating grocery stores. Omitted foods
include "ready to eat" prepared foods, alcohol and tobacco products, and vitamins (U.S.
Department of Agriculture 2013). Once per month, SNAP benefits are issued to participating
households in a lump-sum payment. When a household's benefits are issued, their EBT card



                                              6
is automatically reloaded and any remaining balance is carried over from prior months. SNAP
customers proceed through the standard checkout line and tender their purchases with their
EBT card, as well as other payment methods if expenditures exceed their card balance or if
purchasing ineligible products.
        In some states, each participating household receives its benefits on the same day as every
other participating household. States that issue all SNAP benefits on a single day mostly do
so on the first of the month. In contrast, other states stagger benefit issuance over multiple
days ­ for example, some households may receive their monthly benefits on the first, some
on the third, and some on the fifth day of the month. Among states that stagger benefit
issuance, there exists considerable variation in the number of days on which benefits are
issued. For example, Wyoming staggers its benefit issuance across the first four days of the
month, whereas Missouri issues benefits between the first and 22nd days of the month.
        Appendix Table A.1 details issuance policies by state. At the start of our sample period
(in 2006), 14 states issued benefits during the first calendar week only, 2 states issued benefits
during the second calendar week only, 24 states issued benefits on days spanning the first
two calendar weeks, and 9 issued benefits on days spanning three or more calendar weeks.6
During the course of the years we study, 12 states expanded the number of days during
the month on which they issue benefits. In 2014, 17 states in our sample staggered issuance
across three or more calendar weeks.

3        Data

Our primary data source is the Kilts-Nielsen Retail Scanner data set, a large panel of weekly
retail transaction records. The data contain point-of-sale records at the store and product
level from the 48 contiguous states and the District of Columbia between 2006 and 2014.
We focus our analysis on data from the 11,508 grocery stores in the sample. The stores
included in our sample account for approximately 53% of all grocery store sales volume in
    6
    We use "calendar week" to refer to the specified week number in a given month. For example, the first
calendar week refers to days 1-7 of the month.



                                                   7
the geographic markets covered by Nielsen.7
       Each observation includes sales volume and volume-weighted average price for each store,
week, and Universal Product Code (UPC, or product). The weekly product price is averaged
across all units sold in a store. The price we observe incorporates retailer discounts and
specials, such as coupons or loyalty card price reductions, but does not reflect discounts
from manufacturer coupons (e.g., a manufacturer rebate).
       The majority of the weekly data that stores report to Nielsen corresponds to the week
that begins on a Sunday and ends the following Saturday.8 We transform the raw Nielsen
data to represent the first four calendar weeks of each month. To do so, for each calendar
week, we compute the average price of each product across the (one or two) Sunday-to-
Saturday weeks in which the observed store-week falls, weighting by the number of dates in
the calendar week that fall in each respective Sunday-to-Saturday week.9 We discard any
data associated with calendar days 29 to 31.
       We impose two additional product-level restrictions on our data. First, Nielsen does not
report a product price for store-weeks in which a product was not sold in a given store. To
limit the influence on our results of changes in the composition of products for which we
observe price, we restrict our analysis to store-month-products for which we observe price in
all four weeks.10 Second, because our focus is on SNAP-induced changes in demand, in our
main analyses we exclude products sold by grocery stores for which SNAP benefits cannot
be used (e.g., non-food items or prepared foods).11
   7
      In restricting our analysis to grocery stores, we exclude drug stores as well as "superstores" that retail
a more general line of goods, such as Target.
    8
      Although all stores report price and volume data for a seven-day period, this period need not end on a
Saturday; for example, stores may submit data that aligns with their promotion week instead. Rather than
including the exact dates used by each retailer, Nielsen assigns the data to the "best fit Saturday," that
is, the Saturday that most closely matches the promotion week. Because no information is provided on the
actual date range for the weekly data by retailer, we use the date provided.
    9
      To illustrate, consider a month in which the 1st day of the month is a Saturday. For the week that
includes the 1st of the month, Nielsen reports a price of $1, and for the following week (the 2nd through the
8th), Nielsen reports a price of $2. We would calculate the price of this product in the first calendar week of
                       1
the month as $1.00 7     + $2.00 6
                                 7  $1.86.
   10
      Thus, the composition of products for a given store may vary across months but not within a single
month.
   11
      We consider the effect of SNAP issuance on purchases and prices for SNAP-ineligible products in Section


                                                       8
          We supplement the Retail Scanner Data using a second Kilts-Nielsen data set, the Con-
sumer Panel. This data set consists of daily, product-level expenditure data for a panel of
40,000 to 60,000 households per year from 2004 to 2014. Participants use in-home optical
scanners to record their purchases. We incorporate data from the Consumer Panel in two
main ways. First, a number of our analyses rely on data about SNAP prevalence in the
neighborhood in which the store is located. Although the Retail Scanner Data include state
and county identifiers for each store, they do not include location information at a finer level
of geography. To estimate local SNAP prevalence, we use the following method, similar to
DellaVigna and Gentzkow (2019). For a given store, we calculate total expenditures per ZIP
code, for each ZIP code of residence of its shoppers in the Consumer Panel. We then assign
the store the average SNAP prevalence of its shoppers' ZIP codes, weighting by the number
of shopping trips to the store by customers in a given ZIP code. We restrict our analysis to
the 97% of stores in the Retail Scanner Data for which this method yields a ZIP code. We use
the store's ZIP code to link our data with ZIP code-level demographic data from the 5-year
American Community Survey spanning 2008-2012 (Census Bureau 2012). In particular, we
use the share of households that participate in SNAP from these data.
          Second, we construct an index to reflect the average price faced by SNAP customers in
a given store and week. To do so, we first create expenditure shares by product for SNAP-
eligible households from the Consumer Panel.12 We construct these expenditure shares for
each SNAP-eligible product by summing expenditures for the product across households
and dates during our sample period, and then scaling that sum by total expenditures on
all SNAP-eligible products over the same time period. By construction, these expenditure
shares are constant over time. We denote the expenditure share for product k as k . We
4.
     12
     We impute SNAP eligibility from household income and family size by applying the federal gross income
test. Household income is reported with a two-year lag in the Consumer Panel (i.e., households are asked
about their income two years before the panel year); therefore, we reassign households to their income
reported two years in the future. Doing so excludes households that do not participate for two consecutive
years after the year in which their shopping is reported. We cannot apply the SNAP asset test because the
Consumer Panel does not report data on household assets.



                                                    9
normalize the expenditure shares to sum to one in a given store-month, and denote the
normalized expenditure shares by ksmy for store s, calendar month m, and year y .
       Following Hastings and Washington (2010), we next use the expenditure shares to con-
struct an expenditure-weighted index of log prices for each store-week using the following
equation:


                                 log (Pswmy ) =        ksmy log(pkswmy )                                 (1)
                                                   k

where pkswmy denotes the unit price for product k sold in store s in calendar week w, calendar
month m, and year y .
       We similarly construct an index of expenditures on SNAP-eligible products in a given
store and week. The expenditure index is defined as the log of weighted expenditures in the
store-week, where the weights (i.e., the expenditure shares) are the same as those used to
construct the price index:


                                 log (Yswmy ) =        ksmy log(ykswmy )                                 (2)
                                                   k

where ykswmy denotes expenditures on product k in store s in calendar week w, calendar
month m, and year y . As with the price index, the expenditure index attaches higher weight
to products that are more likely to be purchased by SNAP-eligible households, and for which
we would therefore be more likely to observe SNAP-induced changes in demand or prices.13
       In many of our analyses, the main explanatory variable of interest is the share of SNAP
benefits a state issues in a given calendar week, Issuanceswmy .14 To illustrate, if store s is
located in a state that distributes all benefits on the 1st of the month, Issuances1my = 1
  13
      As robustness checks, we consider unweighted analyses and analyses that focus on an alternative subset
of products.
   14
      We allow issuance policy to vary at the county-level when applicable and subject to data availability.
Specifically, Pennsylvania and Ohio allow issuance policy to vary at the county-level and New York City
follows a different issuance schedule than the rest of New York; however, in the case of Ohio, we do not have
data on the 15% of counties that do not stagger, so we assume that all counties in the state follow the same
schedule.



                                                       10
and Issuanceswmy = 0 for w  {2, 3, 4}. Alternatively, if the state distributes its benefits
                                                                                       7
evenly from the 1st through the 15th of the month, Issuanceswmy =                     15
                                                                                           for w  {1, 2},
                     1
Issuanceswmy =       15
                          for w = 3, and Issuanceswmy = 0 for w = 4.15

4         SNAP Issuance and Food Expenditure Cyclicality

Our goal in this section is to isolate the causal effect of SNAP issuance on intra-month
patterns in grocery expenditures. Columns 1-3 of Table 1 estimate variants of the following
model:


                   log Yswmy =  Issuanceswmy + smy + wmy +  Xsy w + swmy                                (3)

where smy denotes store-month-year fixed effects, wmy denotes year-month-week fixed ef-
fects, w denotes calendar week fixed effects, and Xswmy is a vector of time-varying charac-
teristics of the state in which store s is located. As described above, Issuanceswmy , denotes
the share of SNAP benefits issued in calendar week w of month m of year y in the state in
which store s is located. Hence,  represents the percent increase in expenditures for weeks
in which 100 percent of SNAP benefits are issued relative to weeks in which no benefits are
issued. Each observation is weighted at the store-level by average annual food sales.
         As a benchmark, Column 1 of Table 1 reports the estimated effect of SNAP issuance
from a regression that controls only for store-month-year fixed effects. The effect of SNAP
issuance is identified from comparing expenditures across weeks in a given store, based on
differences in the share of SNAP benefits issued in the specified weeks. Note that because
this specification includes state-month-year fixed effects, it isolates within-month variation
in food expenditures from state changes to SNAP policy that affect benefit generosity or
    15
     Twelve states in our sample assign a case's issuance date based on the first letter of their last name,
which may result in an uneven distribution across benefit issuance days, biasing our measure Issuanceswmy .
We do not have data on the distribution of last names by state, however, in robustness checks below, we
test the sensitivity of our results to exclusion of states with this issuance assignment method as well as a
re-weighting of Issuanceswmy by nationwide name distributions. Relatedly, Illinois' policy assigns issuance
date based on a combination of the case name and the type of case. We obtain administrative data from
Illinois on the number of cases issued benefits by day and adjust our measure of Issuanceswmy to match
this distribution.


                                                    11
other features of program administration of the type studied in Ganong and Liebman (2018)
and Jaravel (2018). The results imply that expenditures are 5.1% higher in weeks in which
all benefits are issued compared to weeks in which no benefits are issued.
   As with much of the prior literature, the effect reported in Column 1 risks conflating the
effect of SNAP issuance with other sources of intra-month cyclicality in consumption, such as
the timing of paychecks, utility bills, or the issuance of other benefits. To address this concern,
Column 2 replicates Column 1 but additionally controls for year-month-week fixed effects.
In doing so, it absorbs within-month cyclicality that is unrelated to SNAP issuance. Figure
1 (Panel A) graphically presents the variation underlying this specification; after partialling
out the store-month-year and year-month-week fixed effects, the relationship between SNAP
issuance and log expenditures appears fairly linear and remains upward-sloping. Indeed the
estimated effect reported in Column 2 is quite similar to that in Column 1 (expenditures are
5.6% higher in weeks in which all benefits are issued relative to weeks in which no benefits are
issued), suggesting that non-SNAP sources of within-month cyclicality are unlikely to have
driven the findings of prior analyses of SNAP-induced consumption that failed to account
for such factors.
   The specification in Column 2 identifies the effect of SNAP issuance from cross-sectional
variation across states in issuance policies, and, to a lesser extent, by changes in a state's
issuance policy over time. However, it is possible that either of these sources of variation
could be correlated with other factors that affect expenditure cyclicality. For example, larger
states might tend to exhibit more within-month cyclicality (for reasons unrelated to SNAP)
and also to stagger benefit issuance over a larger number of days. To address some of these
possibilities, Column 3 (our preferred specification, matching equation (3)) controls for the
calendar week interacted with state population, gross domestic product, and unemployment
rate. Again, the results are virtually unchanged by these additions.
   Because our expenditure data is at the retailer level, it reflects the shopping behavior of
both SNAP recipients as well as other shoppers. Hence, to the extent our results are driven


                                                12
by SNAP-induced cyclicality, we would expect them to be more pronounced in stores that
are located in neighborhoods with high SNAP prevalence. Figure 2 explores this possibility
by displaying the estimated effect of SNAP issuance by local SNAP prevalence, using the
specification reported in Column 3 of Table 1. In ZIP codes in which fewer than 5% of
households participate in SNAP, there is a small amount of cyclicality: expenditures are 1.8%
higher in weeks in which 100 percent of SNAP benefits are issued relative to weeks with no
issuance. By comparison, this estimate grows monotonically with local SNAP prevalence,
increasing to 49% for stores located in ZIP codes in which over 35% of households receive
SNAP.16
       Along similar lines, Panel B of Table 1 restricts the analysis to stores in ZIP codes for
which we estimate that greater than 20% of the population receives SNAP.17 As suggested by
Figure 2, the estimated effects of SNAP issuance for such high-SNAP stores are substantially
higher than those of the overall sample. In our preferred specification, expenditures in high-
SNAP stores are 19.3% higher in weeks in which all benefits are issued relative to weeks in
which no benefits are issued.
       In Columns 2 and 3, identification of the effect of the SNAP issuance schedule comes
from variation across states in issuance policy as well as within-state issuance policy changes
over time. However, cross-sectional policy variation between stores may be correlated with
other factors that shape a store's cyclicality, unrelated to SNAP issuance. To address this
possibility, we next turn from specifications that rely on cross-sectional variation across states
in issuance policies to specifications that exclusively exploit within-state changes in policy
over time. In particular, Columns 4 and 5 of Table 1 estimate variants of the following model:


               log Yswmy =  Issuanceswmy + smy + wmy +  Xsy w + sw + swmy                               (4)
  16
     Appendix Figure A.1 shows a similar relationship between SNAP-induced cyclicality and SNAP preva-
lence at the level of the grocery chain.
  17
     In principle, SNAP participation at a given store may differ from the general population in a neighbor-
hood. However, using the Consumer Panel, we estimate that the share of customers in the stores in this
"high-SNAP" sample of neighborhoods that are SNAP-eligible is also approximately 20%.



                                                    13
where sw denotes store by calendar week fixed effects. Including these fixed effects im-
plements a difference-in-differences analysis, in which identification comes from within-state
policy changes over time. A benefit of this approach is that it avoids the identification threats
described above; a downside is that with only 12 policy changes during our sample period
(largely concentrated during the final three years), the effect it identifies is not nationally
representative and will be less precisely estimated.
       The difference-in-differences analysis requires that, absent the policy changes, intra-
month cyclicality would have evolved similarly in states that did and did not modify their
benefit issuance schedules. This assumption may be violated, for example, if state-level trends
in expenditure cyclicality prompt lawmakers to adjust the issuance schedules to relieve con-
gestion at grocery stores.18 To assess the plausibility of this parallel trends assumption,
Figure 3 presents an event-study analysis of the effect of the policy changes on the cycli-
cality of within-month consumption, which we measure as the share of monthly purchases
made in the first two weeks.19 The figure suggests the reforms reduced intra-month cyclical-
ity in expenditures, especially within the high-SNAP stores most affected by the reforms.
In contrast, the figure provides no evidence of differential trends in cyclicality in the period
leading up to the reforms, consistent with the parallel trends assumption underlying the
difference-in-differences analysis.
       Column 4 of Table 1 presents results from a difference-in-differences analysis, adding store
by calendar week fixed effects to the specification reported in Column 2. The point estimate
increases slightly (to 6.4%) relative to the specifications identified from cross-sectional vari-
ation in state policy, and the standard error of the estimate doubles in size.20 Finally, to
  18
     For example, both the USDA and grocery store lobbying groups have recommended that states stagger
SNAP issuance for this reason (Cloud 2012).
  19
     Ten out of the 12 policy changes in our data expand the share of benefits issued in weeks 3 and 4 relative
to weeks 1 and 2. The two exceptions are Oklahoma and Virginia, which we exclude from this analysis.
  20
     A potential concern with this analysis is that, because states reform their SNAP issuance schedules
at different times, the parallel trends assumption may be violated when the effects of the SNAP issuance
reforms vary over time (Goodman-Bacon 2018). To investigate the robustness of our analysis to this issue,
Appendix Table A.2 separately estimates the effect of SNAP issuance for each state policy reform, using as
controls only those states that did not revise their issuance schedule during our sample period. Although
there is substantial variation in the magnitude of the individual estimates for each state, the overall story is


                                                      14
address the possibility that the effects of the policy changes may be confounded by other
state-level trends that would affect within-month expenditure cyclicality, Column 5 adds
controls for the time-varying state characteristics that were included in Column 3. The re-
sults are similar to those in Column 4. Columns 4 and 5 in Panel B again show much larger
effects when the analysis is restricted to the sub-sample of high-SNAP stores.
    We next consider a range of robustness checks on the main cross-sectional and difference-
in-differences results (Columns 3 and 5 of Table 1). Columns 1 and 2 of Appendix Table
A.3 present versions of these analyses that are not weighted by store volume. Similarly,
Columns 3 and 4 present results for total food expenditures, rather than our main outcome
measure, which aggregates expenditures using weights based on the purchases of SNAP-
eligible shoppers. These alternative specifications yield qualitatively similar results to our
main analysis.
    We estimate two robustness checks motivated by potential measurement error in our
main explanatory variable reflecting the timing of SNAP issuance. Although most states
issue benefits uniformly across issuance days (e.g., based on the last digit of the recipient's
Social Security Number or case number), 10 states allocate benefit issuance across days
based on first letter of the recipient's last name. To account for non-uniform issuance of
benefits across recipients in such states, Columns 5 and 6 of Appendix Table A.3 construct
the issuance share variable by combining the issuance schedule for such states along with the
national distribution of last names from the 2010 Census.21 As an alternative check, Columns
7 and 8 exclude these states along with three others that issue benefits non-uniformly across
issuance days.22 In both cases, the results are similar to those we obtain when using our full
sample or main measure of SNAP issuance share.
    Thus far we have parameterized variation in issuance policy through the share of benefits
consistent with the results of our main specification; the average of the state-specific estimates (weighted by
the volume of sales in the stores in each state) is 4.4% for all stores and 12.8% for high-SNAP stores.
  21
     This re-weighting is not possible for two states, Maryland and Missouri, which employ more elaborate
distribution schedules.
  22
     The additional excluded states are Louisiana, Ohio, and South Carolina.



                                                      15
issued in a given calendar week. Appendix Table A.4 explores within-month cyclicality within
broader categories of state issuance policy. We estimate separate regressions for states with
four different SNAP issuance policies: (1) all benefits issued during the first week of the
month; (2) all benefits issued during the second week of the month; (3) all benefits issued
during the first and second weeks of the month; and (4) benefits issued during the first three
or more weeks of the month. Each of these regressions take the form:

                                                4
                             log Yswmy =  +          w + smy + swmy                             (5)
                                               w=2

       The estimated w terms measures the change in food expenditure within a store between
the first week of the calendar month (the omitted category) and the wth week of the calendar
month.23 The results suggest that within-month expenditure patterns closely track SNAP
issuance schedules; for example, in high-SNAP stores located in states that issue all benefits
in week 1, food expenditures in that week are between 15 and 21 percent higher than in
other weeks of the month. In contrast, we observe little evidence of cyclicality in states that
spread issuance across three or four weeks.
       Finally, we have so far focused on the effect of SNAP issuance on the timing of SNAP-
eligible purchases. It is also possible that SNAP issuance affects expenditures on food or non-
food products that cannot be paid for with SNAP benefits. For example, if benefit issuance
induces more SNAP-enrolled customers to shop in a given week, those customers may also
purchase more SNAP-ineligible products during those weeks while at the grocery store. To
explore this possibility, Appendix Table A.5 investigates the effect of SNAP issuance on non-
food grocery items and alcohol purchases. We observe no evidence that SNAP issuance affects
the timing of alcohol purchases and some evidence for a small effect on non-food grocery
items in high-SNAP stores, although the latter is not consistent across specifications.
  23
    To the extent that the timing of SNAP issuance affects purchases in weeks other than the week of
issuance, these effects may be reflected in the w terms.




                                                16
5         SNAP Issuance and Retail Prices

The previous section provides evidence that SNAP issuance causes retailers to face pre-
dictable monthly fluctuations in customer shopping behavior, especially in states with com-
pressed benefit issuance schedules and in locations where SNAP participation is high. In
response to these fluctuations in demand, retailers may strategically vary prices over the
course of the month to maximize profits. Alternatively, to the extent retailer prices do ex-
hibit SNAP-induced pricing cyclicality, it could be that this cyclicality is what induces the
observed fluctuations in consumer demand. This section empirically investigates these pos-
sibilities by studying the effect of SNAP issuance on retailer prices.
         Using the price index described in Equation (1), we estimate a similar set of specifications
as those reported in Table 1 to estimate the effect of SNAP issuance on retail prices. Column
1 of Table 2 estimates the relationship between SNAP issuance and log prices, controlling
for store-month-year fixed effects. The result implies that prices are approximately 0.13%
lower in weeks in which all benefits are issued compared to weeks in which no benefits are
issued. However, adding year-month-week fixed effects (Column 2) to this analysis causes
the point estimate to switch signs and decline in magnitude to 0.04%, suggesting that the
difference in prices may have been due to within-month fluctuations unrelated to SNAP
issuance. We present visual evidence for this result in Figure 4. Adding controls for state
characteristics (Column 3, our preferred specification) yields similar evidence against within-
month price fluctuations. The estimated 95% confidence interval for the effect of SNAP
issuance excludes price changes greater in magnitude than 0.1%. Finally, the difference-in-
differences analyses, reported in Column 4 and 5, yield slightly larger, but still near-zero and
statistically insignificant, estimates of the effect of SNAP issuance on retailer prices.24 By
comparison, Hastings and Washington (2010) estimate that prices increase by between 2.5%
    24
    Appendix Figure A.2 replicates the event-study analysis in Figure 3 for the effect of the SNAP issuance
policy changes on prices, and provides no evidence of differential pre-trends based on whether a state changed
policies. In addition, Appendix Table A.6 replicates the state-specific analyses contained in Appendix Table
A.2 for prices instead of expenditures; the average of the state specific estimates (weighted by the volume of
sales in the stores in each state) is -0.18% for all stores and 0.02% for high-SNAP stores.


                                                     17
and 3.1% in the first week of the month, depending on their specification; these effects are
approximately 20 times larger than our largest estimated effect across specifications.25
    We next investigate whether the observed null effects on prices mask SNAP-induced price
fluctuations in stores located in high-SNAP neighborhoods. Panel B of Table 2 replicates the
prior analysis for stores located in ZIP codes in which at least 20% of residents participate in
SNAP. The analyses yield estimated effects of SNAP issuance on prices that are slightly larger
than those reported in Panel A, but still near-zero and not statistically significant. The 95%
confidence interval excludes price effects greater in magnitude than 0.2%. Figure 5 further
investigates the relationship between SNAP-induced price fluctuations and neighborhood
SNAP prevalence. As with Table 2, the figure reveals a slightly larger price response in
higher-SNAP stores, although, even in such stores, the magnitude of the observed effects are
small and statistically indistinguishable from zero.26
    A different concern is that our price index - which creates one weekly price per store
weighted by purchases of SNAP-eligible households - may mask differences in price response
by product. For example, retailers may only strategically price products that are in high de-
mand among SNAP recipients or products that see the highest SNAP-induced intra-month
cyclicality in demand. To shed light on this possibility, we replicate our results separately
for the top 10 product groups (e.g., "cheese," "bread") by expenditure share among SNAP-
eligible customers during our sample period.27 Whereas we observe that SNAP-induced cycli-
   25
      Notably, Hastings and Washington (2010) restricted their focus to stores with particularly high shares of
SNAP shoppers (14 to 45 percent of sales), meaning that our overall results are not directly comparable to
theirs. As shown in Figure 5 and Panel B of Table 2, however, we find no evidence for price cyclicality even in
stores for which we estimate a high share of SNAP shoppers. A potential limitation of our analysis relative to
Hastings and Washington (2010) is that we do not directly observe individual-level SNAP participation, so
it is possible that these neighborhood-based estimates overstate the true SNAP share in a store's customer
base. That being said, the magnitude of SNAP-induced sales cyclicality we estimate is comparable to that
observed in Hastings and Washington (2010), suggesting that measurement error in SNAP participation
is not driving the difference between the two sets of results. In addition, as described above, we estimate
that approximately 20% of customers in the stores located in our high-SNAP neighborhoods are SNAP
participants, which, assuming a roughly 80% household take-up rate during the years of our sample period
(Leftin, Eslami, and Strayer 2011; Gray and Cunnyngham 2016), suggests that these stores tend to face
SNAP customer bases within the range of stores studied by Hastings and Washington (2010).
   26
      In contrast, Appendix Figure A.3 shows a negative relationship between SNAP-induced price cyclicality
and SNAP prevalence at the the grocery chain level, although here too the result is not statistically significant.
   27
      Together, these product groups cover 47% of SNAP-eligible household food spending.


                                                       18
cality in sales varies greatly across product groups (Appendix Table A.7), the estimated price
effects are close to zero and, for the most part, not statistically significant (Appendix Table
A.8). Alternatively, retailers might limit their price responses to products that are the most
disproportionately purchased by SNAP recipients compared to non-recipients. To investigate
this possibility, Appendix Table A.9 restricts our analysis to the 10 product modules with the
highest estimated ratio of expenditures by SNAP-eligible customers relative to non-eligible
customers. Here too, the results are similar as with our overall product sample.
       We next consider a range of robustness checks, similar to those presented in the prior
section. In particular, Appendix Table A.10 shows the results are not sensitive to unweighted
analyses (Columns 1 and 2), constructing the SNAP issuance variable to account for state
issuance schedules based on last names (Columns 3 and 4), or excluding states that issue
benefits non-uniformly across issuance dates (Columns 5 and 6).
       In addition, Appendix Table A.11 investigates the possibility that the lack of pricing
results are driven by the absence of price data for products not purchased during a store-
week.28 To assess the importance of this feature of our data, we replicate our expenditure and
price analyses for the subset of stores for which at least 80% (Columns 1-4) and at least 90%
(Columns 5-8) of expenditures are preserved, respectively. Although restricting the sample
in this way yields slightly larger expenditure cyclicality, we observe no consistent evidence
that this restriction is attenuating our price results.
       Along similar lines, we next examine the role that coupon usage could play in driving our
pricing results. Recall that the prices we observe in our retailer data are net of certain coupons
and loyalty discounts. Hence, if SNAP customers are more likely to shop in weeks that SNAP
benefits are issued, and if SNAP customers are also more likely to apply such coupons or
discounts to their purchases, the prices we observe may vary based on SNAP issuance even
  28
    Recall that we exclude products in store-months for which the product was not purchased in one or more
weeks (approximately 17% of total food expenditures during our sample period). This sample restriction
might distort our results if stores increase prices of certain products during SNAP issuance weeks, and those
higher prices prevent customers from purchasing those products ­ rendering the price increases unobservable
to us.



                                                     19
when retailers do not change them. Or, conversely, this phenomenon could cause us to observe
no change in prices following benefit issuance even if stores tend to increase prices in such
weeks. To investigate these possibilities, Appendix Table A.12 explores the effect of SNAP
issuance on the use of coupons (Columns 1 and 2) and the purchase of discounted items
(Columns 3 and 4) using the Consumer Panel data set. We find no evidence that the use of
coupons or receipt of product discounts vary with the SNAP issuance schedule.
    Finally, Appendix Table A.13 considers the effect of SNAP issuance on the prices of the
two categories of non-SNAP eligible grocery store products considered in the prior section:
non-food grocery items and alcohol. We observe small but statistically significant effects
of issuance on non-food grocery items, although the effects disappear for stores located in
high-SNAP neighborhoods. We observe no consistent evidence of SNAP issuance affecting
alcohol prices.

6    Understanding the Lack of Price Response to SNAP Issuance

The results thus far provide evidence that consumers substantially increase food expenditures
in weeks that SNAP benefits are issued but that retailers do not adjust food prices in those
weeks by more than a very modest degree (if at all). In this section, we conduct several
exploratory analyses to better understand these patterns.
    As an initial step, we focus on one input into retailers' price setting decisions ­ within-
month variation in the aggregate price elasticity of demand that retailers face. SNAP issuance
may affect these elasticities through several channels. For example, the type of customers
who shop following SNAP issuance may have higher or lower elasticities than customers who
shop during other weeks in the month. In addition, households may exhibit different price
sensitivities when spending SNAP benefits than when using cash either because of mental
accounting (Hastings and Shapiro 2018) or a fixed cost of traveling to a store.
    To estimate how SNAP issuance affects demand price elasticities, we estimate the follow-
ing product-level econometric model:



                                              20
  log qkswmy =  Issuanceswmy log Pkswmy +  Issuanceswmy + µ log Pkswmy

                                                           + ksmy + kwmy +  Xsy kw + kswmy (6)


       where log qkswmy denotes the log quantity of product k purchased in store s in week w
in month m of year y , logPkswmy denotes the log price of that product in the corresponding
store-week, ksmy denotes product-store-month fixed effects, kwmy denotes product-week
fixed effects, Xsy denotes year-level characteristics of the state in which the store is located,
and kw denotes product by calendar week fixed effects. We restrict this product-level analysis
to the top 100 food products by expenditure share among SNAP-eligible shoppers.29 The
main parameter of interest in this model is  , which measures the change in price elasticity
for a good between a week in which 100% of SNAP benefits are issued and a week in which no
benefits are issued. As in the prior sections, the kwmy term captures within-month variation
in a product's elasticity that is due to factors other than SNAP issuance. We also consider
variants of equation (6) that implement a difference-in-differences specification by including
product by store by calendar week fixed effects, ksw .
       An important concern with the analysis described in the prior paragraph is that a regres-
sion of quantity on price may fail to recover the true elasticity estimates if there are issues of
reverse causality (i.e., within-month demand shocks could induce stores to adjust prices). To
address this possibility, we follow Hausman (1996) as adapted in DellaVigna and Gentzkow
(2019) and instrument for the price of a product in a store using the price of the product at
  29
    More specifically, these products are those estimated from the Consumer Panel to have the highest
expenditure share among SNAP-eligible customers among all food products that were purchased in at least
80% of the store-weeks in our data. The 80% threshold corresponds to the availability restriction imposed
by DellaVigna and Gentzkow (2019) to select the products included in their analysis. Appendix Table A.14
shows the estimated effects of SNAP issuance on quantity purchased and prices are similar for this subset of
products and our main sample. In addition, to ensure that missing price data is not driving our findings for
this sample, Appendix Table A.15 imputes prices for products that are missing in a given store-week with
the average observed price of the product among stores belonging to the same chain within the same state
in the specified week; the results are qualitatively similar to our main specification, which excludes products
that are missing in at least one week in a given store-month.


                                                      21
stores within the same chain but located in other regions (technically, "Designated Market
Areas" or DMA). Under the assumption that local demand shocks for a store do not affect
chain-level pricing decisions (conditional on our other controls), this analysis identifies the
causal effect of a product's price on the quantity that consumers demand. As in DellaVigna
and Gentzkow (2019), we estimate the first-stage effect of the instrument on prices to be
close to 1 (see Appendix Table A.16).
   Columns 1 and 2 of Table 3 present the estimated effect of SNAP issuance on price
elasticity ( ), as well as the estimated effects of prices (µ) and SNAP issuance ( ) on the
quantity of a product purchased, from the OLS regression described in equation (6). Our
results suggest that customers are slightly more price-elastic in weeks that SNAP benefits
are issued, especially in high-SNAP stores. For example, in stores located in high-SNAP
neighborhoods, our difference-in-differences specification yields an estimated coefficient of -
0.03 for the price by issuance share interaction, suggesting that aggregate consumer demand
becomes approximately 1.6% more elastic in weeks in which all SNAP benefits are issued
compared to weeks in which no benefits are issued. The IV specification (Columns 3 and 4)
yield similar but slightly smaller point estimates ­ especially for the difference-in-differences
specification, for which the estimated elasticity change is only 0.6% for the high-SNAP stores
and is not statistically significant.
   The small observed change in aggregate demand elasticities associated with SNAP is-
suance suggests that large price changes in response to SNAP issuance may not be profit-
maximizing. To link these estimated elasticities to pricing responses, Appendix A draws on
a simple model of grocer pricing, in which grocery stores have local market power due to
the fact that customers are constrained by travel costs and perishable foods (as in Ellickson,
Houghton, and Timmins (2013) and Ellickson (2006)). Using this model, we derive the op-
timal price response of grocery stores as a function of changes in consumer price elasticities
over the course of the month. Table 3 includes these predicted price responses under the
elasticity estimates for the corresponding specification and sample. The results suggest that


                                               22
stores should slightly reduce food prices in weeks that SNAP benefits are issued. Focusing on
the IV specification, our estimates suggest that stores should reduce prices between 0.1 and
0.8 percent in weeks in which all benefits are issued relative to weeks in which no benefits
are issued.
       The elasticity results in conjunction with this simple model suggest retailers should mod-
estly reduce food prices in response to SNAP issuance. However, even these modest reduc-
tions are outside our 95% confidence interval for the effect of SNAP issuance on prices ­ an
estimated effect that is near-zero and very slightly positive.30
       One factor missing from our analysis that could potentially explain this discrepancy is
the possibility that SNAP issuance affects grocery stores' marginal costs. For example, stores
may increase staffing in weeks that SNAP benefits are issued to handle the increased flow
of customer traffic (e.g., Cloud 2012). To the extent SNAP issuance raises stores' marginal
costs in this way, it may offset the incentive to lower prices from SNAP-induced changes in
consumer elasticities.31
       As noted above, a potential reason why stores do not adjust prices in response to SNAP
issuance is that the benefits of doing so may be quite small, given the small predicted price
changes implied by our elasticity estimates. A complementary explanation for the lack of
pricing response could be the adjustment or managerial decision costs that a store would
incur by varying its prices in response to SNAP issuance cycles (Hanna, Mullainathan, and
Schwartzstein 2014; Bloom et al. 2013). For example, DellaVigna and Gentzkow (2019) find
that such costs contribute to uniform pricing decisions across grocery stores belonging to the
same chain. The SNAP-induced elasticity changes over the course of a month are smaller
than the elasticity differences across stores documented by DellaVigna and Gentzkow (2019);
  30
      Taking the prescriptions of this stylized model as optimal would suggest that, by failing to reduce prices
in response to SNAP issuance, retailers are forgoing profits, SNAP recipients are facing higher food prices
during their shopping trips, and non-recipients who disproportionately shop in weeks that benefits are not
issued are benefiting from the (relatively) lower food prices.
   31
      In principle, SNAP-induced variation in marginal costs could create a net incentive for firms to raise
prices in response to SNAP issuance, notwithstanding the observed effects on customer elasticities. Our
near-zero price effects thus provide some evidence against this possibility as well.



                                                      23
as such, it would not be surprising that similar factors limit grocery store price adjustments
based on SNAP issuance cycles.
   To assess the contribution of factors other than small elasticity changes (such as manage-
rial inertia) in explaining stores' lack of price responses, Appendix Figure A.4 disaggregates
our results to explore the relationship between SNAP-induced variation in elasticities and
prices. In particular, there may be larger changes in customer demand elasticity within sub-
sets of the data ­ e.g., certain products ­ along with correspondingly larger fluctuations in
price. To investigate this possibility, Appendix Figure A.4 plots the estimated effects of SNAP
issuance, by product, on prices and elasticities. If small changes in elasticities were the only
factor responsible for the lack of observed price effects, we would expect to observe larger
price changes for those products experiencing larger changes in elasticities. However, the
slope of the best linear-fit is near zero, providing no evidence for such a pattern. Thus, while
small elasticities and associated small incentives to vary prices could certainly contribute to
lack of observed price, this analysis provides suggestive evidence that other factors may be
at play as well.
   Finally, pricing strategies that require managers to set weekly prices differently across
stores may be costlier to implement than pricing strategies that vary prices by week but that
are uniform within a week across stores within a given chain. To explore the role played by
this specific type of managerial cost in limiting store pricing responses, we focus on a subset of
stores in which adjusting to SNAP issuance would not require different pricing policies across
stores within a chain. In particular, Appendix Figure A.5 replicates Appendix Figure A.4,
limiting the analysis to chains for which all stores are located entirely within a single state
or entirely within a set of states that have uniform SNAP issuance schedules. Among stores
located in high-SNAP neighborhoods, the figure suggests a small but positive relationship
between SNAP-induced elasticity and pricing changes, closer to the predictions of the simple
model. The results therefore provide suggestive evidence that managerial inertia may help
explain why stores do not set prices based on intra-month cycles in SNAP issuance.


                                               24
7    Conclusion

In this paper we study intra-month patterns in customer demand and retail pricing driven
by SNAP issuance. We find that SNAP issuance causes large increases in food expenditures
but little to no change in retail food prices. We investigate several potential explanations
for the lack of price response. For example, notwithstanding the large effects on demand
induced by SNAP issuance, we observe small effects of issuance on the price elasticity of
demand facing retailers, which may limit their incentives to adjust prices in response to the
SNAP issuance schedule. Although we do not provide direct evidence for them, our results
are also consistent with factors such as changing marginal labor supply costs or managerial
inertia contributing to the lack of observed price response.
    Our results have implications for the likely effect of policy reforms that alter the SNAP
issuance schedule. For example, as we have discussed, a number of states have staggered
their SNAP issuance schedules to spread out the dates on which different individuals receive
their monthly allotment of benefits. Similarly, some have proposed splitting the issuance of
SNAP benefits to a given individual into multiple payment dates within a single month (e.g.,
Wilde and Ranney 2000; Hastings and Washington 2010; Dorfman et al. 2019).
    First, our findings related to food expenditure cyclicality shed light on how such reforms
are likely to affect customers shopping behavior. In particular, because we find that food
expenditure cyclicality is due to SNAP issuance ­ rather than some other monthly pattern ­
our results suggest that state reforms to either split or stagger issuance would have the effect
of reducing fluctuations in the aggregate food demand faced by retailers. Consequently, by
smoothing food demand across the month, our findings support the notion that reforms to
SNAP issuance schedules can reduce grocery costs associated with surges in customer traffic,
such as long lines or difficulty stocking shelves or staffing stores.
    In addition, because we find that these reforms would shape the food demand cyclicality
faced by retailers, our results suggest that they may also shape the incidence of SNAP ben-
efits. That is, to the extent retailers face predictable fluctuations in the nature of consumer

                                               25
food demand, it may, in principle, be profit-maximizing for them to adjust food prices over
the course of the month. If retailers were to adjust food prices during the weeks that SNAP
recipients purchase food, such behavior may increase or decrease the purchasing power of
the benefits. Hence, assessing the welfare effect of reforms to SNAP issuance schedules re-
quires understanding the link between issuance and retailer pricing decisions. Because we
find evidence that retailers do not adjust food prices in this way, our results suggest that
concerns relating to the incidence of benefits should not play a large role in state decisions
about whether to adjust their issuance schedules.




                                             26
References
Beatty, Timothy KM, Marianne P Bitler, Xinzhe Huang Cheng, and Cynthia
   Van der Werf. 2019. "SNAP and paycheck cycles." Southern Economic Journal 86
   (1): 18­48.
Bloom, Nicholas, Benn Eifert, Aprajit Mahajan, David McKenzie, and John
   Roberts. 2013. "Does management matter? Evidence from India." The Quarterly Jour-
   nal of Economics 128 (1): 1­51.
Castellari, Elena, Chad Cotti, John Gordanier, and Orgul Ozturk. 2017. "Does
   the Timing of Food Stamp Distribution Matter? A Panel-Data Analysis of Monthly
   Purchasing Patterns of US Households." Health economics 26 (11): 1380­1393.
Castner, Laura, and Juliette Henke. 2011. Benefit Redemption Patterns in the Supple-
   mental Nutrition Assistance Program. Technical report. USDA-FNS Report.
Census Bureau. 2012. Poverty Status in the Past 12 Months (S1701), 2008-2012 American
   Community Survey 5 Year Estimates. http://factfinder.census.gov, accessed on
   1/1/2019. U.S. Census Bureau.
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. 2018. A Quick Guide to SNAP Eligibility and
   Benefits. https://www.cbpp.org/research/food- assistance/a- quick- guide-
   to-snap-eligibility-and-benefits, accessed on 4/10/2019. Center on Budget and
   Policy Priorities.
Chevalier, Judith A., Anil K. Kashyap, and Peter E. Rossi. 2003. "Why Don't Prices
   Rise During Periods of Peak Demand? Evidence from Scanner Data." The American
   Economic Review 93 (1): 15.
Clark, Krissy. 2020. "The Secret Life of a Food Stamp Might Become a Little Less Secret."
    Slate.
Cloud, Kristen. 2012. "SNAP Benefit Issuance Changes in October, Doubles Number of
   Distribution Days." The Shelby Report.
DellaVigna, Stefano, and Matthew Gentzkow. 2019. "Uniform Pricing in U.S. Retail
    Chains." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 134, no. 4 (June): 2011­2084.
Dorfman, Jeffrey H, Christian Gregory, Zhongyuan Liu, and Ran Huo. 2019. "Re-
   examining the SNAP benefit cycle allowing for heterogeneity." Applied Economic Per-
   spectives and Policy 41 (3): 404­433.
Duggan, Mark, and Fiona M. Scott Morton. 2006. "The Distortionary Effects of Gov-
   ernment Procurement: Evidence from Medicaid Prescription Drug Purchasing." The
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (1): 1­30.

                                           27
Ellickson, Paul B. 2006. "Quality Competition in Retailing: A Structural Analysis." In-
     ternational Journal of Industrial Organization 24, no. 3 (May): 521­40.
Ellickson, Paul B., Stephanie Houghton, and Christopher Timmins. 2013. "Esti-
     mating Network Economies in Retail Chains: a Revealed Preference Approach." The
     RAND Journal of Economics 44, no. 2 (June): 169­93.
Ganong, Peter, and Jeffrey B Liebman. 2018. "The decline, rebound, and further rise
   in SNAP enrollment: Disentangling business cycle fluctuations and policy changes."
   American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 10 (4): 153­76.
Gennetian, Lisa A, Roopa Seshadri, Nathan D Hess, Aaron N Winn, and Robert
   M Goerge. 2016. "Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) benefit cycles
   and student disciplinary infractions." Social Service Review 90 (3): 403­433.
Goodman-Bacon, Andrew. 2018. Difference-in-differences with variation in treatment
   timing. Technical report. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gray, Kelsey Farson, and Karen Cunnyngham. 2016. Trends in Supplemental Nu-
   trition Assistance Program Participation Rates: Fiscal Year 2010 to Fiscal Year 2015.
   Technical report. Mathematica Policy Research.
Gregory, Christian A, and Travis A Smith. 2019. "Salience, food security, and SNAP
   receipt." Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 38 (1): 124­154.
Hamrick, Karen S, and Margaret Andrews. 2016. "SNAP participants eating patterns
   over the benefit month: a time use perspective." PloS one 11 (7): e0158422.
Handbury, Jessie, and Sarah Moshary. 2020. School Food Policy Affects Everyone:
   Retail Responses to the National School Lunch Program. Technical report. Working
   Paper.
Hanna, Rema, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Joshua Schwartzstein. 2014. "Learning
   through noticing: Theory and evidence from a field experiment." The Quarterly Journal
   of Economics 129 (3): 1311­1353.
Hastings, Justine, and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2018. "How Are SNAP Benefits Spent? Evi-
   dence from a Retail Panel." American Economic Review 108, no. 12 (December): 3493­
   3540.
Hastings, Justine, and Ebonya Washington. 2008. The First of the Month Effect: Con-
   sumer Behavior and Store Responses. Working Paper, Working Paper Series 14578.
   National Bureau of Economic Research, December.
     . 2010. "The First of the Month Effect: Consumer Behavior and Store Responses."
    American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2 (2): 142­62.

                                          28
Hausman, Jerry A. 1996. "Valuation of new goods under perfect and imperfect competi-
   tion." In The economics of new goods, 207­248. University of Chicago Press.
Jaravel, Xavier. 2018. "What Is the Impact of Food Stamps on Prices and Products Vari-
    ety? The Importance of the Supply Response." AEA Papers and Proceedings 108 (May):
    557­61.
Leftin, Joshua, Esa Eslami, and Mark Strayer. 2011. Trends in Supplemental Nutrition
    Assistance Program Participation Rates: Fiscal Year 2002 to Fiscal Year 2009. Technical
    report. Mathematica Policy Research.
Leung, Justin, and Hee Kwon Seo. 2019. "How Do Government Transfer Payments
   Affect Retail Prices and Welfare? Evidence from SNAP." Working Paper.
Makioka, Ryo. 2018. "Decomposing the Effect of SNAP." Working Paper.
Mastrobuoni, Giovanni, and Matthew Weinberg. 2009. "Heterogeneity in Intra-Monthly
   Consumption Patterns, Self-Control, and Savings at Retirement." American Economic
   Journal: Economic Policy 1 (2): 163­189.
Meckel, Katherine. 2020. "Is the Cure Worse Than the Disease? Unintended Effects of
   Payment Reform in a Quantity-Based Transfer Program." American Economic Review
   110 (6): 1821­1865.
Nevo, Aviv. 2001. "Measuring market power in the ready-to-eat cereal industry." Econo-
   metrica 69 (2): 307­342.
Rothstein, Jesse. 2010. "Is the EITC as good as an NIT? Conditional cash transfers and
   tax incidence." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2 (1): 177­208.
Seligman, Hilary K, Ann F Bolger, David Guzman, Andrea L´             opez, and Kirsten
    Bibbins-Domingo. 2014. "Exhaustion of food budgets at monthfffdfffdfffds end and
    hospital admissions for hypoglycemia." Health affairs 33 (1): 116­123.
Shapiro, Jesse M. 2005. "Is There a Daily Discount Rate? Evidence from the Food Stamp
   Nutrition Cycle." Journal of Public Economics 89 (2): 303­325.
Smith, Travis A, Joshua P Berning, Xiaosi Yang, Gregory Colson, and Jeffrey H
   Dorfman. 2016. "The effects of benefit timing and income fungibility on food purchas-
   ing decisions among Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program households." American
   Journal of Agricultural Economics 98 (2): 564­580.
Stephens Jr., Melvin. 2003. ""3rd of tha Month": Do Social Security Recipients Smooth
    Consumption Between Checks?" American Economic Review: 406­422.




                                            29
Stephens Jr., Melvin. 2006. "Paycheque Receipt and the Timing of Consumption." The
    Economic Journal 116 (513): 680­701.
Stroebel, Johannes, and Joseph Vavra. 2019. "House Prices, Local Demand, and Retail
    Prices." Journal of Political Economy 127, no. 3 (June): 1391­1436.
Todd, Jessica E. 2015. "Revisiting the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program cycle
   of food intake: Investigating heterogeneity, diet quality, and a large boost in benefit
   amounts." Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy 37 (3): 437­458.
U.S. Department of Agriculture. 2013. What Can SNAP Buy? https://www.fns.
   usda . gov / snap / eligible - food - items, accessed on 4/10/2019. USDA Food and
   Nutrition Service.
USDA-FNS. 2019. Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program Participation and Costs.
   Technical report.
Wilde, Parke E. 2012. "The New Normal: The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
   (SNAP)." American Journal of Agricultural Economics 95 (2): 325­331.
Wilde, Parke E, and Christine K Ranney. 2000. "The Monthly Food Stamp Cycle:
   Shopping Frequency and Food Intake Decisions in an Endogenous Switching Regression
   Framework." American Journal of Agricultural Economics 82 (1): 200­213.




                                           30
                     Figure 1: Food Expenditures by Weekly SNAP Issuance

                                                      (a) All Stores




                                   4.7
                                   4.64.5
                            Log Sales
                               4.4 4.3
                                   4.2
                                   4.1




                                            0    .2       .4         .6      .8   1
                                                       SNAP Issuance Share




                                                (b) High-SNAP Stores
                                   4.7
                                   4.64.5
                            Log Sales
                               4.4 4.3
                                   4.2
                                   4.1




                                            0    .2       .4         .6      .8   1
                                                       SNAP Issuance Share



Notes: The figure displays average log food expenditures by the share of SNAP benefits issued in a given
week of the month. Log food expenditures are aggregated across products using weights derived from
purchases by SNAP-eligible shoppers. SNAP Issuance Share reflects the share of SNAP benefits issued
during a calendar week in the jurisdiction in which a store is located. Points in the figure are proportionate
to the number of store-weeks with the specified issuance share and reflect residuals after controlling for
store-year-month and year-month-week fixed effects. Panel A contains all stores in the sample; Panel B is
limited to stores for which we estimate that the share of SNAP recipients in the ZIP code is at least 20%.
The estimated slope of the best linear-fit (weighted by the number of store-weeks with the specified
issuance share) is 0.06 in Panel A and 0.18 in Panel B.




                                                           31
                              Figure 2: Food Expenditure Cyclicality by Local SNAP Prevalence

                         .6




                                                                                                      1200
   Change in Log Sales
                         .4




                                                                                                      800
                                                                                                             Obs. (000s)
                         .2




                                                                                                      400
                         0




                                                                                                      0
                              0-4%    5-9% 10-14% 15-19% 20-24% 25-29% 30-34% 35%+
                                                        SNAP Prevalence

                                                   Change in Log Sales       95% CI

                                                   Obs. (000s)




Notes: The figure displays the estimated effect of SNAP issuance on log food expenditures by local SNAP
prevalence. Local SNAP prevalence refers to the estimated share of the population that are SNAP
recipients in the ZIP code in which the grocery store is located. Log food expenditures are aggregated
across products using weights derived from purchases by SNAP-eligible shoppers. Change in log sales refers
to the estimated coefficient on SNAP Issuance Share, which is defined as the share of SNAP benefits issued
during a given week of the month in the jurisdiction in which a store is located. The effect of SNAP
issuance on log food expenditures is estimated from a specification that controls for store-year-month and
year-month-week fixed effects, as well as the interaction of calendar week with log state population, log
gross domestic product, and unemployment rate (corresponding to Column 3 in Table 1). The error bars on
the estimated effects reflect the 95% confidence interval from standard errors clustered by state. The hollow
bars reflect the number of observations in our sample (i.e., the number of store-weeks) from stores located
in ZIP codes with the specified population share of SNAP recipients.




                                                                 32
Figure 3: Event-Study Analysis of SNAP Issuance Reforms on Food Expenditure Cyclicality

                                                               (a) All Stores




                                     .02
                                     .01
                            Sales Ratio
                                 0   -.01
                                     -.02




                                                -16   -12           -8              -4           0   4
                                                            Quarters Relative to Policy Change




                                                        (b) High-SNAP Stores
                                     .02    0
                                Sales Ratio
                            -.02     -.04




                                                -16   -12           -8              -4           0   4
                                                            Quarters Relative to Policy Change



Notes: The figure displays the event-study analysis of the effect of policy reforms that staggered SNAP
issuance on the timing of food expenditures. The outcome is the ratio of monthly log food expenditures
occurring in the first two calendar weeks relative to monthly log food expenditures occurring during the
full month. Log food expenditures are aggregated across products using weights derived from purchases by
SNAP-eligible shoppers. The estimates reflect the effect of policy reforms in the ten states that expanded
the share of benefits issued during the third and fourth calendar weeks of the month during our sample
period (see Appendix Table A.1). The analysis excludes the two states (Oklahoma and Virginia) that
altered the share of SNAP benefits issued across calendar weeks during our sample period but that did not
expand the share of benefits issued during the third and fourth calendar weeks of the month. The analysis
also excludes Idaho, which reformed its issuance schedule during our sample period but did not alter the
share of benefits issued across calendar weeks. The estimated effects are derived from a specification that
controls for store-year-month and year-month-week fixed effects and that omits a coefficient for the effect of
the intervention in the quarter prior to implementation (the reference period). Panel A contains all stores
in the sample; Panel B is limited to stores for which we estimate that the share of SNAP recipients in the
ZIP code is at least 20%. The brackets surrounding the estimated effects reflect the 95% confidence interval
from standard errors clustered by state.

                                                                       33
                         Figure 4: Food Prices by Weekly SNAP Issuance

                                                  (a) All Stores




                                .96
                                .94
                            Log Price
                               .92
                                .9
                                .88




                                        0    .2       .4         .6      .8   1
                                                   SNAP Issuance Share




                                            (b) High-SNAP Stores
                                .96
                                .94
                            Log Price
                               .92
                                .9
                                .88




                                        0    .2       .4         .6      .8   1
                                                   SNAP Issuance Share



Notes: The figure displays average log food prices by the share of SNAP benefits issued in a given week of
the month. Prices in a store-week correspond to an index of product-level log prices; the index is derived
from purchases by SNAP-eligible shoppers. SNAP Issuance Share reflects the share of SNAP benefits
issued during a calendar week in the jurisdiction in which a store is located. Points in the figure are
proportionate to the number of store-weeks with the specified issuance share and reflect residuals after
controlling for store-year-month and year-month-week fixed effects. Panel A contains all stores in the
sample; Panel B is limited to stores for which we estimate that the share of SNAP recipients in the ZIP
code is at least 20%. The estimated slope of the best linear-fit (weighted by the number of store-weeks with
the specified issuance share) is -0.001 in Panel A and 0.002 in Panel B.




                                                       34
                                   Figure 5: Food Price Cyclicality by Local SNAP Prevalence




                                                                                                      1500
                         .015




                                                                                                      1000
                         .01
   Change in Log Price
                         .005




                                                                                                      500
                                                                                                              Obs. (000s)
                         0




                                                                                                      0
                         -.005




                                                                                                      -500
                                                                                                      -1000
                         -.01




                                 0-4%   5-9% 10-14% 15-19% 20-24% 25-29% 30-34% 35%+
                                                         SNAP Prevalence

                                                     Change in Log Price       95% CI

                                                     Obs. (000s)




Notes: The figure displays the estimated effect of SNAP issuance on log food prices by local SNAP
prevalence. Local SNAP prevalence refers to the estimated share of the population that are SNAP
recipients in the ZIP code in which the grocery store is located. Prices in a store-week correspond to an
index of product-level log prices; the index is derived from purchases by SNAP-eligible shoppers. Change in
log prices refers to the estimated coefficient on SNAP Issuance Share, which reflects the share of SNAP
benefits issued during a given week of the month in the jurisdiction in which a store is located. The effect
of SNAP issuance on log food prices is estimated from a specification that controls for store-year-month
and year-month-week fixed effects, as well as the interaction of calendar week with log state population, log
gross domestic product, and unemployment rate (corresponding to Column 3 in Table 2). The error bars on
the estimated effects reflect the 95% confidence interval from standard errors clustered by state. The hollow
bars reflect the number of observations in our sample (i.e., the number of store-weeks) from stores located
in ZIP codes with the specified population share of SNAP recipients.




                                                                   35
           Table 1: The Effect of SNAP Issuance on Food Expenditure Cyclicality

                                        (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)
Panel A: All Stores
             Issuance Share         0.0509         0.0560          0.0557         0.0636          0.0630
                                     (0.0078)      (0.0084)         (0.0086)       (0.0170)       (0.0125)
                             N      4,157,698      4,157,698       4,157,698      4,157,698       4,157,698
Panel B: High-SNAP Stores
            Issuance Share          0.2074          0.1922         0.1921         0.1749          0.1692
                                    (0.0253)        (0.0314)       (0.0307)       (0.0448)        (0.0329)
                             N       281,739         281,739        281,739        281,739         281,739
Controls
         Store-Year-Month               X                 X            X               X              X
Year-Month-Calendar Week                                  X            X               X              X
 Calendar Week * Controls                                              X                              X
    Calendar Week * Store                                                              X              X
Notes: The table shows the effect of SNAP issuance on food expenditures at a given store in a given week
of the month. Log food expenditures are aggregated across products using weights derived from purchases
by SNAP-eligible shoppers. Issuance Share reflects the share of SNAP benefits issued during a calendar
week in the jurisdiction in which a store is located. Panel A contains all stores in the sample; Panel B is
limited to stores for which we estimate that the share of SNAP recipients in the ZIP code is at least 20%.
All columns include store by year by month fixed effects. Columns 2-5 include year by month by week fixed
effects. Columns 3 and 5 include interactions of calendar week with state-year measures of log population,
log GDP per capita, and unemployment rate. Columns 4 and 5 include calendar week by store fixed effects.
All specifications are weighted by average annual store volume. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are
clustered by state. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                     36
               Table 2: The Effect of SNAP Issuance on Food Price Cyclicality

                                       (1)               (2)         (3)            (4)            (5)
Panel A: All Stores
             Issuance Share        -0.0013           0.0004         0.0002         0.0010         0.0010
                                    (0.0004)        (0.0004)       (0.0004)       (0.0008)       (0.0009)
                             N     4,157,698       4,157,698      4,157,698      4,157,698      4,157,698
Panel B: High-SNAP Stores
            Issuance Share          -0.0014          0.0011         0.0011         0.0014         0.0014
                                    (0.0008)        (0.0008)       (0.0007)       (0.0012)       (0.0014)
                             N      281,739         281,739        281,739        281,739        281,739
Controls
         Store-Year-Month               X                X            X              X              X
Year-Month-Calendar Week                                 X            X              X              X
 Calendar Week * Controls                                             X                             X
    Calendar Week * Store                                                            X              X
Notes: The table shows the effect of SNAP issuance on log food prices at a given store in a given week of
the month. Prices in a store-week correspond to an index of product-level log prices; the index is derived
from purchases by SNAP-eligible shoppers. Issuance Share reflects the share of SNAP benefits issued during
a calendar week in the jurisdiction in which a store is located. Panel A contains all stores in the sample;
Panel B is limited to stores for which we estimate that the share of SNAP recipients in the ZIP code is at
least 20%. All columns include store by year by month fixed effects. Columns 2-5 include year by month by
week fixed effects. Columns 3 and 5 include interactions of calendar week with state-year measures of log
population, log GDP per capita, and unemployment rate. Columns 4 and 5 include calendar week by store
fixed effects. All specifications are weighted by average annual store volume. Standard errors, reported in
parentheses, are clustered by state. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                    37
                               Table 3: Elasticity Estimates, 100 UPCs

                                                 OLS                                        IV
                                       (1)                  (2)                   (3)                  (4)
Panel A: All Stores
               Price X             -0.0216               -0.0145              -0.0207                -0.0056
       Issuance Share               (0.0045)             (0.0082)              (0.0043)             (0.0095)
                 Price             -2.1025              -2.0857               -2.5917              -2.5764
                                    (0.1236)             (0.1250)              (0.1265)             (0.1253)
          Issuance Share            0.0825               0.1024                0.0818               0.0962
                                    (0.0107)             (0.0169)              (0.0108)             (0.0186)
                   N              379,212,892          379,212,892           379,212,892          379,212,892
 Optimal Price Change                -0.9%                -0.6%                 -0.5%                -0.1%
Panel B: High-SNAP Stores
              Price X              -0.0385               -0.0323              -0.0350                -0.0161
       Issuance Share               (0.0092)             (0.0164)              (0.0080)             (0.0181)
                Price              -2.0657              -2.0202               -2.6396              -2.5747
                                    (0.1601)             (0.1562)              (0.2168)             (0.2064)
          Issuance Share            0.2335               0.2425                0.2309               0.2329
                                    (0.0357)             (0.0330)              (0.0362)             (0.0354)
                    N              24,576,132           24,576,132           24,576,132           24,576,132
  Implied Price Change               -1.7%                -1.5%                -0.8%                -0.4%

Calendar Week * Store                  No                   Yes                   No                  Yes
Notes: The table shows the effect of SNAP issuance and price on quantity sold at a given store in a given week
of the month. The analysis is conducted on the top 100 food products by expenditure share among SNAP-
eligible shoppers, subject to the limitation that the product was purchased in at least 80% of store-weeks.
The unit of observation is a product-store-week. The outcome is the log quantity of food products purchased
in a given store-week. Issuance Share reflects the share of SNAP benefits issued during a calendar week in
the jurisdiction in which a store is located. Price refers to the log of a products price in a given store-week.
Implied price change refers to the difference in optimal prices between a week in which all SNAP benefits are
issued and a week in which no SNAP benefits are issued, based on the estimated elasticity and the monopoly
pricing model described in the Appendix. In Columns 1 and 2, the coefficients are obtained by estimating
equation (6) in the text. In Columns 3 and 4, the coefficients are obtained from a two-stage least-squares
estimate, in which a product's price in a given store-week is instrumented for with the price of the product in
stores of the same chain but located in other Designated Market Areas. All columns include product by store
by year by month fixed effects, product by year by month by week fixed effects, and interactions of product
by calendar week with state-year measures of log population, log GDP per capita, and unemployment rate.
Columns 2 and 4 additionally include product by calendar week by store fixed effects. Panel A contains all
stores in the sample; Panel B is limited to stores for which we estimate that the share of SNAP recipients
in the ZIP code is at least 20%. All specifications are weighted by average annual store volume. Standard
errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered by state. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                       38
A     Optimal Pricing Model

To assess the implications for optimal pricing of the SNAP-induced, within-month variation
in sales we estimate above, we use a simple model of retailer profits, similar to the one
employed by DellaVigna and Gentzkow (2019). For simplicity, we assume pricing decisions
occur at the store, rather than chain, level (or, equivalently, that each chain is comprised of
a single store), as we are interested in variation in pricing over time within a given store,
rather than across stores within a chain (as in DellaVigna and Gentzkow (2019)).
    Grocers have local market power, which follows evidence that customers are constrained
due to travel costs and perishable foods (e.g., Ellickson, Houghton, and Timmins 2013;
Ellickson 2006). For a given grocer, consumer demand for product j in week w is described
by Qjw = kj (Pjw )jw , where Qjw is the units of product j that are sold in week w, kj is a
product-specific scale term, and jw is the retailer's price elasticity for product j in week w,
       Qjw Pjw
jw =   Pjw Qjw
               .   Stores face product-specific marginal costs cj and fixed costs Cj , which do
not vary by week. The retailer sets weekly prices to maximize:


                                 max j (Pjw - cj ) Qjw (Pjw ) - j Cj                        (7)
                               {Pjw }


                                                                                
    The first order conditions to this maximization problem imply Pjw = cj 1-jw
                                                                             jw
                                                                                , or, taking
                              
logs, log Pjw = log cj + log( 1+jw
                                jw
                                   ). Hence, the percent change in the optimal price for product
j between week w and week w is approximately given by

                                                     jw              jw
                        log Pjw - log Pjw = log(          ) - log(        )                 (8)
                                                   1 + jw          1 + jw

    Substituting the estimated coefficients from Table 3 into Equation 8 yields our predicted
optimal price change between weeks in which all SNAP benefits are issued and weeks in
which no benefits are issued.




                                                 39
                                   Figure A.1: Chain-Level Food Sales Cyclicality by SNAP Prevalence

                         .3
                         .2
   Change in Log Sales
                         .1
                         0
                         -.1




                               0                   5                   10              15              20
                                                             Local SNAP Prevalence




Notes: The figure displays the estimated effect of SNAP issuance on log food expenditures by local SNAP
prevalence at the grocery chain level. Each circle corresponds to one grocery store chain; the size of each
circle reflects the average annual sales per chain. Local SNAP prevalence refers to the average estimated
share of the population that are SNAP recipients across the ZIP codes in which the grocery stores
belonging to a chain are located. Log food expenditures are aggregated across products using weights
derived from purchases by SNAP-eligible shoppers. Change in log sales refers to the estimated coefficient
on SNAP Issuance Share, which is defined as the share of SNAP benefits issued during a given week of the
month in the jurisdiction in which a store is located. The effect of SNAP issuance on log food expenditures
is estimated from a specification that controls for store-year-month and year-month-week fixed effects, as
well as the interaction of calendar week with log state population, log gross domestic product, and
unemployment rate (corresponding to Column 3 in Table 1). The estimated slope of the best linear-fit is
0.013, with standard error 0.002.




                                                                  40
                                          Figure A.2: Price Ratio Event-Study

                                                          (a) All Stores




                                 .01
                                 .005
                            Price Ratio
                                 0
                                 -.005
                                 -.01




                                          -16    -12           -8              -4           0   4
                                                       Quarters Relative to Policy Change




                                                   (b) High-SNAP Stores
                                 .01
                                 .005
                            Price Ratio
                                 0
                                 -.005
                                 -.01




                                          -16    -12           -8              -4           0   4
                                                       Quarters Relative to Policy Change



Notes: The figure displays the event-study analysis of the effect of policy reforms that staggered SNAP
issuance on food prices. The outcome is the ratio of average log food prices in calendar weeks one and two
to average log food prices across all four weeks of the month. Log food prices are aggregated across
products using weights derived from purchases by SNAP-eligible shoppers. The estimates reflect the effect
of policy reforms in the ten states that expanded the share of benefits issued during the third and fourth
calendar weeks of the month during our sample period (see Appendix Table A.1). The analysis excludes the
two states (Oklahoma and Virginia) that altered the share of SNAP benefits issued across calendar weeks
during our sample period but that did not expand the share of benefits issued during the third and fourth
calendar weeks of the month. The analysis also excludes Idaho, which reformed its issuance schedule during
our sample period but did not alter the share of benefits issued across calendar weeks. The estimated
effects are derived from a specification that controls for store-year-month and year-month-week fixed effects
and that omits a coefficient for the effect of the intervention in the quarter prior to implementation (the
reference period). Panel A contains all stores in the sample; Panel B is limited to stores for which we
estimate that the share of SNAP recipients in the ZIP code is at least 20%. The brackets surrounding the
estimated effects reflect the 95% confidence interval from standard errors clustered by state.


                                                                  41
                                    Figure A.3: Chain-Level Food Price Cyclicality by SNAP Prevalence

                         .02
                         .01
   Change in Log Price
                         0
                         -.01
                         -.02
                         -.03




                                0                   5                   10              15              20
                                                              Local SNAP Prevalence




Notes: The figure displays the estimated effect of SNAP issuance on log prices by local SNAP prevalence at
the grocery chain level. Each circle corresponds to one grocery store chain; the size of each circle reflects
the average annual sales per chain. Local SNAP prevalence refers to the average estimated share of the
population that are SNAP recipients across the ZIP codes in which the grocery stores belonging to a chain
are located. Prices in a store-week correspond to an index of product-level log prices; the index uses
weights derived from purchases by SNAP-eligible shoppers. Change in log prices refers to the estimated
coefficient on SNAP Issuance Share, which is defined as the share of SNAP benefits issued during a given
week of the month in the jurisdiction in which a store is located. The effect of SNAP issuance on log prices
is estimated from a specification that controls for store-year-month and year-month-week fixed effects, as
well as the interaction of calendar week with log state population, log gross domestic product, and
unemployment rate (corresponding to Column 3 in Table 2). The estimated slope of the best linear-fit is
-0.0004, with standard error 0.0003.




                                                                   42
     Figure A.4: The Effect of SNAP Issuance on Elasticities versus Prices by Product

                                                                       (a) All Stores




                                                  .02
                                                  .01
                            Change in Log Price
                                                  0
                                                  -.01
                                                  -.02




                                                         -.2         -.1               0               .1        .2
                                                                           Change in Elasticity




                                                               (b) High-SNAP Stores
                                                  .02
                                                  .01
                            Change in Log Price
                                                  0
                                                  -.01
                                                  -.02




                                                         -.4   -.2            0                   .2        .4   .6
                                                                           Change in Elasticity




Notes: The figure plots the relationship between the effect of SNAP issuance on a product's price elasticity
and the effect of SNAP issuance on the products price. Each point represents one of the top 100 food
products by expenditure share among SNAP-eligible shoppers, subject to the limitation that the product
was purchased in at least 80% of store-weeks. The x-axis represents the estimated effect of Issuance Share
on a products price elasticity; it corresponds to the  coefficient in (6). The y-axis represents the estimated
effect of Issuance Share on the log of a products price during a given store-week. Issuance Share reflects the
share of SNAP benefits issued during a given week of the month in the jurisdiction in which a store is
located. Each estimate is obtained from a product-specific regression and controls for store-year-month and
year-month-week fixed effects, as well as interactions of calendar week with state-year measures of log
population, log GDP per capita, and unemployment rate. All estimates are obtained from specifications
that are weighted by average annual store volume. Panel A contains all stores in the sample; Panel B is
limited to stores for which we estimate that the share of SNAP recipients in the ZIP code is at least 20%.
The estimated slope of the best linear-fit is -0.0026, with standard error 0.0028 in Panel A and 0.0046 with
standard error 0.0026 in Panel B.




                                                                              43
Figure A.5: The Effect of SNAP Issuance on Elasticities versus Prices by Product Among
One-Policy Chains

                                                                   (a) All Stores




                                                  .1
                                                  .05
                            Change in Log Price
                                                  0
                                                  -.05
                                                  -.1




                                                         -3   -2              -1                 0       1
                                                                      Change in Elasticity




                                                              (b) High-SNAP Stores
                                                  .1
                                                  .05
                            Change in Log Price
                                                  0
                                                  -.05
                                                  -.1




                                                         -4   -2             0               2       4
                                                                      Change in Elasticity




Notes: The figure plots the relationship between the effect of SNAP issuance on a product's price elasticity
and the effect of SNAP issuance on the products price among chains facing a single SNAP issuance policy
in each of their stores during a given week. Each point represents one of the top 100 food products by
expenditure share among SNAP-eligible shoppers, subject to the limitation that the product was purchased
in at least 80% of store-weeks. The x-axis represents the estimated effect of Issuance Share on a products
price elasticity; it corresponds to the  coefficient in (6). The y-axis represents the estimated effect of
Issuance Share on the log of a products price during a given store-week. Issuance Share reflects the share of
SNAP benefits issued during a given week of the month in the jurisdiction in which a store is located. Each
estimate is obtained from a product-specific regression and controls for store-year-month and
year-month-week fixed effects, as well as interactions of calendar week with state-year measures of log
population, log GDP per capita, and unemployment rate. All estimates are obtained from specifications
that are weighted by average annual store volume. Panel A contains all stores in the sample; Panel B is
limited to stores for which we estimate that the share of SNAP recipients in the ZIP code is at least 20%.
The estimated slope of the best linear-fit is 0.0017, with standard error 0.0027 in Panel A and 0.0057, with
standard error 0.0019 in Panel B.

                                                                         44
                                              Table A.1: SNAP Issuance Schedule by State, 2006-2014

                               Issuance Days                                                              Issuance Days
      State              2006                      2014           Reform Date        State              2006              2014     Reform Date
       AL                4-18                      4-23             9/1/13            NC                3-12           3-21 (odd)     7/1/11
       AZ                1-13                                                         ND                  1
       AR             4, 5, 8-13                                                      NV                  1
       CA                1-10                                                         NE                 1-5
       CO                1-10                                                         NH                  5
       CT                 1-3                                                         NJ                 1-5
       DE                5-11                      2-17               3/1/13          NM                1-20
       DC                1-10                                                         NY                 1-9
       FL                1-15                                                         OH                1-10          2-20 (even)    2/28/14
       GA                5-14                  5-23 (odd)             9/1/12          OK                  1              1, 5, 10     4/1/11
       ID                 1-5                       1                 9/1/09          OR                 1-9
       IA                1-10                                                         PA          1st 10 business
       IL                  1                1,3,4-10,13,17,20         3/1/14          RI                  1
       IN                1-10                  5-23 (odd)             2/1/14          SC                1-10               1-19       9/1/12
       KY                1-10                                                         SD                 10
       KS                1-10                                                         TN                1-10               1-20      10/1/12




45
       LA                1-14                                                         TX        1,3,5-7,9,11-13,15
       ME               10-14                                                         UT             5, 11, 15
       MD                6-15                                                         VA                  1             1, 4, 7, 9   10/1/12
       MA      1,2,4,5,7,8,10,11,13,14                                                WA                1-10
       MI                 1-9                  3-21 (odd)             1/1/11         WV                  1-9
       MN                4-13                                                         WI      2,3,5,6,8,9,11,12,14,15
       MS                5-19                                                        WY                  1-4
       MO                1-22                                                         VT                  1
       MT                 2-6
     Notes: The table displays the calendar days on which SNAP benefits are issued, by state, at the start of our sample period (2006), the end of our
     sample period (2014), and the date of any change in the issuance schedule, if applicable. States that issue benefits on multiple days allocate benefits
     across issuance days according to Social Security Number (AR, CO, LA, MA, NE, NM, NC, OR, TN, and WI), case number (AL, CA, FL, GA, KY,
     MI, MN, MS, MT, NJ, NY, OH, OK, PA, SC, TX, VA, and WA), last name (AZ, CT, DE, DC, IN, IA, KS, MD, UT, WV, and WY), birth year
     (ID), or birth month (ME). Two states use a combination of last name and case type (IL) or birth month (MO). Illinois changed issuance schedules
     three times during our sample period: once on 3/1/10 (from day 1 to days 1,3,4,7,8,10,11,14,17,19,21,23), then on 6/1/2013 (to 1-10), then again
     on 3/1/2014 (to 1,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,13,17,20). New York City follows a different issuance schedule than the rest of NY: benefits are issued over 13
     different days excluding Sundays and holidays during the first two weeks of each month. In Ohio, staggering is optional by county with 15 percent
     of the smallest counties choosing not to stagger. In Pennsylvania, benefits are made available over the first 10 business days of the month (excluding
     weekends and holidays) with each county choosing one, two, or ten issuance days.
                              Table A.2: SNAP Issuance and Food Expenditure Cyclicality by State Policy Reform

                    (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)          (9)         (10)        (11)         (12)
                    AL          DE           GA          IL           IN          MI          NC          OH           OK           SC         TN           VA
     Panel A: All Stores
     Issuance 0.0279 0.0290 0.0493 0.0397 0.0781 0.0812 0.0329 0.0312 0.0246 0.0039 0.0546 0.0212
        Share (0.0079) (0.0090) (0.0142) (0.0131) (0.0440) (0.0274) (0.0048) (0.0053) (0.0048) (0.0195) (0.0220) (0.0037)
             N 2,758,368 2,744,496 2,881,844 2,857,932 2,780,332 2,779,744 3,036,804 2,866,100 2,726,732 2,858,760 2,843,840 2,975,012
     Panel B: High-SNAP Stores
     Issuance 0.0722 0.0542 0.1490 0.2961 0.1885 0.1991 0.0249 0.0229 0.0560 -0.0195 0.1730 0.0900
        Share (0.0219) (0.0090) (0.0235) (0.1566) (0.0841) (0.0338) (0.0106) (0.0155) (0.0083) (0.0573) (0.0437) (0.0249)




46
             N 149,032        143,772     164,380     152,612      148,192     153,772      169,232     159,412     144,560      162,864     157,840      155,448
     Notes: The table shows the estimated effect of SNAP issuance on log food expenditures, separately for each state that altered its SNAP issuance
     schedule during our sample period. In each column, the analysis is restricted to the specified state and the set of states that did not alter their issuance
     schedule during our sample period. The analysis excludes one state (Idaho), which reformed its issuance schedule during our sample period but did
     not alter the share of benefits issued across weeks of the month. Log food expenditures are aggregated across products using weights derived from
     purchases by SNAP-eligible shoppers. Issuance Share reflects the share of SNAP benefits issued during a calendar week in the jurisdiction in which
     a store is located. Panel A contains all stores in the sample; Panel B is limited to stores for which we estimate that the share of SNAP recipients
     in the ZIP code is at least 20%. All columns correspond to the difference-in-differences specification reported in Column 5 of Table 1; they include
     store by year by month fixed effects, year by month by week fixed effects, store by calendar week fixed effects, and interactions of calendar week with
     state-year measures of log population, log GDP per capita, and unemployment rate. All specifications are weighted by average annual store volume.
     Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered by state. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
                                                Table A.3: Expenditure Cyclicality Robustness Checks

                                       No Store Weights               Total Food Sales             Weight by Last Name               Drop Non-Uniform
                                       (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)              (6)              (7)            (8)
     Panel A: All Stores
            Issuance Share          0.0621         0.0588         0.0535          0.0708         0.0559           0.0621           0.0544         0.0606
                                    (0.0090)       (0.0127)       (0.0080)        (0.0108)       (0.0085)         (0.0122)         (0.0092)       (0.0122)
                             N      4156952         4156920        4156952        4156920         4156952         4156920          3308704        3308704
     Panel B: High-SNAP Stores
            Issuance Share   0.1823                0.1370         0.1964          0.2033         0.1839           0.1681           0.1766         0.1724
                              (0.0266)             (0.0361)       (0.0347)        (0.0257)       (0.0306)         (0.0328)         (0.0268)       (0.0304)
                             N       281,704        281,704        281,704         281,704        281,704          281,704         204,216         204,216

     Calendar Week * Store             No             Yes             No             Yes            No               Yes              No             Yes




47
     The table contains robustness checks for the analyses measuring the effect of SNAP issuance on log food expenditures at a given store in a given
     week of the month. Issuance Share reflects the share of SNAP benefits issued during a calendar week in the jurisdiction in which a store is located.
     Columns 1 and 2 present unweighted results; all other columns report results that are weighted by store volume. In Columns 3 and 4, the outcome is
     the log of total food expenditures; in all other columns, the outcome is log food expenditures aggregated across products using weights derived from
     purchases by SNAP-eligible shoppers. In Columns 5 and 6, Issuance Share is defined to account for the national distribution of last names from the
     2010 Census for the following states: Arizona, Connecticut, Delaware, District of Columbia, Iowa, Kansas, Indiana, Utah, West Virginia, Wyoming.
     Columns 7 and 8 exclude these states from the analysis, along with: Louisiana (which distributes benefits to elderly/disabled recipients on different
     days), Maryland (which distributes benefits based on the first three letters of the recipients last name), Missouri (which distributes benefits based on
     last name and birth month), Ohio (in which staggering is optional by county with 15 percent of the smallest counties choosing not to stagger), and
     South Carolina (which added new recipients non-uniformly after increasing the number of issuance days in 2012). All columns include store by year
     by month fixed effects, year by month by week fixed effects, and interactions of calendar week with state-year measures of log population, log GDP
     per capita, and unemployment rate. Columns 2, 4, 6, and 8 additionally include calendar week by store fixed effects. Panel A contains all stores in
     the sample; Panel B is limited to stores for which we estimate that the share of SNAP recipients in the ZIP code is at least 20%. Standard errors,
     reported in parentheses, are clustered by state. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
              Table A.4: Food Expenditure Cyclicality by SNAP Issuance Policy

                    Week 1               Week 2             Weeks 1 & 2              Weeks 1-3+
                       (1)                 (2)                    (3)                     (4)
Panel A: All Stores
Week 2          -0.0619                   0.0151              -0.0293                  -0.0300
                  (0.0063)               (0.0265)              (0.0060)                (0.0151)
Week 3          -0.0654                   0.0215              -0.0416                   -0.0205
                  (0.0081)               (0.0241)              (0.0079)                (0.0199)
Week 4           -0.0306                  0.0072              -0.0278                   -0.0039
                  (0.0112)               (0.0111)              (0.0067)                (0.0101)
      N             565,470              55,834               3,105,655                430,127
Panel B: High-SNAP Stores
Week 2         -0.1528                  0.0860                  -0.0093                  0.0056
                (0.0395)                (0.0060)               (0.0216)                (0.0254)
Week 3         -0.2184                   0.0666               -0.0975                   -0.0251
                (0.0241)                (0.0118)               (0.0285)                (0.0431)
Week 4         -0.1905                   0.0077               -0.1306                  -0.0648
                (0.0073)                (0.0069)               (0.0221)                (0.0329)
      N              16,933               3,845                219,262                  41,699
Notes: The table shows within-month expenditure patterns by state SNAP issuance policy. Log food ex-
penditures are aggregated across products using weights derived from purchases by SNAP-eligible shoppers.
Column 1 includes stores located in states that issue all benefits during the first week of the month. Column
2 includes stores located in states that issue all benefits during the second week of the month. Column
3 includes stores located in states that issue benefits on days spanning the first two weeks of the month.
Column 4 includes stores located in states that issue benefits on days spanning three or more weeks during
the month. Stores located in states that switch policies during our sample period are classified according to
the policy that is in place during a given store-month. Panel A contains all stores in the sample; Panel B is
limited to stores for which we estimate that the share of SNAP recipients in the ZIP code is at least 20%.
All columns include store by year by month fixed effects. All specifications are weighted by average annual
store volume. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered by state. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, ***
p < 0.01.




                                                     48
       Table A.5: The Effect of SNAP Issuance on Non-Food Expenditure Cyclicality

                                      Non-Food Grocery                             Alcohol
                                      (1)                 (2)              (3)                  (4)
Panel A: All Stores
       Issuance Share               0.0071            -0.0019            0.0082               -0.0296
                                   (0.0045)          (0.0062)           (0.0064)             (0.0332)
                        N         4,156,800          4,156,800         4,000,060             4,000,060
Panel B: High-SNAP Stores
       Issuance Share             0.0334              0.0059             0.0106               0.0197
                                  (0.0113)           (0.0108)           (0.0087)             (0.0119)
                        N          281,704            281,704           270,496              270,496

Calendar Week * Store                 No                  Yes              No                  Yes
Notes: The table shows the effect of SNAP issuance on non-food expenditures at a given store in a given
calendar week. Columns 1 and 2 present results for non-food grocery items. Columns 3 and 4 present results
for alcohol products. Log expenditures are aggregated across products within these categories using weights
derived from purchases by SNAP-eligible shoppers. Issuance Share reflects the share of SNAP benefits issued
during a given week of the month in the jurisdiction in which a store is located. Panel A contains all stores
in the sample; Panel B is limited to stores for which we estimate that the share of SNAP recipients in the
ZIP code is at least 20%. All columns include store by year by month fixed effects, year by month by week
fixed effects, and interactions of calendar week with state-year measures of log population, log GDP per
capita, and unemployment rate. Columns 2 and 4 additionally include calendar week by store fixed effects.
All specifications are weighted by average annual store volume. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are
clustered by state. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                     49
                                  Table A.6: SNAP Issuance and Food Price Cyclicality by State Policy Reform

                    (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)        (8)          (9)         (10)       (11)        (12)
                    AL          DE           GA          IL          IN          MI          NC         OH           OK           SC        TN          VA
     Panel A: All Stores
     Issuance -0.0045 -0.0047 -0.0019                  -0.0024 -0.0015 -0.0007 -0.0010 -0.0015 -0.0046 -0.0018        0.0017   -0.0011
        Share (0.0008) (0.0008) (0.0014)              (0.0023) (0.0025) (0.0022) (0.0015) (0.0023) (0.0007) (0.0029) (0.0042) (0.0023)
             N 2,758,368 2,744,496 2,881,844 2,857,932 2,780,332 2,779,744 3,036,804 2,866,100 2,726,732 2,858,760 2,843,840 2,975,012
     Panel B: High-SNAP Stores
     Issuance -0.0028 -0.0028 -0.0022 0.0003       -0.0001 -0.0004   0.0017   0.0019 -0.0029 0.0013      0.0040   0.0007
        Share (0.0008) (0.0009) (0.0004) (0.0024) (0.0020) (0.0019) (0.0015) (0.0030) (0.0008) (0.0034) (0.0025) (0.0026)




50
             N 149,032        143,772     164,380      152,612    148,192     153,772     169,232     159,412     144,560      162,864    157,840     155,448
     Notes: The table shows the estimated effect of SNAP issuance on log food prices, separately for each state that altered its SNAP issuance schedule
     during our sample period. In each column, the analysis is restricted to the specified state and the set of states that did not alter their issuance schedule
     during our sample period. The analysis excludes one state (Idaho), which reformed its issuance schedule during our sample period but did not alter
     the share of benefits issued across weeks of the month. Log food prices are measured using an index of product-level log prices; the index is derived
     from purchases by SNAP-eligible shoppers. Issuance Share reflects the share of SNAP benefits issued during a calendar week in the jurisdiction in
     which a store is located. Panel A contains all stores in the sample; Panel B is limited to stores for which we estimate that the share of SNAP recipients
     in the ZIP code is at least 20%. All columns correspond to the difference-in-differences specification reported in Column 5 of Table 2; they include
     store by year by month fixed effects, year by month by week fixed effects, store by calendar week fixed effects, and interactions of calendar week with
     state-year measures of log population, log GDP per capita, and unemployment rate. All specifications are weighted by average annual store volume.
     Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered by state. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
                         Table A.7: The Effect of SNAP Issuance on Food Expenditure Cyclicality by Product Group

                           (1)         (2)            (3)         (4)                 (5)          (6)         (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)
                          Bread       Cheese     Frozen Meals Frozen Meat            Juice         Deli        Milk       Produce      Snacks        Soda
     Panel A: All Stores
     Issuance Share 0.0386           0.0562         0.0893          0.0895         0.0476       0.0594      0.0211       0.0388       0.0637       0.0542
                      (0.0053)       (0.0113)       (0.0133)        (0.0158)       (0.0072)     (0.0123)    (0.0034)     (0.0066)     (0.0111)     (0.0112)
                    N 4,156,336 4,155,920           4,154,500       4,144,288      4,156,596 4,156,044 4,155,896 4,155,160 3,715,204 3,715,152
     Panel B: High-SNAP Stores
     Issuance Share 0.1406 0.2262                   0.2881          0.3041         0.1657       0.2199      0.0755       0.1581       0.2336       0.1649
                     (0.0234) (0.0387)              (0.0487)        (0.0536)       (0.0294)     (0.0358)    (0.0122)     (0.0296)     (0.0436)     (0.0293)




51
                    N    281,656      281,632        281,448         281,340        281,684      281,656     281,632      281,556      251,860      251,856
     Notes: The table shows the effect of SNAP issuance on log expenditures in the specified product group at a given store in a given week of the month.
     Expenditures are aggregated across products within the specified product group using weights derived from purchases by SNAP-eligible shoppers.
     The displayed product groups are those that correspond to the greatest share of expenditures among SNAP-eligible customers during our sample
     period. These product groups include: bread and baked goods; cheese; prepared foods frozen; unprepared meat, poultry, seafood-frozen; juice, drinks
     canned, bottled; packaged meat deli; milk; fresh produce; snacks; carbonated beverages. Issuance Share reflects the share of SNAP benefits issued
     during a calendar week in the jurisdiction in which a store is located. Panel A contains all stores in the sample; Panel B is limited to stores for which
     we estimate that the share of SNAP recipients in the ZIP code is at least 20%. All columns include store by year by month fixed effects, year by
     month by week fixed effects, and interactions of calendar week with state-year measures of log population, log GDP per capita, and unemployment
     rate. All specifications are weighted by average annual store volume. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered by state. * p < 0.10, **
     p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
                             Table A.8: The Effect of SNAP Issuance on Food Price Cyclicality by Product Group

                          (1)         (2)             (3)         (4)                (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)           (9)        (10)
                         Bread       Cheese      Frozen Meals Frozen Meat           Juice        Deli         Milk      Produce       Snacks       Soda
     Panel A: All Stores
     Issuance Share    0.0012         0.0012         0.0011          0.0008        -0.0000      -0.0003      -0.0002     0.0009       0.0012      -0.0000
                      (0.0008)       (0.0013)       (0.0016)        (0.0014)      (0.0005)     (0.0012)     (0.0004)    (0.0009)     (0.0009)    (0.0019)
                   N 4,156,336 4,155,920           4,154,500       4,144,288      4,156,596 4,156,044 4,155,896 4,155,160 3,715,204 3,715,152
     Panel B: High-SNAP Stores
     Issuance Share 0.0018     0.0014               0.0034           0.0012        0.0008       0.0013     -0.0013       0.0021       0.0032      -0.0001
                     (0.0011) (0.0019)              (0.0018)        (0.0014)      (0.0008)     (0.0020)     (0.0006)    (0.0014)     (0.0025)    (0.0035)




52
                   N     281,656     281,632        281,448         281,340        281,684     281,656      281,632      281,556     251,860      251,856
     Notes: The table shows the effect of SNAP issuance on log prices in the specified product group at a given store in a given week of the month.
     Prices in a store-week correspond to an index of product-level log prices; the index is derived from purchases of products in the specified product
     group by SNAP-eligible shoppers. The displayed product groups are those that correspond to the greatest share of expenditures among SNAP-eligible
     customers during our sample period. These product groups include: bread and baked goods; cheese; prepared foods frozen; unprepared meat, poultry,
     seafood-frozen; juice, drinks canned, bottled; packaged meat deli; milk; fresh produce; snacks; carbonated beverages. Issuance Share reflects the share
     of SNAP benefits issued during a calendar week in the jurisdiction in which a store is located. Panel A contains all stores in the sample; Panel B is
     limited to stores for which we estimate that the share of SNAP recipients in the ZIP code is at least 20%. All columns include store by year by month
     fixed effects, year by month by week fixed effects, and interactions of calendar week with state-year measures of log population, log GDP per capita,
     and unemployment rate. All specifications are weighted by average annual store volume. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered by
     state. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
Table A.9: Effect of SNAP Issuance on Expenditure and Price Cyclicality, High SNAP-Share
Product Modules

                                                  Sales                                      Price
                                         (1)                   (2)                  (3)                  (4)
Panel A: All Stores
       Issuance Share                0.0618                 0.0581                -0.0008              0.0016
                                     (0.0110)               (0.0209)             (0.0010)             (0.0029)
                         N           4,156,820              4,156,820           4,156,820            4,156,820
Panel B: High-SNAP Stores
       Issuance Share                0.1806                 0.1565                -0.0008              0.0022
                                     (0.0285)               (0.0532)             (0.0018)             (0.0040)
                         N            281,704               281,704              281,704              281,704

Calendar Week * Store                    No                   Yes                   No                   Yes
Notes: The table shows the effect of SNAP issuance on sales and prices for food products corresponding to
modules that tend to be purchased by SNAP-eligible customers at a high rate relative to SNAP-ineligible
customers. To select these modules, using the Consumer Panel we estimate, for each module, the share of
all food expenditures that the module represents, separately for SNAP-eligible and ineligible customers. The
sample underlying the analysis in the table corresponds to the products in the ten modules with the largest
ratio of these two shares. These modules are: frozen/refrigerated appetizers and snacks, carbonated soft
drinks, mayonnaise, certain fruit drinks, certain fruit juices, toaster pastries, frozen Mexican entrees, salad
and cooking oil, yogurt, and cottage cheese. Log food expenditures (columns 1 and 2) are aggregated across
products using weights derived from purchases by SNAP-eligible shoppers. Log food prices (columns 3 and
4) correspond to an index of product-level log prices derived from purchases by SNAP-eligible shoppers.
Issuance Share reflects the share of SNAP benefits issued during a calendar week in the jurisdiction in which
a store is located. Panel A contains all stores in the sample; Panel B is limited to stores for which we estimate
that the share of SNAP recipients in the ZIP code is at least 20%. All columns include store by year by
month fixed effects, year by month by week fixed effects, and interactions of calendar week with state-year
measures of log population, log GDP per capita, and unemployment rate. Columns 2 and 4 additionally
include calendar week by store fixed effects. All specifications are weighted by average annual store volume.
Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered by state. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                       53
                         Table A.10: Price Cyclicality Robustness Checks

                              No Store Weights         Weight by Last Name           Drop Non-Uniform
                                (1)         (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
Panel A: All Stores
       Issuance Share         0.0003      0.0011       -0.0000        0.0009         0.0001       0.0007
                             (0.0004)    (0.0008)     (0.0004)       (0.0009)       (0.0004)     (0.0010)
                        N    4156952     4156952      4156952        4156952        3308704      3308704
Panel B: High-SNAP Stores
       Issuance Share   0.0011            0.0005       0.0009         0.0013         0.0003       0.0004
                       (0.0008)          (0.0014)     (0.0007)       (0.0014)       (0.0007)     (0.0014)
                        N    281,704      281,704     281,704        281,704        204,216      204,204

Calendar Week * Store           No          Yes           No           Yes            No           Yes
The table contains robustness checks for the analyses measuring the effect of SNAP issuance on log food
prices at a given store in a given week of the month. Prices in a store-week correspond to an index of
product-level log prices; the index is derived from purchases by SNAP-eligible shoppers. Issuance Share
reflects the share of SNAP benefits issued during a calendar week in the jurisdiction in which a store is
located. Columns 1 and 2 present unweighted results; all other columns report results that are weighted by
store volume. In Columns 3 and 4, Issuance Share is defined to account for the national distribution of last
names from the 2010 Census for the following states: Arizona, Connecticut, Delaware, District of Columbia,
Iowa, Kansas, Indiana, Utah, West Virginia, Wyoming. Columns 5 and 6 exclude these states from the
analysis, along with: Louisiana (which distributes benefits to elderly/disabled recipients on different days),
Maryland (which distributes benefits based on the first three letters of the recipients last name), Missouri
(which distributes benefits based on last name and birth month), Ohio (in which staggering is optional by
county with 15 percent of the smallest counties choosing not to stagger), and South Carolina (which added
new recipients non-uniformly after increasing the number of issuance days in 2012). All columns include store
by year by month fixed effects, year by month by week fixed effects, and interactions of calendar week with
state-year measures of log population, log GDP per capita, and unemployment rate. Columns 2, 4, 6, and 8
additionally include calendar week by store fixed effects. Panel A contains all stores in the sample; Panel B
is limited to stores for which we estimate that the share of SNAP recipients in the ZIP code is at least 20%.
Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered by state. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                     54
                                                  Table A.11: Missing Price Data Robustness Check

                                                      Over 80% Captured                                              Over 90% Captured
                                        (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)            (7)            (8)
                                       Sales           Sales           Price           Price           Sales           Sales          Price          Price
     Panel A: All Stores
            Issuance Share           0.0540          0.0685           0.0001          0.0011        0.0489          0.1029           0.0002         -0.0001
                                     (0.0093)        (0.0130)        (0.0004)        (0.0011)       (0.0137)        (0.0336)        (0.0006)       (0.0017)
                             N      2,345,996       2,345,984       2,345,996       2,345,984        285,516         285,516         285,516       285,516
     Panel B: High-SNAP Stores
            Issuance Share     0.2029                0.2127           0.0011          0.0021        0.1665          0.2955           0.0008         0.0026
                               (0.0340)              (0.0251)        (0.0007)        (0.0017)       (0.0393)        (0.0880)        (0.0006)       (0.0016)




55
                             N       156,448         156,440         156,448         156,440          19,844          19,844         19,844         19,844

     Calendar Week * Store              No              Yes             No              Yes             No              Yes            No             Yes
     Notes: The table investigates the importance to our results of the fact that the Nielsen Retail Scanner data does not include price data for products
     in store-weeks in which the product was not purchased. Columns 1-4 restrict the analysis to stores for which we observe prices for at least 80% of
     expenditures during the sample period. Columns 5-8 restrict the analysis to stores for which we observe prices for at least 90% of expenditures during
     the sample period. The outcome in Columns 1, 2, 5, and 6 is log food expenditures at a given store in a given week of the month. The outcome in
     Columns 3, 4, 7, and 8 is log food prices at a given store in a given week of the month. Prices in a store-week correspond to an index of product-level
     log prices; the index is derived from purchases by SNAP-eligible shoppers. Issuance Share reflects the share of SNAP benefits issued during a calendar
     week in the jurisdiction in which a store is located. All columns include store by year by month fixed effects, year by month by week fixed effects,
     and interactions of calendar week with state-year measures of log population, log GDP per capita, and unemployment rate. Columns 2, 4, 6, and 8
     additionally include calendar week by store fixed effects. Panel A contains all stores in the sample; Panel B is limited to stores for which we estimate
     that the share of SNAP recipients in the ZIP code is at least 20%. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered by state. * p < 0.10, **
     p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
     Table A.12: The Effect of SNAP Issuance on Coupon Usage and Discount Receipt

                                               Coupon Use                            Discount Receipt
                                         (1)                  (2)                  (3)                  (4)
Panel A: All Stores
       Issuance Share                  0.0001               -0.0009              0.0012               -0.0022
                                      (0.0003)             (0.0008)             (0.0009)             (0.0033)
                    N                2,434,518             2,434,518           2,434,518            2,434,518
       Mean, Dep. Var.                0.0448                 0.0448             0.4227                0.4227
Panel B: High-SNAP Stores
       Issuance Share                  -0.0018              0.0003               -0.0049              0.0125
                                      (0.0014)             (0.0035)             (0.0064)             (0.0097)
                     N                146,638              146,638              146,638              146,638
          Dep Var Mean                0.0389                0.0389               0.3920               0.3920

Calendar Week * Store                    No                  Yes                   No                   Yes
Notes: The table shows the effect of SNAP issuance on coupon use and discount receipt in a given store
in a given week of the month using data from the Consumer Panel. Columns 1 and 2 present results for
the effect of SNAP issuance on the average value of coupons as a share of expenditures per shopping trip.
Columns 3 and 4 present results for the effect of SNAP issuance on the average share per shopping trip of
expenditures on items for which the panelist reported receiving a discounted price deal. Both outcomes use
panelist weights to calculate the average across trips. Issuance Share reflects the share of SNAP benefits
issued during a given week of the month in the jurisdiction in which a store is located. Panel A contains
shopping trips at all stores in the sample; Panel B is limited to shopping trips at stores for which we estimate
that the share of SNAP recipients in the ZIP code is at least 20%. All columns include store by year by
month fixed effects, year by month by week fixed effects, and interactions of calendar week with state-year
measures of log population, log GDP per capita, and unemployment rate. Columns 2 and 4 additionally
include calendar week by store fixed effects. All specifications are weighted by average annual store volume.
Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered by state. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                      56
           Table A.13: The Effect of SNAP Issuance on Non-Food Price Cyclicality

                                      Non-Food Grocery                             Alcohol
                                      (1)                 (2)              (3)                  (4)
Panel A: All Stores
       Issuance Share              0.0010            0.0021              -0.0002             0.0038
                                   (0.0006)          (0.0010)           (0.0005)             (0.0022)
                        N         4,156,800          4,156,800         4,000,060             4,000,060
Panel B: High-SNAP Stores
       Issuance Share               0.0009            0.0014             -0.0001              0.0007
                                   (0.0006)          (0.0012)           (0.0005)             (0.0013)
                        N          284,496            284,496           270,496              270,496

Calendar Week * Store                 No                  Yes              No                  Yes
Notes: The table shows the effect of SNAP issuance on non-food prices at a given store in a given week of
the month. Prices in a store-week correspond to an index of product-level log prices; the index is derived
from purchases by SNAP-eligible shoppers. Columns 1 and 2 present results for non-food grocery items.
Columns 3 and 4 present results for alcohol products. Log prices are aggregated across products within these
categories using an index derived from purchases by SNAP-eligible shoppers. Issuance Share reflects the
share of SNAP benefits issued during a calendar week in the jurisdiction in which a store is located. Panel A
contains all stores in the sample; Panel B is limited to stores for which we estimate that the share of SNAP
recipients in the ZIP code is at least 20%. All columns include store by year by month fixed effects, year by
month by week fixed effects, and interactions of calendar week with state-year measures of log population,
log GDP per capita, and unemployment rate. Columns 2 and 4 additionally include calendar week by store
fixed effects. All specifications are weighted by average annual store volume. Standard errors, reported in
parentheses, are clustered by state. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                     57
    Table A.14: The Effect of SNAP Issuance on Sales and Prices, 100 Product Sample

                                              Quantity                                   Price
                                       (1)                 (2)                  (3)                  (4)
Panel A: All Stores
       Issuance Share              0.0642                0.0902               0.0000               0.0002
                                   (0.0086)              (0.0142)            (0.0008)             (0.0017)
                        N         379,212,892         379,212,892          379,212,892           379,212,892
Panel B: High-SNAP Stores
       Issuance Share              0.2016                0.2195               0.0007               -0.0011
                                   (0.0298)              (0.0302)            (0.0014)             (0.0026)
                        N         24,576,132           24,576,132           24,576,132           24,576,132

Calendar Week * Store                  No                  Yes                  No                   Yes
Notes: The table shows the effect of SNAP issuance on sales and prices for the top 100 food products by
expenditure share among SNAP-eligible shoppers, subject to the limitation that the product was purchased
in at least 80% of store-weeks. The unit of observation is a product-store-week. In Columns 1 and 2, the
outcome is the log quantity of food products purchased. In Columns 3 and 4, the outcome is the log food
price per product. Issuance Share reflects the share of SNAP benefits issued during a calendar week in the
jurisdiction in which a store is located. Panel A contains all stores in the sample; Panel B is limited to
stores for which we estimate that the share of SNAP recipients in the ZIP code is at least 20%. All columns
include product-store-year-month fixed effects and product-year-month-week fixed effects, and interactions of
product by calendar week with state-year measures of log population, log GDP per capita, and unemployment
rate. Columns 2 and 4 additionally include product by calendar week by store fixed effects. All specifications
are weighted by average annual store volume. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered by
state. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                     58
                          Table A.15: Price Imputation Robustness Check

                                                             (1)                                      (2)
Panel A: All Stores
       Issuance Share                                       0.0000                                  0.0000
                                                           (0.0007)                                (0.0017)
                        N                              396,074,068                               396,074,068
Panel B: High-SNAP Stores
       Issuance Share                                       0.0008                                  -0.0010
                                                           (0.0014)                                (0.0025)
                        N                               26,155,896                                26,155,896

Calendar Week * Store                                        No                                       Yes
Notes: This table provides a robustness check on estimates of the effect of SNAP issuance on prices. Unlike
prior specifications, products that are not purchased during one or more weeks in a given store-month are
not excluded from the analysis; rather we impute the price of such products from the average price for the
specified product in the specified week in stores belonging to the same chain and located in the same state.
This analysis is performed for the 100 food products used in the elasticity analysis and described in Table
3. The unit of observation is a product-store-week. The outcome is the log food price per product. Issuance
Share reflects the share of SNAP benefits issued during a calendar week in the jurisdiction in which a store is
located. Panel A contains all stores in the sample; Panel B is limited to stores for which we estimate that the
share of SNAP recipients in the ZIP code is at least 20%. Both columns include product-store-year-month
fixed effects and product-year-month-week fixed effects, and interactions of product by calendar week with
state-year measures of log population, log GDP per capita, and unemployment rate. Column 2 additionally
includes product by calendar week by store fixed effects. All specifications are weighted by average annual
store volume. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered by state. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, ***
p < 0.01.




                                                      59
          Table A.16: First Stage Effect of DMA Price Instrument on Product Price

                                                          (1)                                      (2)
Panel A: All Stores
          DMA Price                                    0.9434                                   0.9430
                                                       (0.0001)                                 (0.0001)
                       N                             379,212,892                              379,212,892
Panel B: High-SNAP Stores
          DMA Price                                    0.9117                                   0.9102
                                                       (0.0003)                                 (0.0004)
                       N                              24,576,132                               24,576,132

Calendar Week * Store                                     No                                       Yes
Notes: The table presents the first stage effect of the Designmated Market Areas (DMA) price instrument
on product prices. The unit of observation is a product-store-week. The analysis is restricted to the top
100 food products by expenditure share among SNAP-eligible shoppers, subject to the limitation that the
product was purchased in at least 80% of store-weeks. The outcome is the log product price. DMA price
refers to the log of the average price of the product across stores in the same chain but located in other
DMAs. Panel A contains all stores in the sample; Panel B is limited to stores for which we estimate that the
share of SNAP recipients in the ZIP code is at least 20%. All columns include product-store-year-month fixed
effects and product-year-month-week fixed effects, and interactions of product by week of the month with
state-year measures of log population, log GDP per capita, and unemployment rate. Column 2 additionally
includes product by calendar week by store fixed effects. All specifications are weighted by average annual
store volume. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered by state. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, ***
p < 0.01.




                                                    60
