                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      THE ACCURACY OF TAX IMPUTATIONS:
                    ESTIMATING TAX LIABILITIES AND CREDITS
                USING LINKED SURVEY AND ADMINISTRATIVE DATA

                                        Bruce D. Meyer
                                           Derek Wu
                                         Grace Finley
                                       Patrick Langetieg
                                         Carla Medalia
                                          Mark Payne
                                         Alan Plumley

                                      Working Paper 28229
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28229

                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020

This paper was prepared for the NBER-CRIW book, "Measuring and Understanding the
Distribution and Intra/Inter-Generational Mobility of Income and Wealth." Any opinions and
conclusions expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views
of the U.S. Census Bureau, the Internal Revenue Service, any other agency of the federal
government, or the NBER. All results were approved for release by the U.S. Census Bureau,
authorization numbers CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-014 and CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-038. We thank
Matthew Stadnicki, Brian Curran, Alexa Grunwaldt, and Angela Wyse for excellent research
assistance; Jim Davis and Maggie Jones for helping us access TAXSIM on the Census servers;
and Dan Feenberg, Tom Hertz, Jonathan Rothbaum, David Splinter, Alex Yuskavage, and
participants at the NBER-CRIW and NTA Conferences for helpful comments and discussions.
We also appreciate the financial support of the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the Russell Sage
Foundation, the Charles Koch Foundation, and the Menard Family Foundation. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Bruce D. Meyer, Derek Wu, Grace Finley, Patrick Langetieg, Carla Medalia, Mark
Payne, and Alan Plumley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Accuracy of Tax Imputations: Estimating Tax Liabilities and Credits Using Linked Survey
and Administrative Data
Bruce D. Meyer, Derek Wu, Grace Finley, Patrick Langetieg, Carla Medalia, Mark Payne, and
Alan Plumley
NBER Working Paper No. 28229
December 2020
JEL No. C42,C81,H20,H24,I32
                                          ABSTRACT

This paper calculates accurate estimates of income and payroll taxes using a groundbreaking set
of linked survey and administrative tax data that are part of the Comprehensive Income Dataset
(CID). We compare our estimates to survey imputations produced by the Census Bureau and
those generated using the TAXSIM calculator from the National Bureau of Economic Research.
The administrative data include two sets of Internal Revenue Service (IRS) data: (1) a limited set
of tax information for the population of individual income tax returns covering selected line items
from Forms 1040, W-2, and 1099-R; and (2) an extensive set of population tax records processed
by the IRS in 2011, covering nearly every line item on Form 1040 and most lines on a series of
third-party information returns. We link these IRS records to the Current Population Survey
Annual Social and Economic Supplement (CPS) for reference year 2010. We describe how we
form tax units and estimate various types of tax liabilities and credits using these linked data,
providing a roadmap for constructing accurate measures of taxes while preserving the survey
family as the sharing unit for distributional analyses. We find that aggregate estimates of various
tax components using the limited and extensive tax data estimates are close to each other and
much closer to public IRS tabulations than either of the imputations using survey data alone. At
the individual level, the absolute errors of survey-only imputations of federal income taxes and
total taxes are on average 10% and 13%, respectively, of adjusted gross income. In contrast, the
limited tax data imputations yield mean absolute errors for federal income taxes and total taxes
that are about 2% and 3% of adjusted gross income, respectively. For the Earned Income Tax
Credit, the limited tax data imputation is off by less than $20 on average for a typical family
(compared to more than $500 using either of the survey-only imputations).

Bruce D. Meyer                                Grace Finley
Harris School of Public Policy                Kennedy School of Government
University of Chicago                         Harvard University
1307 E 60th Street                            79 JFK Street
Chicago, IL 60637                             Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                      gracefinley@g.harvard.edu
bdmeyer@uchicago.edu
                                              Patrick Langetieg
Derek Wu                                      Internal Revenue Service
Harris School of Public Policy                77 K St NE
University of Chicago                         Patrick.T.Langetieg@irs.gov
1307 E 60th Stree
Chicago, IL 60637
derekwu@uchicago.edu
Carla Medalia
U.S. Census Bureau
4600 Silver Hill Road
Washington, DC 20233
carla.medalia@census.gov

Mark Payne
Internal Revenue Service
77 K St NE Washington, DC 20002
John.M.Payne@irs.gov

Alan Plumley
Internal Revenue Service
77 K St NE Washington, DC 20002
alan.plumley@irs.gov



A data appendix is available at
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28229
1.     Introduction
       Accurately measuring tax liabilities and credits is important, as they play a pivotal role in our
understanding of numerous research and policy topics. The Census Bureau has a long history of
calculating features of the income distribution after accounting for taxes (see, e.g., U.S. Census
Bureau 1988, 1993). In recent years, research has proliferated on topics ranging from the
progressivity of the tax and transfer system in the United States (Piketty and Saez 2007,
Congressional Budget Office 2018, Saez and Zucman 2019, Splinter 2019) and poverty rates after
accounting for taxes and transfers (Burkhauser et al. 2019, Fox 2019, Meyer, Wu, and Medalia
2020) to the levels and trends in income inequality and distributional national accounts (Piketty,
Saez, and Zucman 2018, Auten and Splinter 2019).
       However, obtaining convenient and accurate measures of tax liabilities and credits can be
difficult. In household surveys conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau, taxes are never explicitly
asked about and must therefore be imputed. The imputation process makes many strong assumptions
in forming tax units from family and household relationships and relies on income that is measured
with substantial error in surveys. There are also shortcomings associated with administrative tax
records from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), even though these data may contain accurate
measures of taxes. First, access to such data is often restricted and ­ even when access is granted ­
the data may not actually contain measures of taxes paid out and tax credits received. Furthermore,
the IRS does not publish a single measure of net federal income tax liabilities (i.e., taxes owed net of
non-refundable and refundable credits), which must be calculated from a combination of line items.
IRS tax records also do not cover state income taxes, which must be imputed. Finally, the tax unit is
not as natural a sharing unit for distributional analyses as the survey family.
       In this paper, we use a groundbreaking set of linked survey and administrative tax data for
reference year 2010 to calculate accurate estimates of federal and state income taxes and payroll
taxes for families and unrelated individuals in the Current Population Survey Annual Social and
Economic Supplement (CPS ASEC). We compare our estimates to the imputations from the Census
tax calculator and those calculated using the National Bureau of Economic Research's TAXSIM
program. Both of these calculators are extensively used by researchers, with the Census tax
imputations constituting the default tax amounts on the public-use CPS ASEC file and the TAXSIM




                                                   1
calculator serving as perhaps the most well-known and convenient platform for simulating taxes. 1
Specifically, we use estimates from an extensive set of tax records (containing nearly every line item
on a 1040) to assess the measurement error associated with imputations using survey data alone as
well as imputations using survey data combined with a limited set of IRS tax records (containing
certain 1040 line items but no tax liabilities or credits). This limited dataset is what the Census
Bureau receives from the IRS under current regulations and maintains historically. Thus, we also
assess the value to the U.S. Census Bureau (and potentially the broader research community) of
more tax data being shared by the IRS.
        We describe in detail how we form tax units and estimate commonly used measures of tax
liabilities and credits using the linked survey and tax data. While we rely primarily on the TAXSIM
calculator when using the limited tax data, we also modify TAXSIM in a number of ways to better
utilize the advantages and accommodate the shortcomings of the data and TAXSIM. In doing so, we
hope to provide a methodological roadmap for other researchers interested in using linked survey
and administrative data to construct accurate measures of taxes while preserving the survey family as
the sharing unit for distributional analyses. One should keep in mind that the incomes on the tax
records are the incomes reported to the IRS, and therefore should not necessarily be considered the
truth (as some individuals may not file tax returns and some filers may not accurately report their
income, the tax benefits to which they are entitled, or even their filing status). But crucially, many of
the variables we use are recorded consistently in taxpayer and business filings, and it is these reports
that largely determine taxes ultimately paid.
        While previous studies have compared the accuracy of various tax calculators using survey
inputs to administrative targets at an aggregate level, this is one of the first studies to assess the
quality of various tax calculators at the individual or family level. Jones and Ziliak (2020) uses
linked survey and tax records to compare estimates of the Earned Income Tax Credit across different
calculators, but no study ­ to the best of our knowledge ­ uses such linked microdata to evaluate the
accuracy of a more comprehensive set of tax liabilities and credits. Another key contribution of this
study is that it uses combined survey and administrative data to fill in holes associated with relying
exclusively on values from the administrative 1040 data. Specifically, we bring in incomes from
information returns including W-2s and 1099-Rs as well as survey reports (when information returns

1
 As of October 2020, Feenberg and Coutts (1993) ­ which provides an introduction to TAXSIM ­ has been cited nearly
1,000 times on Google Scholar.


                                                        2
are unavailable) to calculate taxes for those in the survey to whom a 1040 record cannot be attached.
No administrative records can be linked to some of these individuals, as they are missing the Census
identifiers that are necessary to link across data sources. In other cases, individuals may have had
taxes withheld even if they did not file a 1040 or may have filed tax returns late.2 Simulating taxes in
this way also aligns our estimates better with aggregates published by the IRS Statistics of Income,
which cover both taxes filed for the relevant tax years as well as taxes paid by some late filers.
         We find that aggregate estimates of various tax components using the limited tax data
imputations and extensive tax data calculations are close to each other and much closer to IRS SOI
aggregates than any of the imputations using survey data alone. This pattern is particularly true for
the EITC and Child Tax Credit. Looking at differences at the individual level, we find that the
imputations of federal income tax liability and total tax liability using survey data alone have mean
absolute errors of 10% and 13%, respectively, of average adjusted gross income, where we take the
calculations based on the extensive tax data to be the benchmark. A key reason for these errors is
that the mean absolute difference in the survey calculation of adjusted gross income is 44% of the
mean amount from the extensive tax data. Moreover, looking at the bottom quartile of survey-
reported income, the mean absolute errors in the survey calculations of the EITC alone have a
magnitude of 5% of adjusted gross income.
         In contrast, the limited tax data imputations have 22-23% of the absolute errors of the survey
imputations for federal income tax liability and 19-20% of the absolute errors of the survey
imputations for total tax liability, taking the extensive tax data calculations as the benchmark (the
range is due to the choice of which calculator is used). The improvement in tax calculations using
the limited tax data is especially noticeable in the top half of the survey income distribution. For a
typical family, we also find that the limited tax data imputation is off by less than $20 for the EITC
(compared to $550 and $569 using the Census and TAXSIM survey imputations, respectively) and
by less than $50 for the Child Tax Credit (compared to $275 and $306 using the Census and
TAXSIM survey imputations). All statements in the text are statistically significant at the 10%
significance level, unless otherwise noted.
         The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the specific types of
income and payroll taxes that we estimate. Section 3 discusses the different tax simulation models

2
 Langetieg, Payne, and Plumley (2017) find that late filers (defined as those filing within two years of the end of the tax
year) constituted 4.5% of total required tax filers during the 2010 tax year.


                                                            3
used in the literature to calculate taxes. Section 4 describes the survey and administrative data and
how they are linked. Section 5 discusses how we construct survey tax units in the linked sample and
use inputs from the survey data and/or administrative tax records to calculate tax liabilities and
credits. Section 6 presents results comparing tax estimates obtained using various tax calculators,
both in aggregate and at an individual level across the income distribution. Section 7 concludes.


2.     Background on Taxes
       In this paper, we estimate several types of income tax liabilities and credits. Specifically, we
estimate federal income taxes, state income taxes, and payroll taxes. With regard to tax credits, we
principally estimate the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) and Child Tax Credit (CTC) ­ which are
the two largest tax credits commonly calculated in tax simulation models ­ and bring in other tax
credits where we can. Our goal is to calculate what taxes should be deducted from an individual's
total income to obtain income available for consumption. As a result, we seek to calculate the tax
liability that an individual accrued in a given calendar year, regardless of whether or not the
individual paid any taxes or received any credits.


Federal Income Tax Liabilities and Credits
       We define federal income taxes as total federal income taxes owed net of non-refundable and
refundable federal tax credits. Federal income taxes can therefore be negative or positive, depending
on whether or not federal income tax liabilities before credits exceed federal tax credits. The main
components of federal income tax liabilities before credits are the tax directly calculated on taxable
income and the alternative minimum tax; where we can, we also bring in smaller taxes like the
additional taxes on Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs) and other qualified retirement plans.
Non-refundable tax credits are capped in the aggregate at the income tax amount before credits,
while refundable tax credits can exceed the income tax amount before credits.
       One of the most prominent refundable federal tax credits is the EITC, which is a benefit for
families and individuals with positive but low earnings. For a family with two children, the
maximum EITC amount in 2010 was $5,036. Eligibility for the EITC depends on several factors.
First, eligible tax units must have members with valid Social Security Numbers (SSNs). Second,
only those with positive earnings can receive the credit. The EITC initially increases proportionally
with earnings, then remains at a maximum level for a range of earned income, and finally decreases

                                                  4
proportionally with additional earnings until it is completely phased out. Third, filers must have an
adjusted gross income (AGI) below a given threshold to be eligible, with a higher threshold for joint
(married) filers than single (unmarried) filers. 3 Lastly, the amount of the credit increases with the
number of qualifying children in the tax unit. 4
        Like the EITC, the CTC is also a tax credit for families with positive but low earnings. The
maximum CTC amount that a family could receive in tax year 2010 was $1,000 per eligible child,
with this amount decreasing with AGI over $75,000 (for a single filer) and $110,000 (for a joint
filer) until completely phasing out. Unlike the EITC, the CTC has both a non-refundable and
refundable portion. The non-refundable portion of the CTC is capped at the federal income tax
liability before credits. Meanwhile, the refundable portion ­ also known as the Additional Child Tax
Credit (ACTC) ­ is capped at the remaining difference between the maximum CTC amount and the
non-refundable portion of the CTC. Tax units earning less than $3,000 are generally ineligible for
the refundable portion, as it is phased-in proportionally with earnings above the $3,000 threshold. 5
        Families and individuals can also claim a wide variety of non-refundable and refundable tax
credits outside of the EITC and CTC. Other important non-refundable credits include: the foreign tax
credit (for individuals who also pay income taxes to a foreign government), education credits (for
families with qualifying students at institutions of higher education), and the child and dependent
care credit (for families with certain expenses to care for qualifying children or other dependents).
Other important refundable credits include: the Making Work Pay Credit (temporarily created as part
of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 and providing a maximum of $400 or
$800 for single and married earners, respectively) and the American Opportunity Tax Credit (also
created as part of the 2009 Recovery Act to help cover qualified post-secondary education expenses).


State Income Tax Liabilities and Credits
        State income taxes are administered by state governments and vary by state. Most states
feature a progressive tax system like the federal income tax system, where higher levels of income
are taxed at higher rates than lower levels. However, some states ­ including Colorado,
3
  In 2010, this threshold was $45,373 for a family with two qualifying children with the parents filing jointly.
4
  The definition of an EITC-qualifying child can be found on p. 46 of the IRS 1040 Tax Guide for 2010, and ­ in the
cases when we simulate the number of EITC-eligible children from survey information only ­ we follow the rules as
closely as we can. See https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-prior/i1040gi--2010.pdf.
5
  The definition of a CTC-qualifying child can be found on p. 40 of the IRS 1040 Tax Guide for 2010. Once again, we
follow the rules as closely as we can when calculating the number of children eligible for the CTC.


                                                        5
Massachusetts, and Michigan ­ impose a flat rate rather than a progressive tax rate. A few states ­
including Alaska, Florida, Texas, and Washington ­ do not have a state income tax. For states that
do have a progressive tax system, the number of brackets and the marginal tax rates vary
significantly (e.g., Hawaii had twelve brackets while Kansas only had three in 2010). Hawaii had the
highest marginal state income tax rate in 2010, with a rate of 11% on incomes over $200,000.
Nonetheless, even the highest marginal state income tax rate was only a fraction of the highest
marginal federal income tax rate in 2010, which was 35% on incomes over $373,650 for both single
and joint filers.
        Additionally, states vary by the type of income that they tax. In most states, taxable income
follows the federal definition of taxable income. However, some states only tax certain types of
income (e.g., New Hampshire taxes interest and dividends but not earned income). Some states also
allow federal income tax liabilities to be deducted from taxable income, while others do not. Lastly,
while most states offer tax credits, the specific types of credits vary substantially by state. Twenty-
one states (plus the District of Columbia) had enacted a state EITC program by 2010, with the state
EITC amounts ranging from 5% to 85% of the federal EITC amount. Fewer than 10 states offered a
state CTC program, with state amounts being only a fraction of the federal program amounts and
state eligibility requirements sometimes being stricter than the federal requirements. Because of the
variation in state tax laws, estimating state income tax liabilities can be more complex than
estimating federal income tax liabilities. However, most tax calculators take this state-level variation
into account.


Payroll Taxes
        Payroll taxes fund the Social Security Administration's Old Age, Survivors, and Disability
Insurance (OASDI) program and the Medicare program. Payroll taxes on wages and salaries ­
known as the Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA) taxes ­ are paid equally by employees and
employers. The employee half is generally withheld by employers (and reported on a W-2) and must
be paid regardless of whether or not the employee files a tax return, while the employer half is paid
by the employer directly. Because our goal is to calculate what must be subtracted from gross
income to obtain disposable income, we do not include taxes paid by the employer. In contrast,
individuals pay payroll taxes on self-employment earnings ­ otherwise known as the Self-
Employment Contributions Act (SECA) taxes ­ throughout the year and reconcile those payments


                                                   6
with the final liability directly on a 1040 when they file their federal income tax returns. For
wage/salary earnings, the employee portion of payroll taxes in 2010 was 6.2% for OASDI taxes and
1.45% for Medicare taxes. Self-employed workers pay both the employer and employee portions of
the payroll tax, amounting to 12.4% of self-employment earnings for OASDI taxes and 2.9% for
Medicare taxes.6 OASDI taxes are paid on only the first $106,800 of earnings, while Medicare taxes
are uncapped.


3.      Literature on Tax Calculators
        Tax simulation models have been developed by several research organizations to impute
federal and state income taxes and payroll taxes from income and demographic inputs. These
calculators are necessary and useful for a number of reasons. First, taxes are never directly reported
on any Census Bureau household surveys. Second, it can be difficult to access administrative
microdata containing information on taxes paid and tax credits received. Third, even in datasets like
the Public Use Tax File (PUF) from the Internal Revenue Service's Statistics of Income Division,
state income taxes and payroll taxes are often not available. In this section, we discuss several tax
calculators that have been frequently used by researchers to calculate taxes.


Description of Available Tax Calculators
        One of the most widely used tax simulation models is the TAXSIM calculator from the
National Bureau of Economic Research (Feenberg and Coutts 1993). Numerous studies have used
the TAXSIM calculator to simulate taxes from various types of microdata, including survey data and
samples of IRS tax returns (see, e.g., Gruber and Saez 2002, Meyer and Sullivan 2003, Piketty and
Saez 2007, Dahl and Lochner 2012). The latest version of TAXSIM is designed to calculate taxes
based on 27 variables provided by the user, and its outputs include ­ among other measures ­ federal
income tax liability, state income tax liability, payroll taxes, and a variety of credits (including
federal and state EITC amounts, the non-refundable and refundable portions of the CTC, and the
child and dependent care credit). The TAXSIM model can be used to calculate taxes for all tax units,
regardless of whether or not they are required to file tax returns. TAXSIM is also updated on an


6
 However, self-employed workers can deduct one-half of their total self-employment tax from their taxable income
when calculating federal income tax.


                                                       7
annual basis to take into account changes in tax rules at the federal and state level, but it does not
allow for the calculation of local income taxes.
         The Bakija Income Tax Calculator ­ developed by Jon Bakija (Bakija 2014) ­ is another tax
simulation model that researchers have used in recent years (see, e.g., Giertz 2007, Hoynes and
Luttmer 2011, Meyer and Sullivan 2012, Jones and Ziliak 2020). Like TAXSIM, the Bakija model
allows for the calculation of federal and state income taxes, payroll taxes, and a variety of credits
(including federal and state EITC amounts, the non-refundable and refundable portions of the CTC,
and the child and dependent care credit). The Bakija model, like TAXSIM, can be used to calculate
taxes for all tax units, regardless of whether or not they are required to file taxes. And, like
TAXSIM, the Bakija model is updated yearly to account for changes in federal and state income tax
rules. Finally, both TAXSIM and the Bakija model are sufficiently flexible that they can run on data
from any source, so long as the necessary inputs are provided.
         However, there are some differences between the Bakija model and TAXSIM. First, the
Bakija model allows more detailed inputs by calculating taxes based on 70 variables provided by the
user (compared to 27 input variables for TAXSIM). For example, while TAXSIM tends to input
income sources in a more aggregate form (e.g., total deductions, property income covering
interest/rent/alimony/etc.) and sums them across the primary and secondary filers in a married tax
unit, the Bakija model allows the input of disaggregated income sources within several categories
and also by primary and secondary filer in a married tax unit. The Bakija model also calculates
federal and state income taxes going back to 1913 and 1900, respectively, while TAXSIM only
calculates federal and state income taxes going back to 1960 and 1977, respectively. On the other
hand, TAXSIM has the capability to model tax rules for dependent filers, while the Bakija model
currently does not.
         The Census Bureau has also developed a tax model used to calculate tax liabilities and credits
using inputs from the CPS ASEC and the IRS Statistics of Income PUF (O'Hara 2004, Webster
2011). The PUF is used through a statistical match with the CPS ASEC to impute certain variables,
including itemized deductions and (until recently) capital gains, which the CPS does not ask about.7
Like TAXSIM and the Bakija model, the Census model outputs federal and state income taxes,
payroll taxes, and various tax credits (including the EITC, the non-refundable and refundable

7
  Specifically, while the Census tax model accounted for capital gains during reference year 2010 (our time period of
interest), more recent changes to the model have resulted in capital gains being omitted in the model's current iteration.


                                                            8
portions of the CTC, and the child and dependent care credit). Unlike TAXSIM and the Bakija
model, however, the Census model designates some tax units as nonfilers.
       Finally, the Urban Institute has developed and maintained the Transfer Income Model
Version 3 (TRIM3), a microsimulation model that ­ among various roles ­ calculates federal and
state income taxes and payroll taxes (Zedlewski and Giannarelli 2015). Like the Census tax model,
TRIM3 is specifically designed to run on the CPS ASEC by defining tax units, dependents and
qualifying children for various tax credits, and income items using that survey. TRIM3, like the
Census model, also relies on a statistical match with the IRS Statistics of Income PUF to impute
itemized deductions and capital gains. Unlike the Census model, TRIM3 calculates taxes for all tax
units, regardless of whether or not they are required to file taxes.


Comparisons of Tax Calculators
       To the best of our knowledge, Wheaton and Stevens (2016) is the only study to have
compared several outcomes of each of the tax simulation models described above. Using the CPS
ASEC, they start by comparing income tax liabilities and credits calculated using TRIM3 to those
calculated using the Census tax model, relative to administrative targets from the IRS Statistics of
Income line item totals. They also compare the outputs of the TAXSIM and Bakija models using
inputs generated separately by TRIM3 and the Census model. Although the Census tax model by
default assigns some units to be nonfilers, Wheaton and Stevens simulate taxes for all units using the
Census tax model regardless of whether they would actually file (following the approach used by
TAXSIM, the Bakija model, and TRIM3).
       Wheaton and Stevens find that TRIM3 captures a higher share of AGI and taxable income
than the Census model, primarily because TRIM3 incorporates capital gains (based on a statistical
match from the IRS PUF) while the Census model no longer captures capital gains. However, both
models yield estimates of AGI and taxable income that fall short of administrative targets by 5-15%.
When it comes to federal income tax liabilities, TRIM3 generally yields estimates that are closer to
administrative targets throughout the income distribution than the Census tax model. For example,
both TRIM3 and the Census tax model produce federal income tax estimates that are above
administrative targets for tax units with AGIs between $10,000 and $200,000, with the Census
model estimates generally being higher than TRIM3 estimates. The authors attribute this discrepancy
to the Census model capturing fewer itemized deductions than TRIM3 in this portion of the income


                                                  9
distribution. Furthermore, TRIM3 and the Census tax model produce federal income tax estimates
that are below administrative targets for tax units with AGI above $200,000, with Census model
estimates generally being lower than TRIM3 estimates. The authors ascribe this difference to the
Census model not accounting for capital gains.
        When it comes to federal tax credits, estimates of the EITC obtained using TRIM3 continue
to be closer to administrative targets than those calculated using the Census tax model. The
difference in EITC estimates between TRIM3 and the Census tax model is partly due to TRIM3
identifying more EITC-qualifying children. Specifically, the Census model identifies EITC-eligible
children as children under the age of 19 or between the ages of 19 and 23 and enrolled in school,
while TRIM3 further accounts for adult disabled children, married children, and other relatives who
meet the qualifying requirements for the EITC. TRIM3 also produces total state income tax
estimates that are also closer to administrative targets (compiled from the Census of Governments)
than the Census model, and estimates of state-level EITC amounts using TRIM3 are also closer to
administrative targets than those obtained using the Census model.
        Wheaton and Stevens also find that the TAXSIM and Bakija models yield tax estimates that
are very similar to TRIM3 when inputs are defined using TRIM3 and very similar to the Census
model when inputs are defined using the Census model. With regard to federal income tax liabilities,
the TAXSIM and Bakija models yield similar estimates (conditional on inputs) throughout the entire
income distribution except at the very bottom (i.e., for tax units with AGI amounts below $10,000).
This difference comes from the Bakija model not accounting for dependent filers, most of whom
have AGI amounts below $10,000. The TAXSIM and Bakija models also yield similar values to
each other for tax credits and total state income taxes. However, there is some variation between
these models when looking at state income taxes for individual states, with this difference being
indicative of the complexities associated with state income tax modeling.


4.      Data
        To calculate tax liabilities and credits, we rely on two types of data: survey data and
administrative tax records. Our survey data come from the 2011 CPS ASEC.8 We also rely on two


8
 Technical documentation (CPS Technical Papers 66 and 77) with full discussion of CPS and CPS ASEC methodology
can be downloaded from https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/cps/technical-documentation/complete.2011.html.


                                                     10
IRS administrative datasets for the population: one with limited 1040 return information and another
with extensive 1040 return information that includes all 1040 line items and most items on third-
party information documents sent to the IRS. We focus on reference year 2010, since this is the only
year for which the extensive tax data are available.


Survey Data
         The CPS ASEC (hereafter referred to as CPS) collects demographic and income information
for households representing the civilian non-institutionalized U.S. population. The 2011 CPS
interviewed approximately 75,000 households (including approximately 90,000 families) between
February and April 2011 about their annual incomes for the previous calendar year. Furthermore,
using reported incomes and information on family structure, the CPS uses an in-house calculator to
impute amounts for various tax liabilities, credits, and tax inputs. These items include federal and
state income tax, payroll tax, the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), Child Tax Credit (CTC), and
adjusted gross income (AGI). While the CPS is a household-level survey, our unit of analysis is a
family ­ defined as either a group of two or more related individuals residing together or an
unrelated individual. The family is generally thought to better approximate the unit that shares
resources and is the unit for the official poverty measure.


Administrative Tax Records
         We rely on two different datasets provided by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). The first
dataset, hereafter referred to as the "limited tax data," is provided to the U.S. Census Bureau under
Section 6103(j) of Title 26 of the U.S. Code, which allows the U.S. Census Bureau to use IRS tax
data for Census survey improvement. The second dataset, hereafter referred to as the "extensive tax
data," is provided to the U.S. Census Bureau under Section 6103(n) of Title 26, which gives access
to the data for the purpose of tax administration. We also bring in information on taxable self-
employment income from the Detailed Earnings Record of the Social Security Administration
(SSA).


Limited Tax Data
         The limited tax data include line items extracted from the universe of Forms 1040, W-2, and
1099-R submitted during the 2011 calendar year, primarily for the 2010 tax year. We start by


                                                 11
describing the information available in the limited 1040 data. These data first contain a set of
variables covering tax unit structure, including an identifier assigned by the Census Bureau to every
tax return, a variable identifying the type of 1040 form (e.g., 1040-EZ, 1040-NR, etc.), filing status,
and the various types of exemptions claimed. We also have reported income amounts for the
following 1040 line items: wages/salaries, taxable dividends, taxable and tax-exempt interest, gross
rents and royalties, Social Security income, adjusted gross income (AGI), and total money income.
Total money income incorporates most sources of income reported in the "income" section of the
1040 form (lines 7-21 of the 1040 form for tax year 2010), but it misses several key income sources
­ including capital gains ­ and is therefore not identical to total income on a 1040 (line 22 of the
1040 form for tax year 2010).
         The limited 1040 data also include separate indicators each for whether a tax unit filed
Schedule A (itemized deductions), Schedule C (profits or losses from self employment), Schedule D
(capital gains and losses), Schedule E (supplemental incomes and losses, including rents and
royalties), Schedule F (profits or losses from farming), and Schedule SE (self-employment taxes).
Furthermore, the limited 1040 data include reported EITC earned income and the number of EITC-
eligible children claimed (ranging from zero to three) for tax units that claim the EITC.9 Finally, the
limited 1040 data include a variable for posting date, which indicates the week that a 1040 return
was posted to the IRS Individual Master File. As for the information returns in the limited tax data,
the W-2 data contain amounts for taxable wages/salaries and deferred compensation associated with
each employee-employer combination (with employers identified by their employer identification
numbers ­ EINs), while the 1099-R data contain amounts of gross retirement distributions from both
employer-sponsored plans and IRA withdrawals.
         Despite including all these items, there are several weaknesses associated with the limited tax
data. First, even though the limited 1040 data cover enough line items to calculate tax liabilities and
credits relatively accurately (especially for those low in the income distribution), they do not contain
actual amounts for federal income taxes paid or tax credits received. The limited 1040 data also miss
key line items, such as capital gains/losses and itemized deductions, that are necessary to generate
accurate estimates of federal income tax liabilities for those high in the income distribution.
Moreover, while the limited 1040 data indicate whether or not a tax unit filed a given Schedule, we

9
 These variables, along with filing status and AGI, allow us to calculate the exact amount of EITC received by tax units
claiming the credit (not simply those tax units that the IRS thinks are eligible).


                                                          12
do not receive information on the contents of that Schedule. The limited tax data also do not cover
information returns outside of Forms W-2 and 1099-R. Of particular interest to us, among the
missing returns, are Forms 1099-G (covering unemployment compensation), 1099-MISC (covering
self-employment earnings for independent contractors), and Schedule K-1 information returns
(covering partnership earnings).


Extensive Tax Data
       The extensive tax data comprise a set of over fifty data files containing information for nearly
every line item corresponding to the universe of 1040 forms (along with the accompanying
Schedules) and a wide set of information returns submitted for the 2010 tax year. The information
returns in the extensive data pertain to only tax year 2010, while the 1040 forms include forms filed
during calendar year 2011 for tax year 2010 as well as prior tax years. Crucially, the extensive 1040
data contain amounts reported for federal income tax liabilities, various tax credits (such as the
EITC), and various deductions. The extensive 1040 data also contain two versions of nearly every
line item on the 1040 ­ one containing raw values corresponding to what was filed and one
containing computer-corrected values that correct for obvious errors (e.g., missing decimal point, too
many zeros, etc.) but not for noncompliance. Wherever possible, we use the computer-corrected
version of a variable.
       With regard to information returns, the extensive tax data contain almost every line item for a
large set of forms, including ­ but not limited to ­ Forms W-2, 1099-R, 1099-G, 1099-MISC, and
Schedule K-1. A caveat associated with the information returns in the extensive tax data is that
"payers" ­ such as employers on W-2s ­ are identified only by their five-digit zip codes (rather than
by EINs, for example). Therefore, distinguishing between unique jobs in the extensive W-2 data may
be more difficult for individuals working in multiple jobs within the same five-digit zip code. We
discuss these issues in greater depth below.


Detailed Earnings Record
       Our final source of administrative tax data is the Detailed Earnings Record (DER) database
of the SSA. The DER contains wage and salary earnings derived from IRS W-2 Forms and a
measure of self-employment earnings (namely, the Medicare-taxable portion of total net self-



                                                 13
employment earnings) derived from Schedule SE of Form 1040. 10 A caveat regarding the DER is
that it contains records only for individuals with valid SSNs and therefore misses W-2s or 1040s
filed using employees' Individual Taxpayer Identification Numbers (ITINs). In this paper, we
primarily rely on the DER to calculate the self-employment portion of payroll taxes when we use the
limited tax data, as those data do not contain any amounts corresponding to self-employment
income.


Attaching Tax Records to Survey Data
Protected Identification Keys
        We attach administrative tax records to survey data using Protected Identification Keys
(PIKs) created by the U.S. Census Bureau's Person Identification Validation System (PVS) (Wagner
and Layne 2014). Approximately 92% of families in the CPS contain at least one member linked to a
PIK. We limit our CPS sample to include survey families with at least one PIKed member and no
individuals with entirely imputed income (often called whole imputes). These restrictions result in a
sample size of 69,000 families containing 170,000 individuals. To correct for the bias arising from
non-random missing PIKs and whole imputations, we divide individual survey weights by the
predicted probability that at least one member of the family has a PIK and no member is a whole
impute (conditional on observables in the survey). Doing so allows us to approximately match
population totals using the re-weighted sample.
        Almost all administrative tax records are linked to PIKs. In the limited tax data, PIKs for the
primary filer, secondary filer, and up to four dependents are available for each 1040 return. In the
extensive tax data, PIKs are available for the primary filer, secondary filer, and all dependents
(uncapped) for each 1040 return. Nearly all of the information returns in the limited and extensive
tax data also contain a PIK corresponding to the individual receiving the income relevant to that
return (e.g., wage/salary earnings on a W-2, retirement income on a 1099-R, etc.). It is worth noting
that we do not adjust for missing PIKs in the 1040s and other tax records, given that there are
insufficient demographics in the tax data and it is not clear how one would reweight those data to
account for missing PIKs. Consequently, we will slightly understate income amounts attached from
the administrative tax data to the survey frame.

10
  Medicare-taxable self-employment earnings are defined as 92.35% of total net self-employment income minus health
insurance costs.


                                                       14
Attaching 1040 Records to Survey Records
         Because an individual should appear as a primary or secondary filer on only one tax return,
we attach only one 1040 return to each survey individual. 11 However, there are cases when an
individual may appear as a primary or secondary filer on multiple 1040 forms (e.g., when an
individual has amended or corrected returns). If two or more 1040 forms can be attached to one
survey individual, then we keep the return with the latest posting date, a filing status of married,
filing jointly (if the returns have the same posting date), or higher AGI amount (if the returns have
the same posting date and filing status).12 When attaching 1040 returns to survey individuals, we do
not bring in tax returns where only the dependent (and not the primary and/or secondary filers)
appears in the CPS. We are able to attach at least one 1040 return to over 88% of CPS families in our
sample, with 17% of families having multiple 1040 returns attached.13


Attaching Information Returns to Survey Records
         Individuals may also have multiple valid forms for a given information return (unlike for a
1040). For example, a person may receive two W-2s (one from each employer) if she works two
jobs. In this case, we attach both W-2 forms to that individual since each form represents a separate
income stream. In rare cases, an employer may even file multiple valid W-2s for an employee. In the
limited W-2 data (which contain EINs), we keep all W-2s pertaining to a "job" (corresponding to a
PIK-EIN combination) if every return associated with that "job" is designated as an "original"
return. When a "job" contains amended or corrected returns, we keep only the amended or corrected
form. 14 For 1099-Rs, the limited tax data do not contain any amendment codes or information on
payers, so we sum over the retirement distributions for all 1099-Rs received by an individual to
calculate the total retirement income associated with that individual.



11
   In the case of married individuals filing separately, an individual may appear on two returns. In this case, we still
attach only one return to the individual because income and tax amounts on such returns only accrue to the filer and not
the spouse.
12
   If a dependent appears on multiple forms, then we follow a similar methodology to keep only one 1040 form per
dependent. While it is not legal for multiple people to claim the same dependent, it is reasonable to assume that some
people do (e.g., divorced parents claiming the same child).
13
   Note that the percentages reported here ­ and in the rest of Sections 4 and 5 ­ are un-weighted.
14
   If more than one amended or corrected form appears for a given job, then we keep the form with the latest posting
date. If the forms have the same posting date, then we keep the one with the higher income amount.


                                                          15
         In the extensive tax data, we de-duplicate information returns slightly differently because
"payers" are identified only by their five-digit zip codes rather than actual identification numbers.
The presence of these payer zip codes and amendment codes across the information returns means
that we can now de-duplicate all information returns (not just W-2s) in the extensive tax data. When
a PIK-payer zip code combination has a corrected or amended form, we keep that form and drop at
least one other original form (if one exists). In the case of the extensive W-2 data, if a PIK-payer zip
code combination with a corrected/amended form contains either multiple corrected/amended forms
or multiple original forms, then we use the EINs from the limited tax data to identify whether these
returns correspond to a single employer or multiple employers within the same zip code.


5.       Methods
         In this section, we discuss how we construct survey tax units in the linked CPS sample and
use inputs from the survey data and/or administrative tax records to calculate tax liabilities and
credits. We examine four different ways of calculating tax liabilities and credits using the linked
CPS sample. In the first approach, we use taxes calculated using the Census tax model relying only
on CPS information. In the second approach, we continue to rely solely on CPS information but use
TAXSIM to impute tax liabilities and credits from survey inputs, using information on filing status
generated by the Census tax model. 15 In the third approach, we combine information from the CPS
and limited tax data to form tax units and impute tax liabilities and credits using TAXSIM. In the
fourth approach, we combine information from the CPS and extensive tax data to form tax units and,
when needed, impute tax liabilities and credits using TAXSIM. Note that the first and second
approaches represent two ways of imputing taxes using survey inputs only, and the third approach
reflects our best attempt at simulating taxes using inputs from a combination of limited tax records
and survey data.16 The fourth approach represents the "gold standard" calculation, as it pulls tax
liabilities and credits directly from an extensive set of 1040 line items whenever possible.

15
   We continue to rely on filing statuses generated by the Census tax model even when imputing tax liabilities using the
TAXSIM calculator, as this allows for a more direct comparison of the tax calculators holding the inputs (including tax
unit structure) constant. This also follows the methodology of Wheaton and Stevens (2016). In future work where our
goal is no longer to specifically compare the calculators, we may consider using household and family relationships from
the survey to construct tax units ourselves.
16
   While we refer to these calculations as "imputations" throughout the paper, one should think of them more as
simulations based on survey reports and less as probabilistic imputations like hotdecking. While the Census tax model
does rely on probabilistic statistical matches in some cases (e.g., capital gains, itemized deductions), many of these


                                                          16
        Before laying out the methodology in detail, it is worth clarifying what we seek to calculate ­
specifically what should be deducted from an individual's observed income to obtain income
available for consumption. The target for our tax calculations consists of the tax liability that an
individual accrued in a given calendar year, regardless of whether or not the individual paid any
taxes or received any credits. An implication of this conceptualization of taxes is that an individual
may have a tax liability for tax year 2010 even if a 1040 filed in calendar year 2011 could not be
attached to her survey record ­ specifically, linkage issues aside, an individual may have had taxes
withheld even if they did not file a 1040 or may have filed taxes late. One implication of this goal is
that the incidence of payroll taxes does not matter for the calculation of after-tax income. Our goal is
just to calculate what is left over after paying taxes, and incidence would be reflected in pre-tax
incomes. Of course, incidence does affect what income would be in the absence of taxes.


Forming Survey Tax Units
Using Survey Information Only
        When calculating taxes using only CPS information (the first two approaches above), we
follow the Census tax model's process for assigning survey individuals to tax units based on marital
status and household relationship. Every survey tax unit has a primary filer. If the filing status of the
survey tax unit is married filing jointly, then there is also a secondary filer. Specifically, married
couples in primary families are assigned a filing status of married filing jointly, and unmarried
family heads in primary families are assigned a filing status of head of household if they can claim a
dependent (and a filing status of single otherwise). Dependents are assigned to family heads if they
are either children under the age of 19, children under the age of 24 and simultaneously enrolled in
school, or other relatives with incomes below the filing threshold ($3,650 in 2010).17 All other
individuals are labeled as single filers. Taxes are calculated only for units who meet the filing
requirement based on the following criteria: having total income exceeding the filing threshold,


matches are likely relevant only for the high end of the income distribution and would therefore not affect the vast
majority of tax units.
17
   Previous studies ­ including Jones and O'Hara (2016) and Splinter, Larrimore, and Mortenson (2017) ­ have shown
that dependents are sometimes strategically reassigned within multi-family households to minimize tax liabilities or
maximize EITC benefits. These reassignments may serve as a channel through which survey imputations of the EITC ­
which assign dependents based on family structure ­ might be understated relative to administrative values. Another
related reason for why survey values of the EITC might be understated is that the EITC-qualifying dependents during a
given tax year may not appear in a family or household when it is subsequently interviewed for the CPS ASEC.


                                                         17
being eligible for the EITC, having self-employment income above $400, or having negative gross
or self-employment income. Tax units that do not meet these requirements would not have a tax
liability and are treated as not having a reason to file.


Using Survey Information and Tax Records
        When using a combination of survey information and tax records, we create survey tax units
in one of two ways. First, for individuals to whom we can attach a 1040 return, we rely on the 1040
tax unit structure to assign them to survey tax units. Second, for all individuals to whom we cannot
attach a 1040 return, we use survey information on family relationship to assign them to survey tax
units. Note that we use survey reports to calculate taxes for individuals to whom we cannot attach a
1040 return, as they may have had taxes withheld and/or paid taxes late. We thus assign everyone in
our CPS sample to a survey tax unit with the role of primary filer, secondary filer, or dependent. Our
methodology for forming survey tax units generally holds when attaching forms from both the
limited and extensive tax data, though we discuss small differences between the data sources below.
        For survey individuals to whom we can attach a 1040 return, we identify their roles as
primary filers, secondary filers, and dependents based on their status on the 1040 returns. We
designate a dependent filer as a dependent to whom we can also attach a separate 1040 return on
which he/she is a primary or secondary filer. Because the limited 1040 data identify at most four
PIKed dependents and a small number of 1040 dependents may also not link to a PIK, we use the
CPS to assign un-attached individuals qualifying as dependents (based on survey characteristics) to
tax units for which the number of 1040 dependent exemptions exceeds the number of PIKed
dependents.18 We undertake this process because the limited 1040 data do not contain amounts or
even the number of qualifying children for certain child-related tax credits, such as the CTC and the
child and dependent care credit. We therefore manually calculate the number of qualifying children
for these credits by first identifying all dependents and then linking birth dates from the SSA
Numident file to calculate the number of dependents with ages falling below the specific thresholds
for relevant credits (age 17 for the CTC and age 13 for the child and dependent care credit). We
assign un-attached dependents in this way only when attaching the limited tax records and not the
extensive tax records, as the extensive 1040 data provide amounts for all tax credits.

18
  We do this for only 1% of tax units, because in 99% of tax units the number of dependent exemptions equals the
number of PIKed dependents.


                                                      18
        Moreover, for a small number of survey individuals (in 4.3% of tax units), we attach joint
1040 returns even though one of the primary or secondary filers on those returns does not appear in
the CPS. We deal with four such cases:
   1. No spouse is recorded in the CPS family, but a spouse is noted as absent in the CPS. We use
        the full amount of tax liabilities and credits calculated for the joint 1040 return. This case
        covers 0.76% of tax units.
   2. No spouse is recorded in the CPS family, and the individual to whom we attach the joint
        1040 return is identified as unmarried in the CPS. We use half the amount of tax liabilities
        and credits calculated for the joint 1040 return. This case covers 1.54% of tax units.
   3. An un-PIKed spouse is recorded in the CPS family. We assume that the un-PIKed spouse is
        the primary or secondary filer on the 1040 return and use the full amount of tax liabilities
        and credits calculated for the joint 1040 return. This case covers 0.99% of tax units.
   4. There is a PIKed spouse interviewed in the CPS family who is not the other spouse on the
        joint 1040 return. We assign half the amount of tax liabilities and credits calculated for the
        joint 1040 return to the individual to whom this return is attached, and we classify the other
        PIKed spouse as a single filer or head of household (depending on whether he/she has
        dependents). This case covers 1.03% of tax units.
In a very small number of cases, a 1040 return attaches to multiple primary and secondary filers split
across different families within a household. Because we cannot determine to which family we
should attach the 1040 return, we do not bring in the 1040 return information in these extremely rare
cases. However, we continue to calculate taxes using dependents listed on a 1040 return even if they
do not appear in the survey family (as they may have moved away for college, been reassigned, etc.).
        Among primary families to whom we attach at least one 1040 return, 62% contain exactly
one tax unit that files as married, filing jointly. Primary families with related subfamilies are highly
varied in their filing status configurations ­ for example, only 15% of such families contain exactly
one tax unit that files as married, filing jointly. Non-family householders and secondary individuals
file often as single non-dependents, while unrelated subfamilies often contain tax units for whom we
attach a single 1040 return filing as a head of household.
        To construct tax units out of the remaining individuals to whom we cannot attach or assign a
1040 return, we rely on family members' relationships to the family head. We start with primary
families, assuming that any married couple among the remaining family members files a joint return.


                                                  19
We calculate taxes assuming any dependents of theirs not on a 1040 form are claimed as their
dependents. For the sake of simplicity, we assume that individuals who meet the dependent criterion
but do not have incomes above the filing threshold do not file separate returns themselves. We then
assume that any other related individuals are single filers.


Calculating Tax Liabilities and Credits
Using Census Tax Model and Survey Data
         For our first method of calculating tax liabilities and credits, we rely on estimates produced
by the Census tax calculator using CPS data statistically matched to the IRS Statistics of Income
PUF. The Census tax calculator provides a number of tax outcomes on the CPS file, including
federal and state income taxes (before and after credits), payroll taxes, various tax credits (including
the EITC and the CTC), and some intermediate outcomes (including AGI and taxable income).
Many of the inputs into the imputation process come directly from demographic and income
information on the CPS. However, the Census tax model relies on a statistical match to the PUF to
impute certain tax items missing from the CPS, including itemized deductions, IRA contributions,
and various self-employment retirement deductions and health insurance premiums. 19 For further
information on the Census tax model, see O'Hara (2004) and Webster (2011).


Using TAXSIM and Survey Data
         In our next method, we calculate tax liabilities and credits by once again relying on CPS
information but this time inputting survey income and other variables into TAXSIM. We continue to
generate tax units based on filing statuses used in the Census tax model, but ­ unlike the Census tax
model ­ we do not bring in the PUF to fill in tax items that are missing in the CPS. Instead, we rely
only on the demographic and income variables available in the CPS to construct each of the
TAXSIM inputs. As a result, certain inputs that are not asked about in the CPS ­ namely capital
gains, itemized deductions, and other deductions factoring into AGI ­ take values of zero using this




19
  The statistical match between the CPS and PUF relies on the following variables: income, filing status, presence of
earned income, presence of self-employment income, presence of unearned income, presence of Social Security income,
presence of mortgage, presence of pension income, number of child exemptions, state of residence, and whether or not a
person is a dependent on another return.


                                                         20
approach.20 This decision likely results in a more substantial bias in tax liabilities for higher-income
units ­ for whom these missing tax items are more relevant ­ than lower-income units.
         We rely on the TAXSIM output for federal and state income tax liabilities and credits, but we
calculate payroll taxes manually (i.e., outside of TAXSIM) using survey-reported amounts for wages
and self-employment earnings. We modify TAXSIM because it does not distinguish between
wage/salary and self-employment earnings when calculating payroll taxes, even though wage/salary
employees pay only the employee portion of the payroll tax while self-employed individuals pay the
entire amount of the payroll tax.21 We follow the rules on withholding limits for tax year 2010 by
setting the maximum level of earnings subject to the Social Security tax at $106,800, while placing
no cap on the maximum level of earnings subject to the Medicare tax.


Combining Survey and Limited Tax Data
         We now discuss how we calculate tax liabilities and credits using a combination of survey
data and limited tax records entered into TAXSIM. We must simulate taxes ourselves because the
limited 1040 and W-2 data do not contain amounts for federal income and payroll taxes, and we also
do not have amounts corresponding to state income taxes. For survey tax units to whom we can
attach a 1040 return, we rely on inputs from the limited tax data wherever possible. Specifically, we
bring in wages, interest income, and dividends (all at the tax unit level) from the limited 1040 data
extract as well as self-employment earnings from the DER.22 We then input the difference between
AGI (for which we have amounts in the limited 1040 data) and the sum of the aforementioned
income sources into the "other non-property income" field in TAXSIM, which supports negative
values.23 This effectively "tricks" TAXSIM into always generating the AGI amount that we observe

20
   In future work, we may consider imputing itemized deductions based on average amounts by AGI bracket that are
publicly available in the IRS Statistics of Income summary data. One caveat here is that we would have to impute not
only itemized deduction amounts but also whether or not a tax unit itemizes its deductions.
21
   However, self-employed individuals are allowed to deduct one-half of their self-employment tax from total income for
calculating federal income tax liability. In essence, the SSA obtains the full amount of self-employment tax, but part of
the total amount can be thought of as being transferred from the personal income tax by the tax rules.
22
   Because the DER records only Medicare-taxable self-employment earnings, we divide the DER self-employment
amount by 0.9235 to obtain our measure of total self-employment earnings. This will understate actual self-employment
earnings, both because we do not have the information in the limited tax data to add back in health insurance deductions
and because individuals with sufficiently low self-employment amounts (below $400 in tax year 2010) do not have to
pay the self-employment tax.
23
   Note that our limited tax data also include values for gross (rather than taxable) Social Security income, but we do not
separately input gross Social Security income into the relevant TAXSIM field. This is because TAXSIM automatically
converts the gross amount to the taxable amount, meaning we would need to subtract taxable Social Security income


                                                            21
on the 1040. Note, however, that our calculation of state income taxes may be slightly biased even
though we anchor to the correct federal AGI amount, as certain income sources are taxed differently
by certain states. Furthermore, while we know which tax units itemized their deductions (i.e., filed a
Schedule A), we do not know the corresponding amounts. We therefore impute itemized deduction
amounts for these tax units by matching them to average amounts by AGI bracket that are publicly
available in the IRS Statistics of Income summary data.
         We rely on TAXSIM outputs for most federal and state income tax variables, with the
exception of the EITC. We calculate the EITC separately because TAXSIM requires the number of
EITC-qualifying children to exceed the number of CTC-eligible children, even though some tax
units that are eligible for the CTC are ineligible for the EITC.24 Since we have both EITC earned
income and the number of EITC-qualifying children from the 1040 extracts, we are able to calculate
the EITC directly. We again calculate payroll taxes manually to estimate just the employee portion
of the payroll tax for wage/salary employees and the full amount of the payroll tax for self-employed
individuals. In particular, for FICA taxes, we multiply Social Security wages (capped at $106,800
per individual) from the W-2 by 6.2% to calculate Social Security taxes and the uncapped sum of
taxable wages and deferred compensation from the W-2 by 1.45% to calculate Medicare taxes. For
SECA taxes, we multiply self-employment earnings in the DER (derived from Schedule SE of the
1040) by 12.4% (once again up to the individual cap of $106,800) to calculate Social Security taxes
and the uncapped amount of self-employment earnings by 2.9% to calculate Medicare taxes.
         We also simulate tax liabilities ­ using information from the DER, IRS information returns,
and the CPS ­ for survey tax units to whom we cannot attach a 1040. There are several reasons for
why tax units may pay taxes even if they are not attached to a 1040. First, not all 1040 returns can be
properly linked to the CPS sample (e.g., 1040s without PIKs or with incorrect PIKs, 1040 returns
attaching to individuals split across multiple survey families, etc.). Second, within our CPS sample,
there may be un-PIKed family members in PIKed families (where at least one CPS member links to
a PIK) to whom we cannot attach a 1040 return. Third, individuals typically have had taxes withheld

from AGI to accurately construct the "catch-all" term. Since the process of converting gross to taxable amounts is not
straightforward and appears to rely on some additional income components that we do not have in the limited tax data,
we choose not to use gross Social Security income as an input into TAXSIM and also not to subtract it from AGI in
constructing the "catch-all" term.
24
   TAXSIM requires the number of EITC children to exceed the number of CTC children, which creates a conflict ­ for
example ­ in cases where we would like to enter zero EITC children but positive CTC children for tax units that are
eligible for the CTC but ineligible for the EITC.


                                                         22
even if they did not file a 1040 return. And fourth, individuals may have filed returns at a later date.
For survey tax units to whom we cannot attach a 1040 return, we bring in taxable wages, retirement
income, and self-employment from W-2s, 1099-Rs, and the DER, respectively. When information
from these administrative sources is not available, we rely on CPS income and demographic
variables. We once again rely on TAXSIM to calculate federal and state income taxes and calculate
payroll taxes outside of TAXSIM. For a detailed mapping of survey and administrative variables to
TAXSIM inputs for the limited tax data imputation, see Appendix Table A.1.


Combining Survey and Extensive Tax Data
           Finally, we discuss how we calculate tax liabilities and credits using a combination of survey
data and extensive tax records. While the extensive 1040 data contain actual amounts for federal
income tax liabilities and credits (as well as nearly every other line item on the 1040), the data do not
contain a single variable equal to the net federal income tax liability. We therefore calculate the net
federal income tax liability as the sum of federal income tax after non-refundable credits (line 55)
and additional tax on IRAs (line 58) minus a series of refundable credits, including the Making Work
Pay Credit (line 63), the EITC (line 64a), the refundable portion of the Child Tax Credit (line 65),
the American Opportunity Credit (line 66), the First-Time Homebuyer Credit (line 67), the Credit for
Federal Tax on Fuels (line 70), and a set of smaller credits listed on line 71. 25 An equivalent
alternative calculation would take the sum of federal income taxes withheld and taxes due (net of
refundable and non-refundable tax credits) and subtract payroll taxes on self-employment earnings,
although additional adjustments may be needed for some tax items that pertain to other tax years. We
continue to use TAXSIM to calculate state income taxes, relying on inputs from the extensive tax
data wherever possible. We also calculate payroll taxes outside of TAXSIM using the same
methodology as that used for the limited tax data, with one exception: instead of calculating SECA
taxes on self-employment earnings in the DER, we take self-employment taxes directly from the
1040 (line 56). Finally, we continue to calculate tax liabilities and credits for survey tax units to
whom we cannot attach a 1040, drawing from IRS information returns when available and relying on
CPS demographics and incomes otherwise. For a detailed mapping of survey and administrative
variables to TAXSIM inputs for the extensive tax data calculation, see Appendix Table A.2.


25
     Line numbers in this sentence and throughout the subsection correspond to the 1040 form for tax year 2010.


                                                          23
6.       Results
         In this section, we discuss three sets of results.26 We begin by showing aggregate estimates of
income and tax components obtained using various tax calculators. We then analyze estimates of
income and tax components across deciles of survey-reported family income, focusing on
differences between various tax calculators. We finally assess the mean absolute errors in tax
imputations from the various tax calculators, relative to estimates obtained using a combination of
survey and extensive tax data. For reference, Appendix Tables A.3, A.5, A.6a, and A.6b contain the
standard errors of the estimates in the main tables, and Appendix Table A.7 contains the results of
statistical tests used to assess additional comparisons we make in the text.


Aggregate Comparisons
         Table 1 shows aggregate dollar amounts for various tax liabilities and credits (as well as
certain intermediate outputs) for our four estimates of taxes calculated on the linked CPS sample.
These include the Census tax model imputation using CPS data ­ hereafter referred to as the "CPS
tax imputation" (Column 3), the imputation using CPS data entered into TAXSIM ­ hereafter
referred to as the "CPS-TAXSIM imputation" (Column 4), the limited tax data imputation (Column
5), and the extensive tax data calculation (Column 6). Recall that the limited tax data imputation and
extensive tax data calculation use some non-1040 IRS data and/or survey reports of income to
simulate taxes for units to whom we cannot attach a 1040. Columns 7 and 8 show alternative
estimates that simulate taxes only for those units to which a 1040 can be attached, and Columns 9
and 10 additionally use non-1040 data to simulate taxes only for families containing an individual
who does not link to a PIK (and to whom we therefore cannot attach a 1040). Note that the estimates
in Columns 7-10 are compiled to better understand the estimates in Columns 5-6 and ­ on their own
­ are not designed to match population totals.
         We compare these estimates to two sets of independent aggregates. The first set of
benchmarks comes from publicly available sources, including IRS SOI line item totals for federal
income tax items, the Census Bureau Survey of State Governments (specifically covering the


26
  Our results are subject to error arising from various sources, including our use of sample data, misreporting of certain
variables in our survey data sources, processing errors, and others.


                                                           24
Quarterly Summary of State and Local Tax Revenues) for state income tax liabilities, and the SSA
for payroll tax liabilities (Column 1).27 Note that the SOI aggregates cover 1040s filed during
calendar year 2011 for tax year 2010 as well as any 1040s filed for the previous two tax years (2008
and 2009).28 The second set of aggregates is calculated from the extensive 1040 universe data
(Column 2). In contrast to the SOI aggregates, the extensive tax data tabulations include 1040s filed
during calendar year 2011 that we filter only for tax year 2010. As a result, we can see that the SOI
aggregates ­ containing late filers from previous tax years ­ uniformly exceed the extensive tax data
aggregates for all items.
        Focusing first on the CPS tax imputation in Column 3, we see that it estimates a total of $808
billion in federal income tax liabilities and $217 billion in state income tax liabilities, both of which
fall short of the independent aggregates. Interestingly, the underestimation of federal income taxes
(defined as federal income taxes paid net of federal tax credits) persists despite the CPS tax
imputation underestimating total EITC amounts by nearly one-third and total CTC amounts by
nearly one-fifth. In fact, much of this underestimation can be attributed to the CPS underestimating
AGI and therefore taxable income, resulting in much lower estimates of federal incomes taxes before
credits relative to the independent aggregates. In contrast, the CPS estimates a total of $461 billion in
payroll tax liabilities, which exceeds the SOI aggregate by approximately 6%. Thus, even though the
CPS underestimates AGI, it appears to overestimate the earnings on which payroll taxes are paid.
        Interestingly, the CPS-TAXSIM imputation in Column 4 yields estimates of federal income
tax liabilities ($859 billion) that are higher than the estimates from the CPS tax imputation and closer
to the independent aggregate despite continuing to rely on CPS income reports and CPS-constructed
tax unit structures.29 The primary reason for this is that the CPS-TAXSIM imputation accounts for
too few itemized deductions. While the CPS tax imputation in Column 3 brings in itemized
deductions using a statistical match to the PUF, the CPS-TAXSIM imputation relies only on the
limited information available in the CPS to construct itemized deductions. To see this, note that the

27
   The benchmarks for payroll taxes are calculated as half of the total OASDHI (Old-Age, Survivors, Disability, and
Hospital Insurance) FICA tax and the total amount of SECA tax. Calculating payroll tax aggregates in this way aligns
with our definition of payroll taxes as being what the employee pays out to SSA. Alternatively, we could make an
additional adjustment to account for the payment of FICA tax over the taxable maximum by a combination of employers
of a given individual that are not refunded to the firms.
28
   Those filed for tax years 2008 and 2009 may be thought of as roughly approximating returns for tax year 2010 that
will be filed after calendar year 2011.
29
   The difference between the CPS-TAXSIM estimate of total federal income taxes and the SOI aggregate is not
statistically significant at the 10% level.


                                                        25
gap in taxable income between the CPS tax imputation and the CPS-TAXSIM imputation is nearly
three times the gap in AGI, with much of the conceptual difference between AGI and taxable income
due to itemized deductions. The CPS-TAXSIM imputation also yields estimates of state income tax
liabilities ($236 billion) and payroll tax liabilities ($470 billion) that are higher than those obtained
using the CPS tax imputation (and therefore closer to the independent aggregates for state income
taxes and farther from those aggregates for payroll taxes), while estimates of the EITC and CTC are
slightly underestimated relative to those from the CPS tax imputation and the SOI aggregates. 30
         Moving on to Columns 5 and 6, we see that aggregate estimates for many of the tax items
between the limited tax data imputation and extensive tax data calculation are strikingly close to
each other and also to SOI aggregates.31 Starting with federal income tax liabilities, we find that the
limited tax data imputation yields $853 billion and the extensive tax data calculation yields $845
billion, with the former within 1% and the latter within a tenth of 1% of the SOI aggregate.32
Approximately 95% of all federal income tax liabilities are associated with tax units to whom a 1040
can be attached. However, the similarity of these estimates may be a result of some offsetting errors
associated with the limited tax data imputation. On one hand, the limited tax data imputation appears
to overstate itemized deductions, as the estimate of taxable income ­ and therefore federal income
taxes before credits ­ is smaller using the limited tax data imputation. On the other hand, there are
certain tax credits ­ including the foreign tax credit, education credits, and the first-time homebuyer
credit ­ that are captured in the extensive tax data but are not simulated by TAXSIM and are
therefore missing in the limited tax data imputation.
         We also find that the limited and extensive tax data estimates in Columns 5 and 6 are
comparable to each other for payroll tax liabilities while the extensive tax data estimate is slightly
smaller for state income tax liabilities.33 The comparability in payroll taxes, even when separating
out FICA and SECA taxes, suggests that the different de-duplication strategies used across the


30
    The difference between the CPS-TAXSIM estimate of total state income taxes and the SOI aggregate is not
statistically significant at the 10% level.
31
   We believe that the SOI aggregates in Column 1 are conceptually closer to the limited and extensive tax data estimates
in Columns 5 and 6, while the extensive tax data benchmarks in Column 2 are conceptually closer to the estimates in
Columns 7-10. This is because Columns 5 and 6 attempt to calculate taxes for late filers (who are covered by the SOI
aggregates) by simulating estimates using non-1040 information, while Columns 7-10 calculate taxes only for those to
whom we can attach a 1040 (and for families containing individuals for whom a key to attach a 1040 is missing).
32
   In each case, the difference with the SOI aggregate is not significant at the 10% level.
33
   The difference in total payroll taxes between the limited tax data imputation and the extensive tax data calculation is
not statistically significant at the 10% level.


                                                           26
limited and extensive W-2 data and the different sources for taxable self-employment earnings (DER
for limited tax data and 1040 for extensive tax data) yield almost equivalent results.34 Finally, the
estimates for the EITC and CTC in Columns 5 and 6 are remarkably close to each other and to their
respective independent aggregates.35 One potential concern with these estimates in Columns 5 and 6
is that an individual should not be able to receive the EITC or CTC if they did not file a 1040.
However, out of the $59 billion estimated for the EITC in Columns 5 and 6, it appears that $55
billion are associated with units to whom a 1040 can be attached (Columns 7 and 8). Approximately
half of this difference can be explained by individuals that have missing PIKs and therefore cannot
be attached to a 1040 (Columns 9 and 10). The remaining difference can likely be attributed to an
assortment of other reasons ­ e.g., a small share of the IRS records cannot be linked to PIKs, 1040
returns may occasionally attach to individuals split across multiple survey families (in which case we
ignore the 1040 information), and there might be slight biases associated with the IPW adjustment to
survey weights or the original CPS weights themselves.


Comparisons of Means by Decile
         Table 2 shows how the differences between the various ways of estimating taxes break down
across the income distribution. We assign families in Table 2 to deciles of survey-reported family
pre-tax money income.36 Note that the survey-reported income distribution should not be interpreted
as the true income distribution. In fact, we find a striking non-monotonicity in taxable income (and
thus federal income taxes before credits) calculated using the extensive tax data along the survey-
reported income distribution. Specifically, we find that families in the bottom decile of survey-
reported income do not have lower levels of taxable income and federal income tax before credits




34
   One potential reason for why the SOI aggregates for payroll tax liabilities on wages (FICA tax) is slightly higher than
the estimates in Columns 5 and 6 is that the federal government does not refund employers when a worker has too much
withheld as a result of multiple employers withholding under the Social Security cap. If this is the case, then it may not
make sense to assume a completely even split between the employee and employer portions of the FICA tax benchmark
­ instead, the weight for the employee portion should likely be slightly below 50%.
35
   The difference in total EITC between the limited tax data imputation and the SOI aggregate is not statistically
significant at the 10% level. The difference in total EITC between the extensive tax calculation and the SOI aggregate is
also not statistically significant at the 10% level.
36
   We adjust survey incomes according to the equivalence scale recommended in National Academy of Sciences (1995)
of the form (A + PK)F, where A and K respectively designate the number of adults and children in the family. Following
Meyer and Sullivan (2012), we set P = F = 0.7.


                                                           27
(per the extensive tax data) than those in the second decile. 37 This finding ­ while puzzling at face
value ­ is consistent with the presence of income under-reporting at the bottom of the survey-
reported income distribution, a result that a number of other studies have found (see, e.g., Brewer,
Etheridge, and O'Dea 2017, Meyer et al. forthcoming).
         Given mean values from the extensive tax data as our basis for comparison in Column 1, we
report results for each of the imputation methods in Columns 2-4 as dollar differences from the
extensive tax data counterpart. Consequently, a negative value in Columns 2-4 suggests that the
imputation method leads to an underestimate (and vice-versa). Although Table 2 reports estimates
for both the CPS tax imputation (Column 2) and CPS-TAXSIM imputation (Column 3), the
estimates between the two survey-only imputations are comparable to each other. Thus, we mostly
focus on the CPS tax imputation (Column 2) and discuss how it compares to the limited tax data
imputation (Column 4). Appendix Table A.4 shows the mean amounts (rather than the dollar
differences from the extensive tax data calculations) for each of the imputation methods.
         We start by examining differences in federal income tax liabilities. We find that the CPS tax
imputations understate federal income tax liabilities in the bottom seven deciles of survey-reported
income, before overstating federal income tax liabilities in the top three deciles of survey-reported
income. 38 This suggests that the overall underestimate of federal income taxes by the CPS tax
calculator in Table 1 is due not so much to the CPS understating incomes for the richest individuals
(as defined by the survey), but rather to the CPS systematically understating incomes for at least the
bottom two-thirds of the survey-defined income distribution. Indeed, we find that the CPS tax
imputation understates the extensive tax data calculation for AGI in the bottom nine deciles of
survey income, for taxable income in the bottom seven deciles, and for federal income tax before
credits in the bottom nine deciles. 39 Likewise, the CPS-TAXSIM imputation understates the
extensive tax data calculation in six of the bottom seven deciles for federal income tax liabilities, all




37
    Specifically, using the extensive tax data calculations, we find no statistically significant difference at the 10% level in
either average taxable income or average federal tax before credits between the first and second deciles.
38
    However, the differences in most of the survey income deciles ­ specifically, the 1st, 4th, 5th, 7th, 8th, and 9th deciles ­
are statistically insignificant at the 10% level.
39
    The differences in some of the survey income deciles ­ specifically, the top three deciles for average AGI, the 7th and
9 deciles for average taxable income, and the top two deciles for average federal tax before credits ­ are statistically
  th

insignificant.


                                                              28
ten deciles for AGI, the bottom seven deciles for taxable income, and the bottom nine deciles for
federal income tax before credits.40
         In contrast, the limited tax data imputation statistically overstates federal income tax
liabilities in the majority of survey income deciles.41 This bias is likely due to the limited tax data
imputation missing a number of tax credits (e.g., education credits, foreign tax credit) that are
available in the extensive tax data and are accessible more broadly across the income distribution.
Interestingly, compared to the CPS tax imputation, the limited tax data imputation yields estimates
of federal income tax liabilities that are closer to the extensive tax data estimates at many of the
bottom and top deciles of survey income (but not in the middle).42 We suspect this is a result of
errors in both tax liabilities and credits offsetting in the CPS tax imputation. Looking however at
AGI, taxable income, and federal income tax before credits, the limited tax data estimates are closer
to the extensive tax data counterparts throughout most of the survey income distribution. 43
         For state income tax liabilities, we continue to find that both the CPS tax imputation and the
CPS-TAXSIM imputation understate the extensive tax data means throughout most of the survey-
reported income distribution and that the limited tax data imputation overstates the extensive tax data
means throughout the distribution.44 For payroll taxes, we find that the limited tax data imputation
yields estimates that are much closer to the extensive tax data counterparts than the CPS tax
imputation, which understates payroll taxes in most of the bottom half of the survey income
distribution and overstates payroll taxes in the top half. 45 Comparably, the CPS-TAXSIM imputation
understates payroll taxes in the bottom six deciles of the survey income distribution.46



40
   The differences in some of the survey income deciles ­ specifically, the 1st, 4th, 5th, 7th, and 9th deciles for average
federal income tax, the 10th decile for average AGI, the 7th and 9th deciles for average taxable income, and the top
three deciles for average federal tax before credits ­ are statistically insignificant at the 10% level.
41
   The differences in the 8thand 9th deciles are not statistically significant at the 10% level.
42
   The differences in the 1st, 8th, and 9th deciles are not statistically significant at the 10% level.
43
   The differences in some of the survey income deciles ­ specifically, the top two deciles for average AGI, the 7th and 9th
deciles for average taxable income, and the 9th decile for average federal tax before credits ­ are statistically insignificant
at the 10% level.
44
   The differences between the CPS imputations and the extensive tax data calculations are statistically insignificant at
the 10% level in the top four deciles. The differences between the CPS-TAXSIM imputations and the extensive tax data
calculations are statistically insignificant at the 10% level in the 7th, 8th, and 9th deciles. The difference between the
limited tax data imputation and the extensive tax data calculation is statistically insignificant in the top income decile.
45
   The difference between the CPS imputation and the limited tax data imputation is statistically insignificant at the 10%
level in the 4th decile.
46
   The difference between the CPS-TAXSIM imputation and the extensive calculation is statistically insignificant at
the 10% level in the 4th and 6th deciles.


                                                              29
         For the EITC, the limited tax data imputation yields estimates that are within 1% of the
extensive tax data means at every decile of survey income. 47 In contrast, the CPS tax imputation
understates those means for EITC in nearly every decile of survey income (except for the second),
with these differences being most pronounced for families in the fourth and fifth deciles. The CPS-
TAXSIM imputation understates EITC means in every decile of survey income. Finally, the limited
tax data imputation also yields estimates of the CTC that are on average closer to the extensive
means than the CPS tax imputation, both on average and throughout most of the survey income
distribution.48


Mean and Median Absolute Errors in Tax Imputations (Tables 3a and 3b)
         Finally, Table 3a shows mean absolute differences in tax liabilities and credits (and other tax
components) at the family level, with estimates from each imputation calculated relative to the
extensive tax data estimates. While the previous table analyzed net mean differences (with
understatements and overstatements canceling each other out), this table analyzes mean absolute
deviations (with understatements and overstatements each contributing to the error). Columns 2, 4,
and 6 show the mean absolute dollar differences for the CPS tax imputation, the CPS-TAXSIM
imputation, and the limited tax data imputation, respectively. Columns 3, 5, and 7 report these mean
differences as a percentage of the extensive tax data estimates in Column 1. We once again examine
these differences across the survey-reported income distribution, assigning families to quartiles of
survey-reported family pre-tax money income. 49 In comparison, Table 3b shows median absolute
differences in tax liabilities and is structured similarly as Table 3a. Since the patterns between the
imputation methodologies are by and large similar in Tables 3a and 3b, we primarily discuss our
results in terms of mean absolute errors.
         We start by discussing the mean absolute differences for the CPS tax imputation (Column 2)
relative to the extensive tax data estimates (Column 1). Again, we focus our discussion on the CPS
tax imputation rather than the CPS-TAXSIM imputation, although the estimates from the two survey
models are close to each other. For federal income tax liabilities, the mean absolute error for the CPS
tax imputation is $7,202 for all families, which is greater than the average federal income tax amount

47
   The differences in the 5th, 6th, 9th, and 10th deciles are statistically insignificant at the 10% level.
48
   The differences in the 2nd, 3rd, 5th, and 6th deciles are statistically insignificant at the 10% level.
49
   Again, we adjust survey incomes using the equivalence scale described earlier.


                                                              30
($6,824) and nearly 10% of average AGI ($73,680). Analogously, the mean absolute error for the
CPS-TAXSIM imputation of federal income taxes is $7,434 over all families.50
         The mean absolute errors in state income tax liabilities and payroll tax liabilities are much
smaller than the mean absolute error in federal income taxes as a share of AGI (each approximately
2% of AGI), even though these errors are sizeable as a share of their mean values from the extensive
tax data (65% for state income taxes and 37% for payroll taxes). Looking at total tax liabilities, the
mean absolute error is $9,385 for all families and about 13% of average AGI for the CPS tax
imputation (and $9,870 over all families for the CPS-TAXSIM imputation). Once again, the mean
absolute errors as a share of AGI are highest in the bottom and top quartiles. It is worth
contextualizing the magnitudes of these mean absolute errors in taxes against errors in other income
sources calculated in the literature. For example, Duncan and Hill (1985) find that the average
absolute difference between survey and administrative values of earnings in their 1982 sample was
$2,123 ­ amounting to approximately 7% of mean earnings. Compared to this difference, the
average absolute difference that we calculate for total taxes (13% of AGI, which is typically a larger
income base than earnings) is considerably greater.
         A key reason for the considerable errors in tax liabilities for the survey-only imputations is
that AGI is measured with substantial error. The mean absolute difference in AGI for the CPS tax
imputation is $32,050 for all families, which is about 44% of the mean AGI amount. Likewise, the
mean absolute difference in AGI for the CPS-TAXSIM imputation is $34,670, which is about 47%
of the mean AGI amount. However, outliers appear to drive at least part of the mean absolute error
in AGI; the median absolute error in AGI is $10,090 (about 14% of the mean AGI amount),
suggesting that the distribution of absolute errors is skewed to the right. As a share of the mean
amount, the mean absolute error in AGI is largest in the bottom quartile (65%). Measurement error
in AGI naturally translates to measurement error in taxable income ­ which consists of AGI minus
itemized/standard deductions and exemptions ­ and federal income tax before credits. The mean
absolute difference in taxable income for the CPS is $27,280, which is 57% of the mean taxable
income amount and among the highest (as a share of the mean amount) in the bottom quartile.
Analogously, the mean absolute difference in federal income tax before credits for the CPS is

50
  Appendix Table A.6a also contains estimates of the mean absolute errors of the CPS-TAXSIM imputation of federal
income taxes by quartile, although we do not perform statistical tests for differences of significance between quartile
estimates.


                                                          31
$6,366, which is 69% of the mean taxable income amount and among the highest in the bottom
quartile (as a share of the mean amount). However, the median absolute differences for taxable
income and federal income tax before credits are only about 18% and 15% of their mean amounts,
respectively.
         We also observe substantial biases in the estimation of tax credits using the survey-only tax
imputations. Specifically, the mean absolute errors for the EITC are $550 and $569 for all families
using the CPS tax and CPS-TAXSIM imputations, respectively, with these errors amounting to
approximately three-quarters of the mean EITC amount.51 The mean absolute error in the CTC using
the CPS tax imputation is smaller at $275 for all families, although this figure is still 37% of the
mean CTC amount.
         In contrast to either of the CPS imputations, the limited tax data imputation yields much
smaller mean absolute differences relative to the extensive tax data estimates. For federal income tax
liabilities, the mean absolute error between the limited tax data imputation and extensive tax data
calculation is 24% for all families. This is approximately one-quarter of the absolute errors for the
CPS tax imputation (106% of the extensive data mean) and CPS-TAXSIM imputation (109% of the
extensive data mean). Similarly, the mean absolute error between the limited and extensive tax data
estimates is a mere 1% for AGI (compared to 44% for the CPS tax imputation), 10% for taxable
income (compared to 57% for the CPS tax imputation), and 16% for federal income tax before
credits (compared to 69% for the CPS tax imputation). The improvement in tax calculation using the
limited tax data is particularly noticeable in the top half of the survey income distribution.
         The similarity in absolute terms between the limited and extensive tax data estimates ­
relative to the CPS imputations ­ also holds for other tax calculations. The mean absolute difference
between the limited and extensive tax data estimates is 16% for state income taxes (compared to
65% for the CPS tax imputation) and 3% for payroll taxes (compared to 37% for the CPS tax
imputation). Taken together, the mean absolute error between the limited tax data imputation and
extensive tax data calculation for total tax liabilities is about 15%, which is approximately 20% of
the absolute errors for the CPS tax imputation (72% of the extensive data mean) and CPS-TAXSIM
imputation (76% of the extensive data mean). Furthermore, the limited tax data lead to particularly
accurate estimates of tax credits. For a typical family, the limited tax data imputation of the EITC is

51
  Appendix Table A.6a also contains estimates of the mean absolute errors for the EITC by quartile, although we do not
perform statistical tests for differences of significance between quartile estimates.


                                                         32
off by less than $20 (compared to more than $500 using the CPS tax and CPS-TAXSIM
imputations) and the limited tax data imputation of the CTC is off by less than $50 (compared to
$275 and $306 using the CPS tax and CPS-TAXSIM imputations, respectively). Finally, when
looking across all families, the median absolute differences between the limited and extensive tax
data estimates are approximately zero for most tax calculations and very small for the others.


7.     Conclusions
       This paper calculates estimates of income and payroll taxes using two different sets of
administrative tax records linked to the 2011 CPS ASEC. By describing how to form tax units and
estimate various types of tax liabilities and credits using these linked data, this paper provides a
roadmap for constructing accurate measures of taxes while preserving the survey family as the
sharing unit for distributional analyses. We find that aggregate estimates of various tax components
(particularly tax credits like the EITC and CTC) calculated using the limited tax data imputations
and extensive tax data calculations are similar to each other and much closer to IRS SOI aggregates
than any of the imputations using survey data alone. Across the deciles of the reported income
distribution, the limited tax data imputations tend to give us a picture of the distribution of income,
taxes, and their components that better match what we see in the extensive tax data, but this pattern
is far from generally true. At the individual level, the CPS tax and CPS-TAXSIM imputations have
substantial errors, with each having mean absolute errors for federal taxes and total taxes equal to
approximately 10 and 13 percent of mean AGI, respectively. The limited tax data imputations have
22-23% of the absolute errors of the survey-only imputations for federal income tax liability and 19-
20% of the absolute errors of the survey-only imputations for total tax liability (relative to the
extensive tax data calculations). For the EITC, the limited tax data imputation is off by less than $20
for a typical family (compared to more than $500 using the survey-only imputations).
       In summary, this paper emphasizes the impacts of errors in tax imputations for three types of
statistics: overall means, means by income decile, and family-level values. These results likely apply
to many uses of the imputations, with larger impacts on some than others. The differences in overall
means, which are especially pronounced for the EITC and CTC, are likely to have large effects
whenever the imputations are used. The differences by income decile indicate how analyses of
progressivity or the distributional impacts of taxes (more generally) are likely to be affected. On top
of the overall errors and mean errors by group, the errors in family-level taxes will matter when

                                                  33
after-tax income is used as an explanatory variable for various analyses or as the baseline income
when trying to identify who is poor or disadvantaged more broadly. In certain cases, such as when
analyses are done at a level for which the imputations are close to correct (on average), there may be
little bias in estimates that rely on these imputations.
        In future work, we hope to extend the comparisons of tax calculators to linked samples using
the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) and the American Community Survey
(ACS). Differing levels of misreporting across Census surveys might affect the extent to which the
magnitudes of errors found using the CPS extend to other surveys. We also hope to examine the
distribution of errors for various tax components across additional demographic and socioeconomic
characteristics, as these analyses may be relevant to recent studies (see, e.g., Goldin and Michelmore
2020, Thomson et al. 2020) that have analyzed the distribution of EITC and CTC receipt relying
exclusively on survey data. We also plan to expand our analyses to other years, especially more
recent ones. While the extensive tax data are currently available to us only for the 2010 processing
year, we are able to access the limited tax data for a wide range of years. The analyses in this paper
shed important light on the degree to which imputations relying on the limited tax data do a
sufficient job of matching the values in the extensive tax data, although we plan on using the
extensive tax data to fill in the remaining holes in the limited tax data imputations. We also plan on
estimating other taxes that families and individuals pay, including sales and property taxes. A caveat
with these taxes is that we are unlikely to obtain administrative values corresponding to them and
must therefore make certain assumptions to simulate them.
        The estimates of taxes calculated in this paper open the door for a number of distributional
analyses that can be done using the family as the unit of analysis. Families are more natural for such
an analysis than households or tax units, since family members share incomes in ways that unrelated
roommates generally do not and multiple tax units within a family may also share resources and plan
expenditures. These analyses include analyzing the redistributive value of taxes and transfers among
families, focusing on how the progressivity of the U.S. tax and transfer system varies along the
income distribution. Another analysis involves evaluating the poverty reduction of tax credits and
government transfers. In all of these analyses, it is useful to examine the extent to which relying on
survey data alone biases estimates not only of taxes and transfers but also of underlying income.




                                                  34
References
Auten, Gerald and David Splinter. 2019. Income Inequality in the United States: Using Tax Data
       to Measure Long-Term Trends. Working Paper.
Bakija, Jon. 2014. Documentation for a Comprehensive Historical U.S. Federal and State Income
       Tax Calculator Program. Working Paper.
Brewer, Mike, Ben Etheridge, and Cormac O'Dea. 2017. Why are Households that Report the
       Lowest Incomes So Well-Off? The Economic Journal, 127(605): F24-F49.
Burkhauser, Richard V., Kevin Corinth, James Elwell, and Jeff Larrimore. 2019. Evaluating
       the Success of President Johnson's War on Poverty: Revisiting the Historical Record Using a
       Full-Income Poverty Measure. NBER Working Paper No. 26532.
Congressional Budget Office. 2018. The Distribution of Household Income, 2014. Washington,
       D.C.: Congressional Budget Office.
Dahl, Gordon B. and Lance Lochner. 2012. The Impact of Family Income on Child Achievement:
       Evidence from the Earned Income Tax Credit. American Economic Review, 102(5): 1927-
       1956.
Duncan, Greg and Daniel H. Hill. 1985. An Investigation of the Extent and Consequences of
       Measurement Error in Labor-Economic Survey Data. Journal of Labor Economics, 3(4):
       508-532.
Feenberg, Daniel and Elisabeth Coutts. 1993. An Introduction to the TAXSIM Model. Journal of
       Policy Analysis and Management, 12(1): 189-194.
Fox, Liana. 2019. The Supplemental Poverty Measure: 2018. Current Population Report P60-268.
       Washington, D.C.: U.S. Census Bureau.
Giertz, Seth H. 2007. The Elasticity of Taxable Income Over the 1980s and 1990s. National Tax
       Journal, 60(4): 743-768.
Goldin, Jacob and Katherine Michelmore. 2020. Who Benefits from the Child Tax Credit? NBER
       Working Paper No. 27940.
Gruber, Jon and Emmanuel Saez. 2002. The Elasticity of Taxable Income: Evidence and
       Implications. Journal of Public Economics, 84(1): 1-32.
Hoynes, Hilary W. and Erzo F.P. Luttmer. 2011. The Insurance Value of State Tax-and-Transfer
       Programs. Journal of Public Economic, 95(11): 1466-1484.
Jones, Maggie R. and Amy B. O'Hara. 2016. Do Doubled-up Families Minimize Household-level

                                               35
       Tax Burden? National Tax Journal, 69(3): 613-640.
Jones, Maggie R. and James P. Ziliak. 2020. The Antipoverty Impact of the EITC: New Estimates
       from Survey and Administrative Tax Records. Center for Economic Studies Working Paper
       19-14. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Census Bureau.
Langetieg, Patrick, Mark Payne, and Alan Plumley. 2017. Counting Elusive Nonfilers Using IRS
       Rather Than Census Data. In A. Plumley (ed.), IRS Research Bulletin, papers Given at the
       7th Annual Joint Research Conference on Tax Administration, 197-222. Washington, D.C.:
       Internal Revenue Service.
Meyer, Bruce D. and James X. Sullivan. 2003. Measuring the Well-Being of the Poor Using
       Income and Consumption. Journal of Human Resources, 38(Supplement): 1180-1220.
Meyer, Bruce D. and James X. Sullivan. 2012. Winning the War: Poverty from the Great Society
       to the Great Recession. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall 2012: 133-200.
Meyer, Bruce D., Derek Wu, and Carla Medalia. 2020. Understanding Poverty by Linking
       Survey, Tax, and Program Data. Working Paper.
Meyer, Bruce D. Derek Wu, Victoria Mooers, and Carla Medalia. Forthcoming. The Use and
       Misuse of Income Data and Extreme Poverty in the United States. Journal of Labor
       Economics.
National Academies of Sciences. 1995. Measuring Poverty: A New Approach. Citro, Constance F.
       and Robert T. Michael, editors. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2019. A Roadmap to Reducing
       Child Poverty. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
O'Hara, Amy. 2004. New Methods for Simulating CPS Taxes. SESHD Working Paper 2004-08.
       Washington, D.C.: U.S. Census Bureau.
Piketty, Thomas and Emmanuel Saez. 2007. How Progressive is the U.S. Federal Tax System? A
       Historical and International Perspective. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(1): 3-24.
Piketty, Thomas, Emmanuel Saez, and Gabriel Zucman. 2018. Distributional National Accounts:
       Methods and Estimates for the United States. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(2): 553-
       609.
Saez, Emmanuel and Gabriel Zucman. 2019. Progressive Wealth Taxation. Brookings Papers on
       Economic Activity, Fall 2019.
Splinter, David. 2019. U.S. Taxes are Progressive: Comment on "Progressive Wealth Taxation."


                                               36
       Working Paper.
Splinter, David, Jeff Larrimore, and Jacob Mortenson. 2017. Whose Child is This? Shifting of
       Dependents Among EITC Claimants Within the Same Household. National Tax Journal,
       70(4): 737-758.
Thomson, Dana, Lisa A. Gennetian, Yiyu Chen, Hannah Barnett, Medline Carter, and
       Santiago Deambrosi. 2020. State Policy and Practice Related to Earned Income Tax Credits
       May Affect Receipt Among Hispanic Families with Children. Child Trends Research Brief.
U.S. Census Bureau. 1986. Measuring the Effect of Benefits and Taxes on Income and Poverty:
       1986. Current Population Reports, Series P60-164-RD-1. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Census
       Bureau.
U.S. Census Bureau. 1992. Measuring the Effect of Benefits and Taxes on Income and Poverty:
       1992. Current Population Reports, Series P60-186RD. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Census
       Bureau.
Wagner, Deborah and Mary Layne. 2014. The Person Identification Validation System (PVS):
       Applying the Center for Administrative Records Research & Applications' Record Linkage
       Software. CARRA Working Paper 2014-01. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Census Bureau.
Webster, Bruce H. 2011. Evaluating the Use of the New Current Population Survey's Annual
       Social and Economic Supplement Questions in the Census Bureau Tax Model. Washington,
       D.C.: U.S. Census Bureau.
Wheaton, Laura and Kathryn Stevens. 2016. The Effect of Different Tax Calculators on the
       Supplemental Poverty Measure. Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute.
Zedlewski, Sheila and Linda Giannarelli. 2015. TRIM: A Tool for Social Policy Analysis.
       Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute.




                                              37
Tables
Table 1. Aggregate Income and Tax Components Using Various Tax Calculators, 2010 Tax Year, CPS Data

                                                      1040
                                                     Universe                                                    CPS ASEC Linked to Administrative Data
                                  Independent                                                                                                                             Imputation        Imputation
                                   Aggregates                                                                                                                             for Limited      for Extensive
                                    from IRS                                         CPS Data                                      Imputation for       Imputation         Tax Data          Tax Data
                                      SOI or        Extensive                           and           Limited       Extensive       Limited Tax        for Extensive        Filers &          Filers &
                                      Other          Tax Data        CPS Tax         TAXSIM          Tax Data       Tax Data        Data Filers          Tax Data        Families with     Families with
                                     Sources        Calculation     Imputation      Imputation      Imputation     Calculation          Only            Filers Only      Missing PIKs      Missing PIKs
                                        (1)             (2)            (3)              (4)             (5)            (6)               (7)                (8)                (9)              (10)
 Federal income tax liability        844,600          825,500        807,600          858,700         853,100        845,300           810,400            804,600           814,500           808,600
 State income tax liability          243,400                         216,800          235,500         246,500        231,900           235,000            219,900           237,000           222,000
 Payroll tax liability               435,800                         461,100          470,200         432,500        433,400           411,300            412,200           413,800           414,700
   Payroll tax on wages              387,900                                          422,000         380,300        382,200           366,300            368,200           367,300           369,100
   Payroll tax on self-emp.            47,900                                          48,260          52,230         51,250            44,930             44,000            46,520            45,590
 Adjusted Gross Income             8,089,000        7,891,000       7,326,000       7,394,000       8,276,000      8,216,000         7,792,000          7,740,000         7,884,000         7,832,000
 Taxable income                    5,502,000        5,366,000       5,238,000       5,421,000       5,357,000      5,534,000         5,052,000          5,237,000         5,105,000         5,289,000
 Fed. inc. tax before credits      1,065,000        1,042,000         917,100         979,100       1,014,000      1,052,000           960,300            999,400           969,100         1,008,000
 Earned income tax credit              59,560          59,510          40,350          34,060          59,020         59,300            54,560             54,600            56,710            56,810
 Child tax credit                      56,260          54,580          45,860          44,460          52,910         54,230            50,320             51,560            51,500            52,740
 Universe of returns                               138,800,000
 Sample of individuals                                                                       170,000                                    140,000           139,000           147,000            146,000

Sources: IRS SOI line items; 2011 Current Population Survey (CPS) Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC); IRS 1040, W-2, 1099-R extracts for tax year 2010; IRS extensive 2010
tax data; TAXSIM.
Approved for release by the U.S. Census Bureau, authorization numbers CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-014, CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-038.

Note: Amounts are in millions of dollars. We drop families with no PIKed members and families with any whole-imputed individuals, adjusting family survey weights using inverse probability
weighting so that we approximately match population totals. Our IRS SOI aggregates come from publicly available line item totals. The CPS Tax Imputation sums income and tax components
imputed by the Census Bureau over families. CPS Data and TAXSIM Imputation sums income and tax components imputed by TAXSIM using CPS inputs over families. Limited Tax Data
refers to tax calculations using TAXSIM with inputs generated from the limited tax data linked to the CPS. The Extensive Tax Data calculation obtains federal income tax liabilities and its
components directly from the extensive tax data and uses TAXSIM to generate tax liabilities and credits for CPS individuals not linked with an extensive tax data tax unit. The calculations for
Columns (5) and (6) include imputed taxes for survey individuals (using survey information on demographics and income) for whom we cannot attach a 1040 return. Columns (7)-(10) calculate
taxes for sub-samples of our overall sample; these estimates are compiled to better understand the estimates in Columns (5) and (6) and ­ on their own ­ do not match population totals.
Specifically, Columns (7) and (8) calculate taxes only for those tax units to whom we can attach a 1040 return, and Columns (9) and (10) additionally calculate taxes for individuals that do not
link to a PIK but are part of families where at least one person contains a PIK. Federal income tax liabilities are total tax (line 55) + additional tax on retirement (line 58) - refundable credits (line
63, 64a, 65, 66, 67, 70, 71).

                                                                                                    38
Table 2. Mean Family Income and Tax Calculations or Imputations by Pre-tax Money Income Decile, 2010
Tax Year, CPS data


                                                     Mean                    Imputation Minus Extensive Tax Data Calculation

                                               Extensive Tax Data         CPS Tax          CPS Data and          Limited Tax Data
                                                   Calculation           Imputation      TAXSIM Imputation          Imputation
  Income or Tax        Decile of Equivalized
    Component          Survey Family Income           (1)                    (2)                  (3)                   (4)
                                All                  6,824                   -162                   28                   83
                                  1                 -1,056                   -524                -325                   479
                                  2                 -2,326                   -915                -548                   125
                                  3                   -562                 -1,475              -1,262                   173
                                  4                   -475                    -45                   24                  256
  Federal income                  5                    988                     -5                  -25                  306
    tax liability                 6                  3,903                 -1,211              -1,240                   331
                                  7                  5,509                   -578                -568                   209
                                  8                  7,846                    287                 567                   116
                                  9                 14,350                     66                 554                   182
                                 10                 40,080                  2,780               3,103                -1,343
                                All                  2,095                   -137                  -62                  113
                                  1                     24                    -50                  -84                  105
                                  2                     47                    -63                -105                   103
                                  3                    473                   -275                -319                   147
                                  4                    611                    -99                -150                   113
 State income tax                 5                    979                   -116                -161                   121
     liability                    6                  1,638                   -310                -333                   105
                                  7                  2,038                   -196                -166                   123
                                  8                  2,592                    -64                   96                 -102
                                  9                  4,083                   -387                -147                   117
                                 10                  8,470                    189                 747                    96
                                All                  4,098                    244                   68                  -16
                                  1                    770                   -439                -498                   -37
                                  2                  1,218                   -171                -312                   -47
                                  3                  1,819                   -149                -351                   -23
                                  4                  2,468                    -32                -279                   -24
    Payroll tax
                                  5                  3,035                    172                  -99                  -26
     liability
                                  6                  3,915                    207                  -61                  -21
                                  7                  4,790                    383                 119                   -24
                                  8                  5,674                    608                 377                    -8
                                  9                  7,141                    682                 620                   -32
                                 10                 10,150                  1,179               1,158                    84
                                All                 13,020                    -55                   34                  181
                                  1                   -262                 -1,013                -907                   547
                                  2                 -1,060                 -1,149                -965                   181
                                  3                  1,729                 -1,899              -1,932                   298
                                  4                  2,604                   -176                -404                   345
                                  5                  5,001                     51                -285                   401
 Total tax liability
                                  6                  9,456                 -1,314              -1,634                   415
                                  7                 12,340                   -391                -615                   308
                                  8                 16,110                    831               1,039                   209
                                  9                 25,570                    361               1,028                   267
                                 10                 58,710                  4,149               5,008                -1,163

                                                      (continued on next page)




                                                                39
Table 2. Mean Family Income and Tax Calculations or Imputations by Pre-tax Money Income Decile, 2010
Tax Year, CPS data (Continued)


                                                    Mean                    Imputation Minus Extensive Tax Data Calculation

                                              Extensive Tax Data         CPS Tax          CPS Data and          Limited Tax Data
                                                  Calculation           Imputation      TAXSIM Imputation          Imputation
  Income or Tax       Decile of Equivalized
    Component         Survey Family Income           (1)                    (2)                  (3)                   (4)
                               All                 73,680                 -6,915               -9,653                   403
                                 1                 19,720                -15,410              -15,980                      9
                                 2                 22,670                 -8,809              -10,390                   -20
                                 3                 34,350                -11,760              -14,030                   120
                                 4                 41,170                 -8,606              -11,400                    84
  Adjusted Gross                 5                 50,470                 -6,000               -9,266                   199
     Income                      6                 66,820                 -9,509              -12,790                   232
                                 7                 76,480                 -4,388               -7,606                   138
                                 8                 91,320                 -1,711               -4,909                   387
                                 9                121,800                 -5,327               -8,251                   416
                                10                212,100                  2,350               -1,922                 2,466
                               All                 48,010                 -1,591               -2,169                -1,417
                                 1                  9,028                 -8,924               -8,997                  -432
                                 2                  6,682                 -5,576               -6,010                  -117
                                 3                 14,350                 -8,334               -9,244                   -98
                                 4                 17,910                 -4,462               -5,775                  -317
 Taxable income                  5                 25,790                 -3,130               -4,537                  -420
                                 6                 39,890                 -5,992               -7,100                -1,265
                                 7                 49,310                 -1,742               -2,171                -1,531
                                 8                 61,180                  2,655                3,280                -2,309
                                 9                 87,200                  2,201                3,813                -3,077
                                10                168,800                 17,370               15,030                -4,605
                               All                  9,221                 -1,260                 -934                  -393
                                 1                  1,473                 -1,462               -1,470                   300
                                 2                    996                   -897                 -927                   -29
                                 3                  2,523                 -2,164               -1,993                   -63
                                 4                  2,462                 -1,633               -1,110                   -83
  Federal income                 5                  3,663                 -1,755               -1,075                   -84
 tax before credits              6                  6,288                 -2,780               -2,048                  -101
                                 7                  7,766                 -2,064               -1,318                  -349
                                 8                  9,884                   -975                 -163                  -456
                                 9                 15,930                   -799                 -240                  -401
                                10                 41,230                  1,920                1,000                -2,663
                               All                    733                   -193                 -295                    -5
                                 1                  1,504                   -375                 -542                   -17
                                 2                  1,828                    236                   -83                  -12
                                 3                  1,390                   -153                 -386                   -14
                                 4                  1,013                   -493                 -653                    -5
  Earned Income                  5                    679                   -467                 -536                      0
    Tax Credit                   6                    379                   -271                 -314                    -2
                                 7                    221                   -168                 -178                      2
                                 8                    170                   -127                 -142                      2
                                 9                     86                    -70                   -72                     0
                                10                     52                    -44                   -43                   -1

                                                     (continued on next page)




                                                               40
Table 2. Mean Family Income and Tax Calculations or Imputations by Pre-tax Money Income Decile, 2010
Tax Year, CPS data (Continued)

                                                              Mean                         Imputation Minus Extensive Tax Data Calculation
                                                      Extensive Tax Data               CPS Tax              CPS Data and              Limited Tax Data
                                                          Calculation                 Imputation          TAXSIM Imputation              Imputation
   Income or Tax         Decile of Equivalized
     Component           Survey Family Income                  (1)                        (2)                       (3)                       (4)
                                  All                           740                        -74                     -108                       -16
                                    1                           590                       -298                     -332                       -22
                                    2                           964                        -49                     -136                       -50
                                    3                           999                        -20                       -95                      -27
                                    4                         1,026                        -59                     -108                       -31
  Child Tax Credit                  5                           971                        -37                       -74                      -17
                                    6                           928                         -7                       -31                       -8
                                    7                           812                         14                        -2                      -12
                                    8                           657                        -20                       -35                       -1
                                    9                           348                       -166                     -170                         7
                                   10                           109                        -98                       -96                        5

Sources: 2011 Current Population Survey (CPS) Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC); IRS 1040, W-2, 1099-R extracts for tax year
2010; IRS extensive 2010 tax data; TAXSIM.
Approved for release by the U.S. Census Bureau, authorization numbers CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-014, CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-038.

Note: We drop families with no PIKed members and families with any whole-imputed individuals, adjusting the individual survey weights using
inverse probability weighting. The CPS Tax Imputation uses income and tax components imputed by the Census Bureau. CPS Data and TAXSIM
Imputation uses income and tax components imputed by TAXSIM using CPS inputs. Limited Tax Data refers to tax calculations using TAXSIM
with inputs generated from the limited tax data linked to the CPS. The Extensive Tax Data calculation obtains federal income tax liabilities and its
components directly from the extensive tax data and uses TAXSIM to generate tax liabilities and credits for CPS individuals not linked with an
extensive tax data tax unit. Federal income tax liabilities are total tax (line 55) + additional tax on retirement (line 58) - refundable credits (line 63,
64a, 65, 66, 67, 70, 71). Family pre-tax money income decile is based on total family income equivalized to represent a two adult, two child
family.




                                                                            41
Table 3a. Mean Absolute Difference Between Imputations and Extensive Tax Calculation, 2010 Tax Year, CPS Data


                                           Extensive Tax                                           CPS Data and TAXSIM
                                          Data Calculation       CPS Tax Imputation                     Imputation            Limited Tax Data Imputation

                           Quartile of                       Mean absolute      % of            Mean absolute      % of      Mean absolute        % of
                           Equivalized         Mean           difference     Column (1)          difference     Column (1)    difference       Column (1)
    Income or Tax         Survey Family
      component              Income             (1)               (2)            (3)                 (4)           (5)           (6)               (7)
                               All            6,824              7,202           105.5              7,434         108.9         1,654               24.2
                                1            -1,561              2,741           175.6              2,822         180.8           565               36.2
  Federal income tax            2               184              3,258         1,768.0              3,259        1771.2           734             399.1
       liability                3             5,159              5,285           102.4              5,429         105.2         1,349               26.1
                                4            23,520             17,530            74.5             18,230           77.5        3,966               16.9
                               All            2,095              1,367            65.3              1,415           67.5          342               16.3
                                1               100                420           421.0                400         400.0           161             160.6
    State income tax            2               752                691            91.9                693           92.2          219               29.1
        liability               3             1,957              1,131            57.8              1,174           60.0          291               14.9
                                4             5,571              3,226            57.9              3,394           60.9          699               12.5
                               All            4,098              1,521            37.1              1,651           40.3          124                3.0
                                1             1,131                669            59.1                747           66.0           66                5.9
  Payroll tax liability         2             2,591              1,009            38.9              1,176           45.4           75                2.9
                                3             4,564              1,543            33.8              1,700           37.2          102                2.2
                                4             8,106              2,862            35.3              2,981           36.8          253                3.1
                               All           13,020              9,385            72.1              9,870           75.8        1,913               14.7
                                1              -330              3,225           976.4              3,232         979.4           712             215.7
   Total tax liability          2             3,527              4,530           128.4              4,601         130.5           925               26.2
                                3            11,680              7,401            63.4              7,832           67.1        1,565               13.4
                                4            37,190             22,380            60.2             23,810           64.0        4,450               12.0
                               All           73,680            32,050*            43.5             34,670           47.1          790                1.1
                                1            23,150             15,100            65.2             16,190           69.9          525                2.3
 Adjusted Gross Income          2            44,170             18,410            41.7             21,080           47.7          527                1.2
                                3            74,800             26,800            35.8             29,760           39.8          520                0.7
                                4           152,600             67,900            44.5             71,650           47.0        1,587                1.0
                               All           48,010             27,280            56.8             28,780           59.9        4,924               10.3
                                1             8,724              8,655            99.2              8,580           98.3        1,104               12.7
    Taxable income              2            20,760             14,140            68.1             14,980           72.2        1,952                9.4
                                3            47,170             23,950            50.8             25,830           54.8        4,399                9.3
                                4           115,400             62,370            54.1             65,740           57.0       12,240               10.6

                                                                     (continued on next page)



                                                                               42
Table 3a. Mean Absolute Difference Between Imputations and Extensive Tax Calculation, 2010 Tax Year, CPS Data (Continued)

                                                  Extensive Tax                                                       CPS Data and TAXSIM
                                                 Data Calculation              CPS Tax Imputation                            Imputation                          Limited Tax Data Imputation
                               Quartile of
                               Equivalized                                 Mean absolute       % of                Mean absolute         % of                   Mean absolute        % of
      Income or Tax           Survey Family            Mean                 difference     Column (1)               difference        Column (1)                 difference       Column (1)
        component                Income                 (1)                     (2)                (3)                   (4)                 (5)                      (6)                 (7)
                                   All                9,221                     6,366               69.0                6,553                 71.1                   1,438                 15.6
                                    1                 1,427                     1,447              101.4                1,413                 99.0                     327                 22.9
    Federal income tax
                                    2                 3,016                     2,512               83.3                2,413                 80.0                     388                 12.9
      before credits
                                    3                 7,436                     4,637               62.4                4,903                 65.9                   1,018                 13.7
                                    4                25,010                    16,870               67.5               17,480                 69.9                   4,018                 16.1
                                   All                  733                       550               75.1                  569                 77.6                      14                  1.9
                                    1                 1,642                     1,094               66.6                1,157                 70.5                      31                  1.9
   Earned Income Tax
                                    2                   925                       763               82.5                  774                 83.7                      15                  1.6
         Credit
                                    3                   283                       266               93.9                  268                 94.8                        5                 1.9
                                    4                    80                        77               96.5                   76                 95.4                        4                 4.5
                                   All                  740                       275               37.2                  306                 41.3                      43                  5.8
                                    1                   825                       373               45.2                  421                 51.1                      74                  9.0
     Child Tax Credit               2                   994                       293               29.5                  341                 34.3                      55                  5.5
                                    3                   838                       238               28.4                  261                 31.2                      29                  3.5
                                    4                   304                       197               64.6                  200                 65.9                      12                  4.1

* Alternatively, we calculated a winsorized mean absolute error for AGI (where we set mean absolute errors for greater than the 99th percentile equal to the 99th percentile), and this winsorized
mean absolute error is equal to $26,420.

Sources: 2011 Current Population Survey (CPS) Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC); IRS 1040, W-2, 1099-R extracts for tax year 2010; IRS extensive 2010 tax data; TAXSIM.
Approved for release by the U.S. Census Bureau, authorization numbers CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-014, CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-038.

Note: We drop families with no PIKed members and families with any whole-imputed individuals, adjusting individual survey weights using inverse probability weighting. The CPS Tax
Imputation uses income and tax components imputed by the Census Bureau. CPS Data and TAXSIM Imputation uses income and tax components imputed by TAXSIM using CPS inputs.
Limited Tax Data refers to tax calculations using TAXSIM with inputs generated from the limited tax data linked to the CPS. The Extensive Tax Data calculation obtains federal income tax
liabilities and its components directly from the extensive tax data and uses TAXSIM to generate tax liabilities and credits for CPS individuals not linked with an extensive tax data tax unit.
Federal income tax liabilities are total tax (line 55) + additional tax on retirement (line 58) - refundable credits (line 63, 64a, 65, 66, 67, 70, 71). Family pre-tax money income decile is based on
total family income equivalized to represent a two adult, two child family.




                                                                                                  43
Table 3b. Median Absolute Difference Between Imputations and Extensive Tax Calculation, 2010 Tax Year, CPS Data


                                          Extensive Tax                                             CPS Data and TAXSIM
                                         Data Calculation        CPS Tax Imputation                      Imputation              Limited Tax Data Imputation

                          Quartile of                       Median absolute        % of         Median absolute      % of      Median absolute       % of
                          Equivalized         Mean            difference        Column (1)        difference      Column (1)     difference       Column (1)
   Income or Tax         Survey Family
     component              Income             (1)               (2)               (3)                (4)            (5)             (6)              (7)
                              All            6,824               2,265              33.2             2,442            35.8            238               3.5
                               1            -1,561                 700              44.8               723            46.3               2              0.1
 Federal income tax            2               184               1,454             790.2             1,475           801.6             92              50.0
      liability                3             5,159               2,430              47.1             2,607            50.5            471               9.1
                               4            23,520               6,763              28.8             7,444            31.6          1,481               6.3
                              All            2,095                 260              12.4               261            12.5               0                0
                               1               100                   0                 0                  0              0               0                0
  State income tax             2               752                 182              24.2               172            22.8               0                0
      liability                3             1,957                 411              21.0               424            21.7             31               1.6
                               4             5,571               1,065              19.1             1,170            21.0            163               2.9
                              All            4,098                 563              13.7               597            14.6               0                0
                               1             1,131                 207              18.3               225            19.9               0                0
 Payroll tax liability         2             2,591                 448              17.3               499            19.3               0                0
                               3             4,564                 723              15.8               759            16.6               0                0
                               4             8,106               1,216              15.0             1,199            14.8               0                0
                              All           13,020               3,116              23.9             3,345            25.7            446               3.4
                               1              -330               1,000             303.0             1,032           312.7             30               9.2
  Total tax liability          2             3,527               2,196              62.3             2,270            64.4            237               6.7
                               3            11,680               3,679              31.5             3,961            33.9            652               5.6
                               4            37,190               8,981              24.1            10,200            27.4          1,693               4.6
                              All           73,680              10,090              13.7            11,210            15.2               0                0
                               1            23,150               4,405              19.0             5,096            22.0               0                0
   Adjusted Gross              2            44,170               7,801              17.7             8,997            20.4               0                0
      Income                   3            74,800              11,680              15.6            12,710            17.0               0                0
                               4           152,600              23,160              15.2            24,470            16.0               0                0
                              All           48,010               8,660              18.0             9,621            20.0               0                0
                               1             8,724                   0                 0                  0              0               0                0
  Taxable income               2            20,760               6,593              31.8             7,345            35.4               0                0
                               3            47,170              12,610              26.7            14,220            30.1            628               1.3
                               4           115,400              27,280              23.6            30,130            26.1          6,368               5.5

                                                                         (continued on next page)


                                                                                   44
Table 3b. Median Absolute Difference Between Imputations and Extensive Tax Calculation, 2010 Tax Year, CPS Data (Continued)

                                               Extensive Tax                                                         CPS Data and TAXSIM
                                              Data Calculation              CPS Tax Imputation                              Imputation                          Limited Tax Data Imputation
                            Quartile of
                            Equivalized                                Median absolute      % of                 Median absolute        % of                  Median absolute       % of
    Income or Tax          Survey Family            Mean                 difference     Column (1)                 difference        Column (1)                 difference       Column (1)
      component               Income                 (1)                      (2)                 (3)                   (4)                 (5)                      (6)                 (7)
                                All                 9,221                     1,351                14.7                1,391                 15.1                       3                  0.0
                                 1                  1,427                         0                   0                     0                   0                       0                    0
  Federal income tax
                                 2                  3,016                       968                32.1                  888                 29.5                       2                  0.1
    before credits
                                 3                  7,436                     1,916                25.8                2,194                 29.5                     136                  1.8
                                 4                 25,010                     6,049                24.2                6,737                 26.9                   1,339                  5.4
                                All                   733                         0                   0                     0                   0                       0                    0
                                 1                  1,642                       146                 8.9                  125                  7.6                       0                    0
  Earned Income Tax
                                 2                    925                         0                   0                     0                   0                       0                    0
        Credit
                                 3                    283                         0                   0                     0                   0                       0                    0
                                 4                     80                         0                   0                     0                   0                       0                    0
                                All                   740                         0                   0                     0                   0                       0                    0
                                 1                    825                         0                   0                     0                   0                       0                    0
   Child Tax Credit              2                    994                         0                   0                     0                   0                       0                    0
                                 3                    838                         0                   0                     0                   0                       0                    0
                                 4                    304                         0                   0                     0                   0                       0                    0

Sources: 2011 Current Population Survey (CPS) Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC); IRS 1040, W-2, 1099-R extracts for tax year 2010; IRS extensive 2010 tax data; TAXSIM.
Approved for release by the U.S. Census Bureau, authorization numbers CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-014, CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-038.

Note: We drop families with no PIKed members and families with any whole-imputed individuals, adjusting individual survey weights using inverse probability weighting. The CPS Tax
Imputation uses income and tax components imputed by the Census Bureau. CPS Data and TAXSIM Imputation uses income and tax components imputed by TAXSIM using CPS inputs.
Limited Tax Data refers to tax calculations using TAXSIM with inputs generated from the limited tax data linked to the CPS. The Extensive Tax Data calculation obtains federal income tax
liabilities and its components directly from the extensive tax data and uses TAXSIM to generate tax liabilities and credits for CPS individuals not linked with an extensive tax data tax unit.
Federal income tax liabilities are total tax (line 55) + additional tax on retirement (line 58) - refundable credits (line 63, 64a, 65, 66, 67, 70, 71). Family pre-tax money income decile is based on
total family income equivalized to represent a two adult, two child family.




                                                                                                  45
Appendix Table A.1. Variables Entered Into TAXSIM for Limited Tax Data Imputation

                                   Tax units with an attached 1040 return                         Tax units without an attached 1040 return
Variables                                    (limited tax data)                                               (limited tax data)
                                                                  Notes                                                      Notes
                       Source                                                                      Source
                                            Extensive Tax Data                    CPS                                         CPS
                                                                                                                  Generated based on family
Tax unit ID          1040 Forms                                                                    Survey
                                                                                                                  relationship
Year                 1040 Forms                                                                    Survey
Marital status
                     1040 Forms          Based on filing status                                    Survey         Based on marital status
(filing status)
                                                                                                                  FIPS code converted to
State                1040 Forms                                                                    Survey
                                                                                                                  SOI code
                                                                          Topcoded at 85, age                     Topcoded at 85, age equal
Primary filer age    1040 Forms                                                                    Survey
                                                                          equal to 70 if blind                    to 70 if blind
                                                                          Topcoded at 85, age
                                                                                                                  Topcoded at 85, age equal
                                                                          equal to 70 if blind,
Secondary filer                                                                                                   to 70 if blind, only non-
                     1040 forms                                           only non-missing if      Survey
age                                                                                                               missing if married, filing
                                                                          married, filing
                                                                                                                  jointly
                                                                          jointly
Number of                                Number of dependent                                                      Number of qualifying
                     1040 Forms                                                                    Survey
dependents                               exemptions                                                               dependents*
Number of
                                                                          Number of                               Number of qualifying
individuals          Numident,
                                                                          qualifying children      Survey         children and other
eligible for          Survey
                                                                          and other relatives*                    relatives*
childcare credit
Number of
                                                                          Number of                               Number of qualifying
individuals          Numident,
                                                                          qualifying children      Survey         children and other
eligible for child    Survey
                                                                          and other relatives*                    relatives*
tax credit
Number of
individuals                              Number of EITC-eligible                                                  Number of EITC-eligible
                     1040 Forms                                                                    Survey
eligible for                             children                                                                 individuals*
EITC
                                         Wages and salaries for
                                                                                                                  Wages + self-employment
Primary filer        1040 Forms,         primary and secondary                                     Survey,
                                                                                                                  income (DER/W-2s &
wages                   DER              and self-employment                                      DER, W-2
                                                                                                                  survey)***
                                         income**
                                                                                                                  Counted as zero because
Secondary filer                            Counted as zero because included in primary
                        N/A                                                                        Survey         included in primary filer
wages                                                      filer wages
                                                                                                                  wages
Dividend
                     1040 Forms                                                                    Survey
income
Interest income      1040 Forms                                                                    Survey
Short term
                                             Counted as zero because included in other                               Not available in any
capital                 N/A                                                                         N/A
                                                         property income                                                   dataset
gains/losses
Long term
                                             Counted as zero because included in other                               Not available in any
capital                 N/A                                                                         N/A
                                                         property income                                                   dataset
gains/losses

                                                      (continued on next page)




                                                                    46
 Appendix Table A.1. Variables Entered Into TAXSIM for Limited Tax Data Imputation (cont.)


                                         Tax units with an attached 1040 return                     Tax units without an attached 1040 return
                                                   (limited tax data)                                           (limited tax data)
                                                                    Notes                                                       Notes
                              Source                                                                Source
 Variable                                       Extensive Tax Data              CPS                                             CPS
                                               Difference between
                                               adjusted gross
                                               income and                                                            Includes rent, financial
 Other property
                                N/A            wages/salaries, self-                                Survey           assistance, and other sources
 income
                                               employment income,                                                    of income
                                               dividends, and
                                               interest
 Other non-property                                                                                                  Includes education assistance
                            1040 Forms                                                              Survey
 income                                                                                                              and alimony
                                                  Counted as zero because included in other                          Gross distributions from the
 Pension income                 N/A                                                                 1099-R
                                                              property income                                        1099-R form
 Social security                                  Counted as zero because included in other
                                N/A                                                                 Survey
 income                                                       property income
 Unemployment                                     Counted as zero because included in other
                                N/A                                                                 Survey
 insurance income                                             property income
                                                                        Includes transfers
                                                                        such as SSI, public                          Includes transfers such as
 Transfer income              Survey                                    assistance, and             Survey           SSI, public assistance, and
                                                                        veteran/survivor                             veteran/survivor benefits
                                                                        benefits
 Rent paid                      N/A                     Not available in any dataset                  N/A            Not available in any dataset
                                                                        Converted from                               Converted from household
 Real estate taxes paid       Survey                                                                Survey
                                                                        household level                              level
 Other itemized
                                N/A                                                                   N/A            Not available in any dataset
 deductions
                                                Backed-out from the
                                                amount of child care
                                                                                                                     Converted from household
 Childcare expenses         1040 Forms          credit received and                                 Survey
                                                                                                                     level
                                                adjusted gross
                                                income
 Deductions not                                 Includes average
                                                                                                                     Only includes family
 included in other          1040 Forms          itemized                                            Survey
                                                                                                                     medical expenses
 itemized deductions                            deductions*****


* Qualifying individuals are based on the 2010 Tax Guide. The number of qualifying children for linked tax units attaches survey children to a linked
tax unit if a dependent is not linked from the 1040.
** Self-employment income is pulled from the DER and divided by 0.9235.
*** Survey self-employment income is replaced with non-zero self-employment income from the DER divided by 0.9235.
***** If a linked tax unit notes that it filed a Schedule A, all other itemized deduction variables are set to 0, and deductions not included in other
itemized deductions is set to the average itemized deductions based on AGI bucket. If a linked tax unit does not file a Schedule A, all itemized
deduction variables are set to 0.




                                                                        47
Appendix Table A.2. Variables Entered Into TAXSIM for Extensive Tax Data Calculation

                                   Tax units with an attached 1040 return                        Tax units without an attached 1040 return
Variables                                   (extensive tax data)                                            (extensive tax data)
                                                                  Notes                                                     Notes
                       Source                                                                     Source
                                            Extensive Tax Data                    CPS                                        CPS
                                                                                                                 Generated based on family
Tax unit ID          1040 Forms                                                                   Survey
                                                                                                                 relationship
Year                 1040 Forms                                                                   Survey
Marital status
                     1040 Forms          Based on filing status                                   Survey         Based on marital status
(filing status)
                                                                                                                 FIPS code converted to
State                1040 Forms                                                                   Survey
                                                                                                                 SOI code
                                         Equal to 70 if claiming an
                                                                                                                 Topcoded at 85, age equal
Primary filer age    1040 Forms          exemption for being over                                 Survey
                                                                                                                 to 70 if blind
                                         the age of 65 or blind
                                                                                                                 Topcoded at 85, age equal
                                         Equal to 70 if claiming an
Secondary filer                                                                                                  to 70 if blind, only non-
                     1040 forms          exemption for being over                                 Survey
age                                                                                                              missing if married, filing
                                         the age of 65 or blind
                                                                                                                 jointly
                                         Maximum of number of
Number of                                dependent exemptions                                                    Number of qualifying
                     1040 Forms                                                                   Survey
dependents                               and number of dependent                                                 dependents*
                                         PIKs
Number of
                                                                          Number of                              Number of qualifying
individuals
                       Survey                                             qualifying children     Survey         children and other
eligible for
                                                                          and other relatives*                   relatives*
childcare credit
Number of
                                                                          Number of                              Number of qualifying
individuals
                       Survey                                             qualifying children     Survey         children and other
eligible for child
                                                                          and other relatives*                   relatives*
tax credit
Number of
individuals                              Number of EITC-eligible                                                 Number of EITC-eligible
                     1040 Forms                                                                   Survey
eligible for                             children                                                                individuals*
EITC
                                         Wages and salaries for
                                                                                                                 Wages + self-employment
Primary filer        1040 Forms,         primary and secondary                                    Survey,
                                                                                                                 income (DER/W-2s &
wages                   DER              and self-employment                                     DER, W-2
                                                                                                                 survey)***
                                         income**
                                                                                                                 Counted as zero because
Secondary filer                            Counted as zero because included in primary
                        N/A                                                                       Survey         included in primary filer
wages                                                      filer wages
                                                                                                                 wages
Dividend
                     1040 Forms                                                                   Survey
income
Interest income      1040 Forms                                                                   Survey
Short term
                                                                                                                    Not available in any
capital              1040 forms                                                                    N/A
                                                                                                                          dataset
gains/losses
Long term
                                                                                                                    Not available in any
capital              1040 forms                                                                    N/A
                                                                                                                          dataset
gains/losses

                                                      (continued on next page)




                                                                    48
Appendix Table A.2. Variables Entered Into TAXSIM for Extensive Tax Data Calculation (cont.)


                                    Tax units with an attached 1040 return                     Tax units without an attached 1040 return
                                             (extensive tax data)                                         (extensive tax data)
                                                               Notes                                                      Notes
                           Source                                                              Source
Variable                                   Extensive Tax Data              CPS                                             CPS
                                          Supplemental
                                          gains/losses,                                                       Includes rent, financial
Other property
                         1040 Forms       Schedule E                                           Survey         assistance, and other sources
income
                                          profit/loss, other                                                  of income
                                          income
                                          State income tax
Other non-property                                                                                            Includes education assistance
                         1040 Forms       refund + alimony -                                   Survey
income                                                                                                        and alimony
                                          total adjustments
                                          Taxable IRS
                                          distributions and                                                   Taxable distributions from
Pension income           1040 Forms                                                           1099-R
                                          pensions/ annuities                                                 the 1099-R form
                                          (line 36)****
Social security
                         1040 Forms                                                            Survey
income
Unemployment
                         1040 Forms                                                           1099-G
insurance income
                                                                     Includes transfers
                                                                     such as SSI, public                      Includes transfers such as
Transfer income             Survey                                   assistance, and           Survey         SSI, public assistance, and
                                                                     veteran/survivor                         veteran/survivor benefits
                                                                     benefits
Rent paid                    N/A                      Not available in any dataset              N/A           Not available in any dataset
                                                                                                              Converted from household
Real estate taxes paid   1040 Forms                                                            Survey
                                                                                                              level
Other itemized                               Total deductions -
                         1040 Forms                                                             N/A           Not available in any dataset
deductions                                   estate taxes
                                             Backed-out from the
                                             amount of child care
                                                                                                              Converted from household
Childcare expenses       1040 Forms          credit received and                               Survey
                                                                                                              level
                                             adjusted gross
                                             income
                                             Includes total
                                             interest deduction,
Deductions not
                                             medical deduction,                                               Only includes family
included in other        1040 Forms                                                            Survey
                                             charitable giving,                                               medical expenses
itemized deductions
                                             and casualty/theft
                                             loss

*Qualifying individuals are based on the 2010 Tax Guide. The number of qualifying children for linked tax units attaches survey children to
a linked tax unit if a dependent is not linked from the 1040.
**Self-employment income for linked tax units is the sum of lines 12 and 18 from the 1040 form.
*** Survey self-employment income for unlinked tax units is replaced with self-employment income from the DER divided by 0.9235 if
DER self-employment income is non-zero. Survey wages for unlinked tax units are replaced with W-2 wages if W-2 wages are non-zero.
**** State income tax refund and alimony are placed in other non-property income because TAXSIM does not have a taxable income
variable for these two sources of income.




                                                                    49
Appendix Table A.3. Aggregate Income and Tax Components Using Various Tax Calculators with Standard Errors, 2010 Tax Year, CPS Data

                                                1040
                                               Universe                                            CPS ASEC Linked to Administrative Data
                                Independent                                                                                                          Imputation      Imputation
                                 Aggregates                                                                                                          for Limited    for Extensive
                                  from IRS                                CPS Data                                 Imputation for    Imputation       Tax Data        Tax Data
                                    SOI or    Extensive                      and        Limited       Extensive     Limited Tax     for Extensive      Filers &        Filers &
                                    Other      Tax Data      CPS Tax      TAXSIM       Tax Data       Tax Data      Data Filers       Tax Data      Families with   Families with
                                   Sources    Calculation   Imputation   Imputation   Imputation     Calculation        Only         Filers Only    Missing PIKs    Missing PIKs
                                     (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)            (6)            (7)              (8)             (9)            (10)
 Federal income tax liability      844,600      825,500      807,600       858,700      853,100        845,300         810,400         804,600         814,500         808,600
                                                 (1,524)     (11,550)     (12,760)     (32,420)       (27,240)        (32,640)        (27,500)         (32,670)       (27,540)
 State income tax liability       243,400                    216,800       235,500      246,500        231,900         235,000         219,900         237,000         222,000
                                                              (2,809)       (2,945)      (6,422)        (5,695)         (6,391)         (5,670)         (6,445)         (5,733)
 Payroll tax liability            435,800                    461,100       470,200      432,500        433,400         411,300         412,200         413,800         414,700
                                                              (4,520)       (5,036)      (4,620)        (4,586)         (4,406)         (4,357)         (4,489)         (4,442)
   Payroll tax on wages           387,900                                  422,000      380,300        382,200         366,300         368,200         367,300         369,100
                                                                            (4,633)      (4,057)        (4,069)         (3,960)         (3,966)         (3,968)         (3,976)
   Payroll tax on self-emp.        47,900                                   48,260       52,230         51,250          44,930          44,000           46,520         45,590
                                                                            (1,267)      (1,359)        (1,323)         (1,247)         (1,190)         (1,269)         (1,214)
 Adjusted Gross Income          8,089,000     7,891,000     7,326,000    7,394,000    8,276,000      8,216,000       7,792,000       7,740,000       7,884,000       7,832,000
                                                 (6,516)     (68,870)     (76,110)    (152,700)      (148,100)       (151,800)       (147,300)       (152,900)       (148,400)
 Taxable income                 5,502,000     5,366,000     5,238,000    5,421,000    5,357,000      5,534,000       5,052,000       5,237,000       5,105,000       5,289,000
                                                 (5,302)     (52,570)     (58,020)    (115,900)      (116,000)       (116,100)       (116,600)       (116,500)       (117,000)
 Fed. inc. tax before credits   1,065,000     1,042,000       917,100      979,100    1,014,000      1,052,000         960,300         999,400         969,100       1,008,000
                                                 (1,626)     (12,000)     (12,460)     (32,520)       (27,930)        (32,650)        (28,110)         (32,730)       (28,200)
 Earned income tax credit          59,560        59,510        40,350       34,060       59,020         59,300          54,560          54,600           56,710         56,810
                                                    (14)       (1,240)        (653)      (1,716)        (1,722)         (1,588)         (1,593)         (1,652)         (1,658)
 Child tax credit                  56,260        54,580        45,860       44,460       52,910         54,230          50,320          51,560           51,500         52,740
                                                    (13)         (860)        (723)      (1,121)        (1,158)         (1,060)         (1,094)         (1,089)         (1,122)
 Sample Size                                  138,800,000                        170,000                              140,000         139,000         147,000         146,000

See Table 1 for all notes and sources. Standard errors in parentheses are calculated using replicate weights.
Approved for release by the U.S. Census Bureau, authorization numbers CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-014, CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-038.




                                                                                      50
Appendix Table A.4. Mean Family Income and Tax Calculations or Imputations by Pre-Tax Money Income
Decile, 2010 Tax Year, CPS Data (Replacing Differences with Overall Means)


                                                     Mean                                  Imputation

                                               Extensive Tax Data         CPS Tax       CPS Data and      Limited Tax Data
                                                   Calculation           Imputation   TAXSIM Imputation      Imputation
  Income or Tax        Decile of Equivalized
    Component          Survey Family Income           (1)                   (2)              (3)                (4)
                                All                  6,824                 6,662           6,852              6,907
                                  1                 -1,056                -1,580          -1,381               -577
                                  2                 -2,326                -3,241          -2,874             -2,201
                                  3                   -562                -2,037          -1,824               -389
                                  4                   -475                  -520            -451               -219
  Federal income                  5                    988                   983             963              1,294
    tax liability                 6                  3,903                 2,692           2,663              4,234
                                  7                  5,509                 4,931           4,941              5,718
                                  8                  7,846                 8,133           8,413              7,962
                                  9                 14,350                14,416          14,904             14,532
                                 10                 40,080                42,860          43,183             38,737
                                All                  2,095                 1,958           2,033              2,208
                                  1                     24                   -26              -60               129
                                  2                     47                   -16              -58               150
                                  3                    473                   198             154                620
                                  4                    611                   512             461                724
 State income tax                 5                    979                   863             818              1,100
     liability                    6                  1,638                 1,328           1,305              1,743
                                  7                  2,038                 1,842           1,872              2,161
                                  8                  2,592                 2,528           2,688              2,490
                                  9                  4,083                 3,696           3,936              4,200
                                 10                  8,470                 8,659           9,217              8,566
                                All                  4,098                 4,342           4,166              4,082
                                  1                    770                   331             272                733
                                  2                  1,218                 1,047             906              1,171
                                  3                  1,819                 1,670           1,468              1,796
                                  4                  2,468                 2,436           2,189              2,444
    Payroll tax
                                  5                  3,035                 3,207           2,936              3,009
     liability
                                  6                  3,915                 4,122           3,854              3,894
                                  7                  4,790                 5,173           4,909              4,766
                                  8                  5,674                 6,282           6,051              5,666
                                  9                  7,141                 7,823           7,761              7,109
                                 10                 10,150                11,329          11,308             10,234
                                All                 13,020                12,965          13,054             13,201
                                  1                   -262                -1,275          -1,169                285
                                  2                 -1,060                -2,209          -2,025               -879
                                  3                  1,729                  -170            -203              2,027
                                  4                  2,604                 2,428           2,200              2,949
                                  5                  5,001                 5,052           4,716              5,402
 Total tax liability
                                  6                  9,456                 8,142           7,822              9,871
                                  7                 12,340                11,949          11,725             12,648
                                  8                 16,110                16,941          17,149             16,319
                                  9                 25,570                25,931          26,598             25,837
                                 10                 58,710                62,859          63,718             57,547

                                                      (continued on next page)
                                                                51
Appendix Table A.4. Mean Family Income and Tax Calculations or Imputations by Pre-Tax Money Income
Decile, 2010 Tax Year, CPS Data (Replacing Differences with Overall Means) (Continued)


                                                    Mean                                  Imputation

                                              Extensive Tax Data         CPS Tax       CPS Data and      Limited Tax Data
                                                  Calculation           Imputation   TAXSIM Imputation      Imputation
  Income or Tax       Decile of Equivalized
    Component         Survey Family Income           (1)                   (2)              (3)                (4)
                               All                 73,680                66,765           64,027             74,083
                                 1                 19,720                 4,310            3,740             19,729
                                 2                 22,670                13,861           12,280             22,650
                                 3                 34,350                22,590           20,320             34,470
                                 4                 41,170                32,564           29,770             41,254
  Adjusted Gross                 5                 50,470                44,470           41,024             50,669
     Income                      6                 66,820                57,311           54,030             67,052
                                 7                 76,480                72,092           68,874             76,618
                                 8                 91,320                89,609           86,411             91,707
                                 9                121,800               116,473          113,549            122,216
                                10                212,100               214,450          210,178            214,566
                               All                 48,010                46,419           45,841             46,593
                                 1                  9,028                   104               31              8,596
                                 2                  6,682                 1,106              672              6,565
                                 3                 14,350                 6,016            5,106             14,252
                                 4                 17,910                13,448           12,135             17,593
 Taxable income                  5                 25,790                22,660           21,253             25,370
                                 6                 39,890                33,898           32,790             38,625
                                 7                 49,310                47,568           47,139             47,779
                                 8                 61,180                63,835           64,460             58,871
                                 9                 87,200                89,401           91,013             84,123
                                10                168,800               186,170          183,830            164,195
                               All                  9,221                 7,961            8,287              8,828
                                 1                  1,473                    11                 3             1,773
                                 2                    996                    99               69                967
                                 3                  2,523                   359              530              2,460
                                 4                  2,462                   829            1,352              2,379
  Federal income                 5                  3,663                 1,908            2,588              3,579
 tax before credits              6                  6,288                 3,508            4,240              6,187
                                 7                  7,766                 5,702            6,448              7,417
                                 8                  9,884                 8,909            9,721              9,428
                                 9                 15,930                15,131           15,690             15,529
                                10                 41,230                43,150           42,230             38,567
                               All                    733                   540              438                728
                                 1                  1,504                 1,129              962              1,487
                                 2                  1,828                 2,064            1,745              1,816
                                 3                  1,390                 1,237            1,004              1,376
                                 4                  1,013                   520              360              1,008
  Earned Income                  5                    679                   212              143                679
    Tax Credit                   6                    379                   108               65                377
                                 7                    221                    53               43                223
                                 8                    170                    43               28                172
                                 9                     86                    16               14                 86
                                10                     52                      8                9                51

                                                     (continued on next page)
                                                                52
Appendix Table A.4. Mean Family Income and Tax Calculations or Imputations by Pre-Tax Money Income
Decile, 2010 Tax Year, CPS Data (Replacing Differences with Overall Means) (Continued)

                                                  Mean                                   Imputation
                                            Extensive Tax Data       CPS Tax          CPS Data and        Limited Tax Data
                                                Calculation         Imputation      TAXSIM Imputation        Imputation
  Income or Tax     Decile of Equivalized
    Component       Survey Family Income           (1)                  (2)                (3)                  (4)
                             All                    740                  666               632                  724
                               1                    590                  292               258                  568
                               2                    964                  915               828                  914
                               3                    999                  979               904                  972
                               4                  1,026                  967               918                  995
 Child Tax Credit              5                    971                  934               897                  954
                               6                    928                  921               897                  920
                               7                    812                  826               810                  800
                               8                    657                  637               622                  656
                               9                    348                  182               178                  355
                              10                    109                   11                13                  114

See Table 2 for all notes and sources. Standard errors in parentheses are calculated using replicate weights.
Approved for release by the U.S. Census Bureau, authorization numbers CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-014, CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-038.




                                                             53
Appendix Table A.5 Mean Family Income and Tax Calculations or Imputations by Pre-Tax Money Income
Decile with Standard Errors, 2010 Tax Year, CPS Data


                                                  Mean                      Imputation Minus Extensive Tax Data Calculation

                                            Extensive Tax Data          CPS Tax           CPS Data and          Limited Tax Data
                                                Calculation            Imputation       TAXSIM Imputation          Imputation
  Income or Tax     Decile of Equivalized
    Component       Survey Family Income            (1)                    (2)                   (3)                    (4)
                             All                   6,824                   -162                    28                    83
                                                   (208)                  (175)                (177)                   (66)
                             1                    -1,056                   -524                 -325                   479
                                                   (442)                  (443)                (444)                 (234)
                             2                    -2,326                   -915                 -548                   125
                                                   (108)                  (106)                (108)                   (25)
                             3                      -562                 -1,475               -1,262                   173
                                                   (447)                  (446)                (446)                   (67)
                             4                      -475                     -45                   24                  256
                                                   (147)                  (144)                (140)                   (34)
  Federal income             5                       988                      -5                  -25                  306
    tax liability                                  (207)                  (209)                (206)                   (49)
                             6                     3,903                 -1,211               -1,240                   331
                                                   (573)                  (576)                (576)                 (177)
                             7                     5,509                   -578                 -568                   209
                                                   (536)                  (535)                (534)                   (50)
                             8                     7,846                    287                  567                   116
                                                   (254)                  (247)                (238)                 (110)
                             9                   14,350                       66                 554                   182
                                                   (821)                  (816)                (817)                 (429)
                             10                  40,080                   2,780                3,103                -1,343
                                                 (1,593)                (1,441)              (1,460)                 (490)
                             All                   2,095                   -137                   -62                  113
                                                     (48)                   (38)                (39)                   (19)
                             1                         24                    -50                  -84                  105
                                                     (29)                   (29)                (28)                   (11)
                             2                         47                    -63                -105                   103
                                                     (20)                   (21)                (20)                    (7)
                             3                       473                   -275                 -319                   147
                                                     (92)                   (92)                (92)                   (21)
                             4                       611                     -99                -150                   113
                                                     (38)                   (38)                (37)                    (8)
 State income tax            5                       979                   -116                 -161                   121
     liability                                       (52)                   (51)                (50)                    (9)
                             6                     1,638                   -310                 -333                   105
                                                   (105)                  (104)                (103)                   (10)
                             7                     2,038                   -196                 -166                   123
                                                   (132)                  (130)                (131)                   (14)
                             8                     2,592                     -64                   96                 -102
                                                     (68)                   (65)                (63)                   (15)
                             9                     4,083                   -387                 -147                   117
                                                   (308)                  (303)                (306)                   (37)
                             10                    8,470                    189                  747                     96
                                                   (305)                  (231)                (241)                 (189)
                                                   (continued on next page)

                                                              54
Appendix Table A.5. Mean Family Income and Tax Calculations or Imputations by Pre-Tax Money Income
Decile with Standard Errors, 2010 Tax Year, CPS Data (Continued)


                                                     Mean                     Imputation Minus Extensive Tax Data Calculation

                                               Extensive Tax Data          CPS Tax          CPS Data and           Limited Tax Data
                                                   Calculation            Imputation      TAXSIM Imputation           Imputation
  Income or Tax        Decile of Equivalized
    Component          Survey Family Income            (1)                    (2)                   (3)                  (4)
                                All                   4,098                    244                    68                 -16
                                                        (27)                   (18)                (18)                   (5)
                                1                       770                   -439                 -498                  -37
                                                        (23)                   (21)                (21)                   (7)
                                2                     1,218                   -171                 -312                  -47
                                                        (26)                   (22)                (24)                   (7)
                                3                     1,819                   -149                 -351                  -23
                                                        (48)                   (43)                (45)                   (7)
                                4                     2,468                     -32                -279                  -24
                                                        (35)                   (28)                (32)                   (8)
    Payroll tax
                                5                     3,035                    172                   -99                 -26
     liability
                                                        (40)                   (29)                (32)                   (8)
                                6                     3,915                    207                   -61                 -21
                                                        (47)                   (40)                (42)                   (9)
                                7                     4,790                    383                  119                  -24
                                                        (58)                   (49)                (54)                 (10)
                                8                     5,674                    608                  377                    -8
                                                        (66)                   (51)                (55)                   (9)
                                9                     7,141                    682                  620                  -32
                                                        (97)                   (91)                (95)                 (15)
                                10                  10,150                   1,179                1,158                   84
                                                      (129)                  (123)                (126)                 (45)
                                All                 13,020                      -55                   34                 181
                                                      (262)                  (208)                (212)                 (72)
                                1                      -262                 -1,013                 -907                  547
                                                      (447)                  (448)                (450)                (234)
                                2                    -1,060                 -1,149                 -965                  181
                                                      (125)                  (125)                (125)                 (31)
                                3                     1,729                 -1,899               -1,932                  298
                                                      (564)                  (560)                (563)                 (81)
                                4                     2,604                   -176                 -404                  345
                                                      (187)                  (190)                (186)                 (37)
 Total tax liability            5                     5,001                      51                -285                  401
                                                      (263)                  (260)                (256)                 (52)
                                6                     9,456                 -1,314               -1,634                  415
                                                      (673)                  (675)                (673)                (177)
                                7                   12,340                    -391                 -615                  308
                                                      (700)                  (692)                (694)                 (53)
                                8                   16,110                     831                1,039                  209
                                                      (339)                  (320)                (309)                (106)
                                9                   25,570                     361                1,028                  267
                                                    (1,136)                (1,121)              (1,130)                (448)
                                10                  58,710                   4,149                5,008               -1,163
                                                    (1,882)                (1,659)              (1,702)                (549)
                                                      (continued on next page)


                                                                 55
Appendix Table A.5 Mean Family Income and Tax Calculations or Imputations by Pre-Tax Money Income
Decile with Standard Errors, 2010 Tax Year, CPS Data (Continued)


                                                 Mean                     Imputation Minus Extensive Tax Data Calculation

                                           Extensive Tax Data          CPS Tax          CPS Data and          Limited Tax Data
                                               Calculation            Imputation      TAXSIM Imputation          Imputation
  Income or Tax    Decile of Equivalized
    Component      Survey Family Income            (1)                    (2)                   (3)                  (4)
                            All                 73,680                  -6,915                -9,653                  403
                                                (1,033)                  (924)                 (933)                (182)
                            1                   19,720                -15,410               -15,980                      9
                                                (3,048)                (3,039)               (3,039)                (130)
                            2                   22,670                  -8,809              -10,390                   -20
                                                  (534)                  (487)                 (491)                 (54)
                            3                   34,350                -11,760               -14,030                   120
                                                (1,649)                (1,642)               (1,659)                 (53)
                            4                   41,170                  -8,606              -11,400                    84
                                                  (660)                  (655)                 (679)                 (51)
  Adjusted Gross            5                   50,470                  -6,000                -9,266                  199
     Income                                       (949)                  (909)                 (924)                (103)
                            6                   66,820                  -9,509              -12,790                   232
                                                (2,724)                (2,715)               (2,689)                 (69)
                            7                   76,480                  -4,388                -7,606                  138
                                                (2,506)                (2,486)               (2,488)                 (90)
                            8                   91,320                  -1,711                -4,909                  387
                                                (1,291)                (1,183)               (1,191)                (103)
                            9                  121,800                  -5,327                -8,251                  416
                                                (4,710)                (4,646)               (4,684)                (154)
                            10                 212,100                   2,350                -1,922                2,466
                                                (7,680)                (7,557)               (7,637)              (1,787)
                            All                 48,010                  -1,591                -2,169               -1,417
                                                  (738)                  (643)                 (647)                (190)
                            1                     9,028                 -8,924                -8,997                 -432
                                                (2,970)                (2,970)               (2,970)                (407)
                            2                     6,682                 -5,576                -6,010                 -117
                                                  (374)                  (371)                 (371)                 (62)
                            3                   14,350                  -8,334                -9,244                  -98
                                                (1,334)                (1,331)               (1,339)                (192)
                            4                   17,910                  -4,462                -5,775                 -317
                                                  (515)                  (535)                 (529)                 (79)
 Taxable income             5                   25,790                  -3,130                -4,537                 -420
                                                  (710)                  (701)                 (683)                (143)
                            6                   39,890                  -5,992                -7,100               -1,265
                                                (2,314)                (2,320)               (2,320)                (205)
                            7                   49,310                  -1,742                -2,171               -1,531
                                                (1,626)                (1,604)               (1,594)                (146)
                            8                   61,180                   2,655                 3,280               -2,309
                                                (1,113)                (1,067)               (1,054)                (314)
                            9                   87,200                   2,201                 3,813               -3,077
                                                (3,435)                (3,425)               (3,432)                (954)
                            10                 168,800                 17,370                15,030                -4,605
                                                (4,976)                (4,551)               (4,610)              (1,348)
                                                  (continued on next page)

                                                             56
Appendix Table A.5 Mean Family Income and Tax Calculations or Imputations by Pre-Tax Money Income
Decile with Standard Errors, 2010 Tax Year, CPS Data (Continued)


                                                    Mean                       Imputation Minus Extensive Tax Data Calculation

                                              Extensive Tax Data           CPS Tax           CPS Data and          Limited Tax Data
                                                  Calculation             Imputation       TAXSIM Imputation          Imputation
  Income or Tax       Decile of Equivalized
    Component         Survey Family Income            (1)                    (2)                    (3)                   (4)
                               All                   9,221                 -1,260                   -934                  -393
                                                     (208)                  (176)                  (177)                  (64)
                               1                     1,473                 -1,462                 -1,470                   300
                                                     (453)                  (453)                  (453)                 (224)
                               2                       996                   -897                   -927                   -29
                                                      (86)                    (87)                   (86)                 (20)
                               3                     2,523                 -2,164                 -1,993                   -63
                                                     (433)                  (433)                  (433)                  (63)
                               4                     2,462                 -1,633                 -1,110                   -83
                                                     (135)                  (134)                  (136)                  (22)
  Federal income               5                     3,663                 -1,755                 -1,075                   -84
 tax before credits                                  (203)                  (206)                  (200)                  (42)
                               6                     6,288                 -2,780                 -2,048                  -101
                                                     (568)                  (572)                  (570)                 (180)
                               7                     7,766                 -2,064                 -1,318                  -349
                                                     (539)                  (537)                  (535)                  (40)
                               8                     9,884                   -975                   -163                  -456
                                                     (249)                  (239)                  (233)                 (109)
                               9                   15,930                    -799                   -240                  -401
                                                     (815)                  (809)                  (810)                 (424)
                               10                  41,230                   1,920                  1,000                -2,663
                                                   (1,608)                (1,450)                (1,470)                 (483)
                               All                     733                   -193                   -295                     -5
                                                        (9)                     (9)                    (8)                  (1)
                               1                     1,504                   -375                   -542                   -17
                                                      (37)                    (37)                   (37)                   (5)
                               2                     1,828                    236                     -83                  -12
                                                      (42)                    (36)                   (38)                   (5)
                               3                     1,390                   -153                   -386                   -14
                                                      (33)                    (28)                   (29)                   (6)
                               4                     1,013                   -493                   -653                     -5
                                                      (29)                    (27)                   (27)                   (3)
  Earned Income                5                       679                   -467                   -536                      0
    Tax Credit                                        (28)                    (28)                   (27)                   (3)
                               6                       379                   -271                   -314                     -2
                                                      (21)                    (19)                   (20)                   (2)
                               7                       221                   -168                   -178                      2
                                                      (15)                    (14)                   (13)                   (1)
                               8                       170                   -127                   -142                      2
                                                      (15)                    (15)                   (14)                   (1)
                               9                        86                     -70                    -72                     0
                                                      (10)                    (11)                   (10)                   (1)
                               10                       52                     -44                    -43                    -1
                                                        (8)                     (7)                    (7)                  (1)
                                                     (continued on next page)


                                                                 57
Appendix Table A.5 Mean Family Income and Tax Calculations or Imputations by Pre-Tax Money Income
Decile with Standard Errors, 2010 Tax Year, CPS Data (Continued)

                                                  Mean                  Imputation Minus Extensive Tax Data Calculation
                                            Extensive Tax Data       CPS Tax          CPS Data and          Limited Tax Data
                                                Calculation         Imputation      TAXSIM Imputation          Imputation
  Income or Tax     Decile of Equivalized
    Component       Survey Family Income           (1)                 (2)                   (3)                   (4)
                             All                    740                  -74                -108                   -16
                                                     (6)                  (4)                  (5)                  (2)
                             1                      590                -298                 -332                   -22
                                                   (17)                 (14)                (14)                    (5)
                             2                      964                  -49                -136                   -50
                                                   (22)                 (15)                (17)                    (7)
                             3                      999                  -20                  -95                  -27
                                                   (24)                 (18)                (19)                    (7)
                             4                    1,026                  -59                -108                   -31
                                                   (23)                 (13)                (14)                    (7)
 Child Tax Credit            5                      971                  -37                  -74                  -17
                                                   (20)                 (15)                (17)                    (5)
                             6                      928                    -7                 -31                    -8
                                                   (20)                 (12)                (14)                    (4)
                             7                      812                   14                    -2                 -12
                                                   (18)                 (12)                (12)                    (5)
                             8                      657                  -20                  -35                    -1
                                                   (17)                 (10)                (11)                    (4)
                             9                      348                -166                 -170                      7
                                                   (11)                 (10)                (10)                    (2)
                             10                     109                  -98                  -96                     5
                                                     (8)                  (8)                  (7)                  (2)

See Table 2 for all notes and sources. Standard errors in parentheses are calculated using replicate weights.
Approved for release by the U.S. Census Bureau, authorization numbers CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-014, CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-038.




                                                             58
Appendix Table A.6a. Mean Absolute Difference Between Imputations and Extensive Tax Calculation with Std. Errors, 2010 Tax Year, CPS Data


                                           Extensive Tax                                           CPS Data and TAXSIM
                                          Data Calculation       CPS Tax Imputation                     Imputation            Limited Tax Data Imputation

                           Quartile of                       Mean absolute      % of            Mean absolute      % of      Mean absolute        % of
                           Equivalized         Mean           difference     Column (1)          difference     Column (1)    difference       Column (1)
    Income or Tax         Survey Family
      component              Income             (1)              (2)             (3)                 (4)            (5)           (6)             (7)
                               All            6,824              7,202           105.5              7,434          108.9         1,654             24.2
                                              (208)              (187)                              (188)                         (68)
                               1             -1,561              2,741           175.6              2,822          180.8           565             36.2
                                              (208)              (187)                              (188)                         (68)
  Federal income tax           2                184              3,258          1768.0              3,259        1771.2            734            399.1
       liability                              (144)              (143)                              (143)                         (27)
                               3              5,159              5,285           102.4              5,429          105.2         1,349             26.1
                                              (338)              (328)                              (329)                         (89)
                               4             23,520             17,530             74.5            18,230           77.5         3,966             16.9
                                              (659)              (593)                              (589)                        (229)
                               All            2,095              1,367             65.3             1,415           67.5           342             16.3
                                                (48)              (42)                               (42)                         (20)
                               1                100                420           421.0                400          400.0           161            160.6
                                                (22)              (23)                               (23)                           (6)
   State income tax            2                752                691             91.9               693           92.2           219             29.1
       liability                                (39)              (39)                               (38)                           (8)
                               3              1,957              1,131             57.8             1,174           60.0           291             14.9
                                                (77)              (73)                               (74)                           (8)
                               4              5,571              3,226             57.9             3,394           60.9           699             12.5
                                              (166)              (149)                              (149)                         (80)
                               All            4,098              1,521             37.1             1,651           40.3           124              3.0
                                                (27)              (18)                               (18)                           (5)
                               1              1,131                669             59.1               747           66.0            66              5.9
                                                (21)              (19)                               (20)                           (4)
  Payroll tax liability        2               2591              1,009             38.9             1,176           45.4            75              2.9
                                                (23)              (16)                               (19)                           (5)
                               3              4,564              1,543             33.8             1,700           37.2           102              2.2
                                                (36)              (23)                               (26)                           (6)
                               4              8,106              2,862             35.3             2,981           36.8           253              3.1
                                                (66)              (59)                               (58)                         (18)
                                                                     (continued on next page)
                                                                                59
Appendix Table A.6a. Mean Abs. Diff. Between Imputations and Extensive Tax Calculation with Std. Errors, 2010 Tax Year, CPS Data (Cont.)


                                          Extensive Tax                                             CPS Data and TAXSIM
                                         Data Calculation       CPS Tax Imputation                       Imputation            Limited Tax Data Imputation

                          Quartile of                       Mean absolute       % of             Mean absolute      % of      Mean absolute        % of
                          Equivalized         Mean           difference      Column (1)           difference     Column (1)    difference       Column (1)
    Income or Tax        Survey Family
      component             Income              (1)               (2)             (3)                 (4)           (5)            (6)             (7)
                              All           13,020               9,385             72.1              9,870           75.8        1,913              14.7
                                              (262)              (227)                               (230)                         (73)
                              1                -330              3,225            976.4              3,232          979.4           712            215.7
                                              (249)              (249)                               (247)                         (96)
   Total tax liability        2               3,527              4,530            128.4              4,601          130.5           925             26.2
                                              (185)              (186)                               (185)                         (31)
                              3             11,680               7,401             63.4              7,832           67.1        1,565              13.4
                                              (424)              (406)                               (408)                         (88)
                              4             37,190             22,380              60.2            23,810            64.0        4,450              12.0
                                              (812)              (721)                               (719)                       (250)
                              All           73,680             32,050              43.5            34,670            47.1           790              1.1
                                             (1033)              (949)                               (960)                       (183)
                              1             23,150             15,100              65.2            16,190            69.9           525              2.3
                                             (1308)             (1298)                              (1303)                         (57)
 Adjusted Gross Income        2             44,170             18,410              41.7            21,080            47.7           527              1.2
                                              (648)              (600)                               (602)                         (50)
                              3             74,800             26,800              35.8            29,760            39.8           520              0.7
                                            (1,616)            (1,567)                             (1,565)                         (53)
                              4            152,600             67,900              44.5            71,650            47.0        1,587               1.0
                                            (3,286)            (3,127)                             (3,157)                       (717)
                              All           48,010             27,280              56.8            28,780            59.9        4,924              10.3
                                              (738)              (649)                               (653)                       (167)
                              1               8,724              8,655             99.2              8,580           98.3         1104              12.7
                                            (1,253)            (1,252)                             (1,253)                       (168)
    Taxable income            2             20,760             14,140              68.1            14,980            72.2         1952               9.4
                                              (467)              (472)                               (465)                         (73)
                              3             47,170             23,950              50.8            25,830            54.8        4,399               9.3
                                            (1,266)            (1,203)                             (1,204)                       (125)
                              4            115,400             62,370              54.1            65,740            57.0       12,240              10.6
                                            (2,143)            (1,915)                             (1,906)                       (575)
                                                                      (continued on next page)

                                                                                60
Appendix Table A.6a. Mean Abs. Diff. Between Imputations and Extensive Tax Calculation with Std. Errors, 2010 Tax Year, CPS Data (Cont.)

                                          Extensive Tax                                             CPS Data and TAXSIM
                                         Data Calculation          CPS Tax Imputation                      Imputation             Limited Tax Data Imputation
                          Quartile of
                          Equivalized                          Mean absolute       % of          Mean absolute         % of      Mean absolute        % of
     Income or Tax       Survey Family        Mean              difference     Column (1)         difference        Column (1)    difference       Column (1)
       component            Income                    (1)                     (2)               (3)              (4)   (5)            (6)             (7)
                              All                   9,221                    6,366               69.0           6,553   71.1         1,438             15.6
                                                     (208)                    (191)                             (191)                 (66)
                                    1               1,427                    1,447             101.4            1,413   99.0           327             22.9
                                                     (227)                    (227)                             (227)                 (92)
    Federal income tax
                                    2               3,016                    2,512               83.3           2,413   80.0           388             12.9
      before credits
                                                     (142)                    (143)                             (143)                 (22)
                                    3               7,436                    4,637               62.4           4,903   65.9         1,018             13.7
                                                     (338)                    (332)                             (331)                 (90)
                                    4              25,010                   16,870               67.5          17,480   69.9         4,018             16.1
                                                     (662)                    (607)                             (602)                (224)
                                   All                 733                      550              75.1             569   77.6              2             0.3
                                                        (9)                      (8)                               (8)                  (1)
                                    1               1,642                    1,094               66.6           1,157   70.5              2             0.1
                                                      (27)                     (21)                              (21)                   (4)
   Earned Income Tax
                                    2                  925                      763              82.5             774   83.7              2             0.2
          Credit
                                                      (17)                     (15)                              (16)                   (2)
                                    3                  283                      266              93.9             268   94.8              2             0.7
                                                      (10)                       (9)                               (9)                  (1)
                                    4                   80                       77              96.5              76   95.4              5             5.7
                                                        (6)                      (6)                               (6)                  (1)
                                   All                 740                      275              37.2             306   41.3            43              5.8
                                                        (6)                      (4)                               (4)                  (2)
                                    1                  825                      373              45.2             421   51.1            74              9.0
                                                      (13)                       (9)                             (10)                   (5)
     Child Tax Credit               2                  994                      293              29.5             341   34.3            55              5.5
                                                      (13)                       (8)                               (8)                  (4)
                                    3                  838                      238              28.4             261   31.2            29              3.5
                                                      (12)                       (7)                               (7)                  (2)
                                    4                  304                      197              64.6             200   65.9            12              4.1
                                                        (8)                      (6)                               (6)                  (2)
See Table 3a for all notes and sources. Standard errors in parentheses are calculated using replicate weights.
Approved for release by the U.S. Census Bureau, authorization numbers CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-014, CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-038.

                                                                                  61
Appendix Table A.6b. Median Abs. Diff. Between Imputations and Extensive Tax Calculation with Std. Errors, 2010 Tax Year, CPS Data


                                          Extensive Tax                                                  CPS Data and TAXSIM
                                         Data Calculation        CPS Tax Imputation                           Imputation              Limited Tax Data Imputation

                          Quartile of                       Median absolute         % of             Median absolute      % of      Median absolute       % of
                          Equivalized         Mean            difference         Column (1)            difference      Column (1)     difference       Column (1)
   Income or Tax         Survey Family
     component              Income            (1)                (2)                 (3)                   (4)            (5)             (6)              (7)
                              All            6,824               2,265                33.2                2,442            35.8            238               3.5
                                             (208)                (13)                                     (14)                             (4)
                              1             -1,561                 700                44.8                  723            46.3               2              0.1
                                             (226)                (14)                                     (15)                             (0)
 Federal income tax           2                184               1,454              790.2                 1,475           801.6              92             50.0
      liability                              (144)                (16)                                     (16)                             (4)
                              3              5,159               2,430                47.1                2,607            50.5            471               9.1
                                             (338)                (21)                                     (21)                             (9)
                              4             23,520               6,763                28.8                7,444            31.6          1,481               6.3
                                             (659)                (61)                                     (56)                            (16)
                              All            2,095                 260                12.4                  261            12.5               0              0.0
                                              (48)                  (3)                                      (3)                            (0)
                              1                100                    0                0.0                     0            0.0               0              0.0
                                              (22)                  (0)                                      (0)                            (0)
  State income tax            2                752                 182                24.2                  172            22.8               0              0.0
      liability                               (39)                  (4)                                      (4)                            (0)
                              3              1,957                 411                21.0                  424            21.7              31              1.6
                                              (77)                  (5)                                      (6)                            (2)
                              4              5,571               1,065                19.1                1,170            21.0            163               2.9
                                             (166)                (14)                                     (16)                             (4)
                              All            4,098                 563                13.7                  597            14.6               0              0.0
                                              (27)                  (4)                                      (4)                            (0)
                              1              1,131                 207                18.3                  225            19.9               0              0.0
                                              (21)                  (4)                                      (5)                            (0)
 Payroll tax liability        2              2,591                 448                17.3                  499            19.3               0              0.0
                                              (23)                  (6)                                      (7)                            (0)
                              3              4,564                 723                15.8                  759            16.6               0              0.0
                                              (36)                  (9)                                    (10)                             (0)
                              4              8,106               1,216                15.0                1,199            14.8               0              0.0
                                              (66)                (17)                                     (18)                             (0)
                                                                          (continued on next page)
                                                                                     62
Appendix Table A.6b. Median Abs. Diff. Between Imputations and Extensive Tax Calculation with Std. Errors, 2010 Tax Year, CPS Data (Cont.)


                                         Extensive Tax                                                  CPS Data and TAXSIM
                                        Data Calculation        CPS Tax Imputation                           Imputation              Limited Tax Data Imputation

                         Quartile of                       Median absolute         % of             Median absolute      % of      Median absolute       % of
                         Equivalized         Mean            difference         Column (1)            difference      Column (1)     difference       Column (1)
   Income or Tax        Survey Family
     component             Income              (1)              (2)                 (3)                   (4)            (5)             (6)              (7)
                             All           13,020               3,116                23.9                3,345            25.7            446               3.4
                                             (262)               (18)                                     (20)                             (5)
                             1                -330              1,000              303.0                 1,032           312.7             30              9.2
                                             (249)               (16)                                     (17)                             (2)
  Total tax liability        2               3,527              2,196                62.3                2,270            64.4            237              6.7
                                             (185)               (23)                                     (25)                             (5)
                             3             11,680               3,679                31.5                3,961            33.9            652              5.6
                                             (424)               (32)                                     (35)                             (9)
                             4             37,190               8,981                24.1               10,200            27.4          1,693              4.6
                                             (812)               (80)                                     (83)                           (19)
                             All           73,680              10,090                13.7               11,210            15.2               0             0.0
                                           (1,033)               (57)                                     (66)                             (0)
                             1             23,150               4,405                19.0                5,096            22.0               0             0.0
                                           (1,308)               (66)                                     (79)                             (0)
   Adjusted Gross            2             44,170               7,801                17.7                8,997            20.4               0             0.0
      Income                                 (648)               (84)                                    (100)                             (0)
                             3             74,800              11,680                15.6               12,710            17.0               0             0.0
                                           (1,616)              (118)                                    (130)                             (0)
                             4            152,600              23,160                15.2               24,470            16.0               0             0.0
                                           (3,286)              (245)                                    (254)                             (0)
                             All           48,010               8,660                56.8                9,621            20.0               0             0.0
                                             (738)               (58)                                     (66)                             (0)
                             1               8,724                   0               99.2                     0            0.0               0             0.0
                                            (1253)                 (0)                                      (0)                            (0)
   Taxable income            2             20,760               6,593                68.1                7,345            35.4               0             0.0
                                             (467)               (75)                                     (80)                             (0)
                             3             47,170              12,610                50.8               14,220            30.1            628              1.3
                                           (1,266)              (116)                                    (121)                           (59)
                             4            115,400              27,280                54.1               30,130            26.1          6,368              5.5
                                            (2143)              (230)                                    (243)                           (73)
                                                                         (continued on next page)

                                                                                   63
Appendix Table A.6b. Median Abs. Diff. Between Imputations and Extensive Tax Calculation with Std. Errors, 2010 Tax Year, CPS Data (Cont.)

                                            Extensive Tax                                                       CPS Data and TAXSIM
                             Quartile of   Data Calculation                CPS   Tax Imputation                         Imputation             Limited Tax Data Imputation
                            Equivalized                             Median absolute          % of            Median absolute        % of      Median absolute       % of
    Income or Tax          Survey Family          Mean                  difference        Column (1)           difference        Column (1)     difference       Column (1)
      component               Income                (1)                     (2)               (3)                  (4)              (5)             (6)             (7)
                                All               9,221                     1,351              69.0               1,391              15.1                3            0.0
                                                  (208)                      (10)                                   (11)                               (0)
                                 1                1,427                          0            101.4                    0              0.0                0            0.0
                                                  (227)                        (0)                                   (0)                               (0)
  Federal income tax
                                 2                3,016                       968              83.3                 888              29.5                2            0.1
     before credits
                                                  (142)                      (10)                                   (10)                               (0)
                                 3                7,436                     1,916              62.4               2,194              29.5             136             1.8
                                                  (338)                      (16)                                   (19)                               (7)
                                 4               25,010                     6,049              67.5               6,737              26.9          1,339              5.4
                                                  (662)                      (55)                                   (53)                             (17)
                                All                  733                         0             75.1                    0              0.0                0            0.0
                                                      (9)                      (0)                                   (0)                               (0)
                                 1                1,642                       146              66.6                 125               7.6                0            0.0
                                                    (27)                       (7)                                   (8)                               (0)
  Earned Income Tax
                                 2                   925                         0             82.5                    0              0.0                0            0.0
        Credit
                                                    (17)                       (0)                                   (0)                               (0)
                                 3                   283                         0             93.9                    0              0.0                0            0.0
                                                    (10)                       (0)                                   (0)                               (0)
                                 4                     80                        0             96.5                    0              0.0                0            0.0
                                                      (6)                      (0)                                   (0)                               (0)
                                All                  740                         0             37.2                    0              0.0                0            0.0
                                                      (6)                      (0)                                   (0)                               (0)
                                 1                   825                         0             45.2                    0              0.0                0            0.0
                                                    (13)                       (0)                                   (0)                               (0)
   Child Tax Credit              2                   994                         0             29.5                    0              0.0                0            0.0
                                                    (13)                       (0)                                   (0)                               (0)
                                 3                   838                         0             28.4                    0              0.0                0            0.0
                                                    (12)                       (0)                                   (0)                               (0)
                                 4                   304                         0             64.6                    0              0.0                0            0.0
                                                      (8)                      (0)                                   (0)                               (0)
See Table 3b for all notes and sources. Standard errors in parentheses are calculated using replicate weights.
Approved for release by the U.S. Census Bureau, authorization numbers CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-014, CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-038.


                                                                                           64
Appendix Table A.7. Results of Statistical Testing of Statements in Text

            Statement in Text                                                                          Result of Statistical Tests
"We find that aggregate estimates of        Diff. in total federal taxes between limited and CPS imputation = 45,550 (30,690) [0.138]
various tax components using the            Diff. in total state taxes between limited and CPS imputation = 29,680 (5,677) [<.001]
limited and extensive tax data estimates    Diff. in total payroll taxes between limited and CPS imputation = -28,620 (2,100) [<.001]
are close to each other and much closer     Diff. in total AGI between limited and CPS imputation = 950,400 (133,800) [<.001]
to public IRS tabulations than any of the   Diff. in total taxable income between limited and CPS imputation = 118,900 (106,400) [0.264]
imputations using survey data alone."       Diff. in total federal taxes before credits between limited and CPS imputation = 97,240 (30,540) [0.001]
(Abstract, p. 3)                            Diff. in total EITC between limited and CPS imputation = 18,670 (756) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in total CTC between limited and CPS imputation = 7,048 (413) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in total federal taxes between limited and CPS-TAXSIM imputation = -5,523 (30,740) [0.857]
                                            Diff. in total state taxes between limited and CPS-TAXSIM imputation = 10,970 (5,702) [0.054]
                                            Diff. in total payroll taxes between limited and CPS-TAXSIM imputation = -37,720 (2,050) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in total AGI between limited and CPS-TAXSIM imputation = 882,100 (134,200) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in total taxable income between limited and CPS-TAXSIM imputation = -64,380 (106,100) [0.544]
                                            Diff. in total federal taxes before credits between limited and CPS-TAXSIM imputation = 35,240 (30,490) [0.248]
                                            Diff. in total EITC between limited and CPS-TAXSIM imputation = 24,960 (1,009) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in total CTC between limited and CPS-TAXSIM imputation = 8,449 (532) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in total federal taxes between extensive and CPS imputation = 37,700 (25,120) [0.133]
                                            Diff. in total state taxes between extensive and CPS imputation = 15,060 (49,180) [0.759]
                                            Diff. in total payroll taxes between extensive and CPS imputation = -27,720 (2,000) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in total AGI between extensive and CPS imputation = 889,900 (130,400) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in total taxable income between extensive and CPS imputation = 296,100 (109,300) [0.007]
                                            Diff. in total federal taxes before credits between extensive and CPS imputation = 134,800 (25,430) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in total EITC between extensive and CPS imputation = 18,950 (768) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in total CTC between extensive and CPS imputation = 8,371 (457) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in total federal taxes between extensive and CPS-TAXSIM imputation = -13,300 (25,110) [0.596]
                                            Diff. in total state taxes between extensive and CPS-TAXSIM imputation = -3,639 (4,933) [0.461]
                                            Diff. in total payroll taxes between extensive and CPS-TAXSIM imputation = -36,820 (1,954) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in total AGI between extensive and CPS-TAXSIM imputation = 821,600 (130,700) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in total taxable income between extensive and CPS-TAXSIM imputation = 112,800 (108,700) [0.299]
                                            Diff. in total federal taxes before credits between extensive and CPS-TAXSIM imputation = 72,800 (25,320) [0.004]
                                            Diff. in total EITC between extensive and CPS-TAXSIM imputation = 25,240 (1,019) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in total CTC between extensive and CPS-TAXSIM imputation = 9,772 (567) [<.001]

                                                                               (continued on next page)




                                                                                          65
Appendix Table A.7. Results of Statistical Testing of Statements in Text (Continued)

            Statement in Text                                                                           Result of Statistical Tests
"In contrast, the limited tax imputations    Diff. in mean abs. error for federal taxes between limited and CPS imputation = -5549 (150) [<.001]
have 22-23% the absolute error of the        Diff. in mean abs. error for total taxes between limited and CPS imputation = -7472 (187) [<.001]
CPS imputation for federal income taxes
and 19-20% of the absolute error of the
CPS imputation for total taxes."
(Abstract, p. 3)

"For the Earned Income Tax Credit, the       Diff. in mean abs. error for EITC between limited imputation and $20 = -18 (1) [<.001]
limited tax data imputation is off by less   Diff. in mean abs. error for EITC between CPS imputation and $500 = 50 (8) [<.001]
than $20 for a typical family (compared      Diff. in mean abs. error for EITC between CPS-TAXSIM imputation and $500 = 69 (8) [<.001]
to more than $500 using either of the        Diff. in mean abs. error for EITC between limited and CPS imputation = 536 (8) [<.001]
survey-only imputations)." (Abstract)

"The improvement in tax calculation          Diff. in mean abs. error (as % of mean amount) for fed. taxes between quartiles 3 and 1 using ltd imp. = -0.623 (0.0844) [<.001]
using the limited tax data is particularly   Diff. in mean abs. error (as % of mean amount) for fed. taxes between quartiles 4 and 1 using ltd. imp. = -0.531 (0.0815) [<.001]
noticeable in the top half of the survey     Diff. in mean abs. error (as % of mean amount) for fed. taxes between quartiles 3 and 2 using ltd. imp. = 3.724 (3.121) [0.233]
income distribution." (p. 3, 32)             Diff. in mean abs. error (as % of mean amount) for fed. taxes between quartiles 4 and 2 using ltd. imp. = 3.816 (3.121) [0.221]
                                             Diff. in mean abs. error (as % of mean amount) for tot. taxes between quartiles 3 and 1 using ltd. imp. = -2.290 (1.651) [0.165]
                                             Diff. in mean abs. error (as % of mean amount) for tot. taxes between quartiles 4 and 1 using ltd. imp. = -2.275 (1.651) [0.168]
                                             Diff. in mean abs. error (as % of mean amount) for tot. taxes between quartiles 3 and 2 using ltd. imp. = 0.1281 (0.0186) [<.001]
                                             Diff. in mean abs. error (as % of mean amount) for tot. taxes between quartiles 4 and 2 using ltd. imp. = 0.1425 (0.0179) [<.001]

"For a typical family, we also find that     Diff. in mean abs. error for CTC between limited imputation and $50 = -7 (2) [<.001]
the limited tax data imputation is           Diff. in mean abs. error for CTC between limited and CPS imputation = -232 (3) [<.001]
off...by less than $50 for the Child Tax
Credit (compared to $275 using the
survey imputation)." (p. 3)

"As a result, we can see that the SOI        Diff. in total federal taxes between extensive calculation and SOI = -19,100 (1,524) [<.001]
aggregates ­ containing late filers from     Diff. in total AGI between extensive calculation and SOI = -198,000 (6,516) [<.001]
previous tax years ­ uniformly exceed        Diff. in total taxable income between extensive calculation and SOI = -136,000 (5,302) [<.001]
the extensive tax data aggregates for all    Diff. in total federal income taxes before credits between extensive calculation and SOI = -23,000 (1,626) [<.001]
items." (p. 25)                              Diff. in total EITC between extensive calculation and SOI = -50 (14) [<.001]
                                             Diff. in total CTC between extensive calculation and SOI = -1,680 (13) [<.001]

                                                                                 (continued on next page)



                                                                                             66
Appendix Table A.7. Results of Statistical Testing of Statements in Text (Continued)

             Statement in Text                                                                       Result of Statistical Tests
"Focusing first on the CPS tax               Diff. in total federal taxes between CPS imputation and SOI = -37,000 (11,550) [0.001]
imputation in Column 3, we see that it       Diff. in total state taxes between CPS imputation and SOI = -26,600 (2,809) [<.001]
estimates a total of $808 billion in
federal income tax liabilities and $217
billion in state income tax liabilities,
both of which fall short of the
independent aggregates." (p.25)

"Interestingly, the underestimation of       Diff. in total EITC between CPS imputation and SOI = -19,210 (1,240) [<.001]
federal income taxes (defined as federal     Diff. in total CTC between CPS imputation and SOI = -10,400 (860) [<.001]
income taxes paid net of federal tax
credits) persists despite the CPS tax
imputation underestimating total EITC
amounts by nearly one-third and total
CTC amounts by nearly one-fifth."
(p.25)

"In fact, much of this underestimation       Diff. in total AGI between CPS imputation and SOI = -763,000 (68,870) [<.001]
can be attributed to the CPS                 Diff. in total taxable income between CPS imputation and SOI = -264,000 (52,570) [<.001]
underestimating AGI and therefore            Diff. in total federal income taxes before credits between CPS imputation and SOI = -147,900 (12,000) [<.001]
taxable income, resulting in much lower
estimates of federal income taxes before
credits relative to the independent
aggregates." (p.25)

"In contrast, the CPS estimates a total of   Diff. in total payroll taxes between CPS imputation and SOI = 25,300 (4,520) [<.001]
$461 billion in payroll tax liabilities,
which exceeds the SOI aggregate by
approximately 6%." (p.25)

                                                                                (continued on next page)




                                                                                            67
Appendix Table A.7. Results of Statistical Testing of Statements in Text (Continued)

             Statement in Text                                                                     Result of Statistical Tests
"Interestingly, the CPS-TAXSIM                Diff. in total federal taxes between CPS and CPS-TAXSIM imputation = -51,070 (2,229) [<.001]
imputation in Column 4 yields estimates       Diff. in total federal taxes between CPS-TAXSIM imputation and SOI = 14,100 (12,760) [0.269]
of federal income tax liabilities ($859
billion) that are higher than the estimates
from the CPS tax imputation and closer
to the independent aggregates, despite
continuing to rely on CPS income
reports and CPS-constructed tax unit
structures." (p.25)

"To see this, note that the gap in taxable    Diff. in total taxable income gap and total AGI gap b/w CPS and CPS-TAXSIM imputation = -115,000 (4,692) [<.001]
income between the CPS tax imputation
and the CPS-TAXSIM imputation is
nearly three times the gap in AGI, with
much of the conceptual difference
between AGI and taxable income due to
itemized deductions." (p.25)

"The CPS-TAXSIM imputation also               Diff. in total state taxes between CPS-TAXSIM imputation and SOI = -7,900 (12,760) [0.536]
yields estimates of state income tax          Diff. in total payroll taxes between CPS-TAXSIM imputation and SOI = 34,400 (5,036) [<.001]
liabilities ($236 billion) and payroll tax    Diff. in total EITC between CPS-TAXSIM imputation and SOI = -25,500 (653) [<.001]
liabilities ($470 billion) that are higher    Diff. in total CTC between CPS-TAXSIM imputation and SOI = -11,800 (723) [<.001]
than those obtained using the CPS tax         Diff. in total state taxes between CPS and CPS-TAXSIM imputation = -18,700 (776) [<.001]
imputation (and therefore closer to the       Diff. in total payroll taxes between CPS and CPS-TAXSIM imputation = -9,099 (700) [<.001]
independent aggregates for state income       Diff. in total EITC between CPS and CPS-TAXSIM imputation = 6,293 (427) [<.001]
taxes and farther from those aggregates       Diff. in total CTC between CPS and CPS-TAXSIM imputation = 1,401 (175) [<.001]
for payroll taxes), while estimates of the
EITC and CTC are slightly
underestimated relative to those from
the CPS tax imputation and the SOI
aggregates." (p.25, 26)

                                                                                (continued on next page)




                                                                                           68
Appendix Table A.7. Results of Statistical Testing of Statements in Text (Continued)

              Statement in Text                                                                         Result of Statistical Tests
"Starting with federal income tax            Diff. in total federal taxes between limited imputation and SOI = 8,500 (32,420) [0.793]
liabilities, we find that the limited tax    Diff. in total federal taxes between extensive calculation and SOI = 700 (27,240) [0.979]
data imputation yields $853 billion and
the extensive tax data calculation yields
$845 billion, with the former within
approximately 1% and the latter within a
tenth of 1% of the SOI aggregate."
(p.26)

"On one hand, the limited tax data           Diff. in total taxable income between limited imputation and extensive calculation = -177,200 (28,450) [<.001]
imputation appears to overstate itemized     Diff. in federal income taxes before credits between limited imputation and extensive calculation = -37,560 (8,959) [<.001]
deductions, as the estimate of taxable
income ­ and therefore federal income
taxes before credits ­ is smaller using
the limited tax data imputation." (p.26)

"We also find that the limited and           Diff. in total state taxes between limited imputation and extensive calculation = 14,610 (1,742) [<.001]
extensive tax data estimates in Columns      Diff. in total payroll taxes between limited imputation and extensive calculation = -900 (618) [0.145]
5 and 6 are comparable to each other for
payroll tax liabilities, while the
extensive tax data estimate is slightly
smaller for state income tax liabilities."
(p.26)

"Finally, the estimates for the EITC and     Diff. in total EITC between limited imputation and SOI = -540 (1,716) [0.753]
CTC in Columns 5 and 6 are remarkably        Diff. in total EITC between extensive calculation and SOI = -260 (1,722) [0.880]
close to each other and to their             Diff. in total EITC between limited imputation and extensive calculation = -1,323 (150) [<.001]
respective independent aggregates."          Diff. in total CTC between limited imputation and SOI = -3,350 (1,121) [0.003]
(p.27)                                       Diff. in total CTC between extensive calculation and SOI = -2,030 (1,158) [0.080]
                                             Diff. in total CTC between limited imputation and extensive calculation = -277 (87) [0.001]

                                                                                  (continued on next page)




                                                                                              69
Appendix Table A.7. Results of Statistical Testing of Statements in Text (Continued)

            Statement in Text                                                                         Result of Statistical Tests
"Specifically, we find that families in   Diff. in avg. taxable income between first and second decile using extensive calculation = 2,346 (3,008) [0.435]
the bottom decile of survey-reported      Diff. in avg. federal tax before credits between first and second decile using extensive calculation = 477 (462) [0.302]
income do not have lower levels of
taxable income and federal income tax
before credits (per the extensive tax
data) than those in the second decile."
(p.27)

"We start by examining differences in     Diff. in avg. federal taxes between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 1 = -524 (443) [0.237]
federal income tax liabilities. We find   Diff. in avg. federal taxes between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 2 = -915 (106) [<.001]
that the CPS tax imputations understate   Diff. in avg. federal taxes between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 3 = -1475 (446) [<.001]
federal income tax liabilities in the     Diff. in avg. federal taxes between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 4 = -45 (144) [0.755]
bottom seven deciles of survey-reported   Diff. in avg. federal taxes between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 5 = -5 (209) [0.981]
income, before overstating federal        Diff. in avg. federal taxes between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 6 = -1,211 (576) [0.036]
income tax liabilities in the top three   Diff. in avg. federal taxes between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 7 = -578 (535) [0.280]
deciles of survey-reported income."       Diff. in avg. federal taxes between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 8 = 287 (247) [0.245]
(p.28)                                    Diff. in avg. federal taxes between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 9 = 66 (816) [0.936]
                                          Diff. in avg. federal taxes between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 10 = 2,780 (1,441) [0.054]


"In contrast, the limited tax data        Diff. in avg. federal taxes between limited imputation and extensive calculation in decile 1 = 479 (234) [0.041]
imputation statistically overstates       Diff. in avg. federal taxes between limited imputation and extensive calculation in decile 3 = 173 (67) [0.010]
federal income tax liabilities in the     Diff. in avg. federal taxes between limited imputation and extensive calculation in decile 4 = 256 (34) [<.001]
majority of survey income deciles."       Diff. in avg. federal taxes between limited imputation and extensive calculation in decile 5 = 306 (49) [<.001]
(p.29)                                    Diff. in avg. federal taxes between limited imputation and extensive calculation in decile 6 = 331 (177) [0.061]
                                          Diff. in avg. federal taxes between limited imputation and extensive calculation in decile 7 = 209 (50) [<.001]
                                          Diff. in avg. federal taxes between limited imputation and extensive calculation in decile 8 = 116 (110) [0.292]
                                          Diff. in avg. federal taxes between limited imputation and extensive calculation in decile 9 = 182 (429) [0.671]

                                                                               (continued on next page)




                                                                                           70
Appendix Table A.7. Results of Statistical Testing of Statements in Text (Continued)

            Statement in Text                                                                       Result of Statistical Tests
"Indeed, we find that the CPS tax          Diff. in avg. AGI between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 1 = -15,410 (3,039) [<.001]
imputation understates the extensive tax   Diff. in avg. AGI between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 2 = -8,809 (487) [<.001]
data calculation for AGI in the bottom     Diff. in avg. AGI between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 3 = -11,760 (1,642) [<.001]
nine deciles of survey income, for         Diff. in avg. AGI between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 4 = -8,606 (655) [<.001]
taxable income in the bottom seven         Diff. in avg. AGI between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 5 = -6,000 (909) [<.001]
deciles, and for federal income tax        Diff. in avg. AGI between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 6 = -9,509 (2,715) [<.001]
before credits in the bottom nine          Diff. in avg. AGI between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 7 = -4,388 (2,486) [0.078]
deciles." (p.28)                           Diff. in avg. AGI between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 8 = -1,711 (1,183) [0.148]
                                           Diff. in avg. AGI between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 9 = -5,327 (4,646) [0.252]
                                           Diff. in avg. AGI between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 10 = 2,350 (7,557) [0.756]
                                           Diff. in avg. taxable income between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 1 = -8,924 (2,970) [0.003]
                                           Diff. in avg. taxable income between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 2 = -5,576 (371) [<.001]
                                           Diff. in avg. taxable income between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 3 = -8,334 (1,331) [<.001]
                                           Diff. in avg. taxable income between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 4 = -4,462 (535) [<.001]
                                           Diff. in avg. taxable income between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 5 = -3,130 (701) [<.001]
                                           Diff. in avg. taxable income between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 6 = -5,992 (2,320) [0.010]
                                           Diff. in avg. taxable income between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 7 = -1,742 (1,604) [0.277]
                                           Diff. in avg. taxable income between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 8 = 2,655 (1,067) [0.013]
                                           Diff. in avg. taxable income between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 9 = 2,201 (3,425) [0.520]
                                           Diff. in avg. taxable income between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 10 = 17,370 (4,551) [<.001]
                                           Diff. in avg. federal tax before credits between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 1 = -1,462 (453) [0.001]
                                           Diff. in avg. federal tax before credits between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 2 = -897 (87) [<.001]
                                           Diff. in avg. federal tax before credits between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 3 = -2,164 (433) [<.001]
                                           Diff. in avg. federal tax before credits between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 4 = -1,633 (134) [<.001]
                                           Diff. in avg. federal tax before credits between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 5 = -1,755 (206) [<.001]
                                           Diff. in avg. federal tax before credits between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 6 = -2,780 (572) [<.001]
                                           Diff. in avg. federal tax before credits between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 7 = -2,064 (537) [<.001]
                                           Diff. in avg. federal tax before credits between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 8 = -975 (239) [<.001]
                                           Diff. in avg. federal tax before credits between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 9 = -799 (809) [0.323]
                                           Diff. in avg. federal tax before credits between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 10 = 1,920 (1,450) [0.185]




                                                                                           71
Appendix Table A.7. Results of Statistical Testing of Statements in Text (Continued)

              Statement in Text                                                                    Result of Statistical Tests
"Likewise, the CPS-TAXSIM                   Diff. in avg. federal taxes between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation decile 1 = -325 (444) [0.464]
imputation understates the extensive tax    Diff. in avg. federal taxes between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation decile 2 = -548 (108) [<.001]
data calculations in six of the bottom      Diff. in avg. federal taxes between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation decile 3 = -1,262 (446) [0.005]
seven deciles for federal income tax        Diff. in avg. federal taxes between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation decile 4 = 24 (140) [0.864]
                                            Diff. in avg. federal taxes between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation decile 5 = -25 (206) [0.904]
liabilities, all ten deciles for AGI, the   Diff. in avg. federal taxes between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation decile 6 = -1,240 (576) [0.031]
bottom seven deciles for taxable income,    Diff. in avg. federal taxes between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation decile 7 = -568 (534) [0.287]
and the bottom nine deciles for federal     Diff. in avg. federal taxes between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation decile 8 = 567 (238) [0.017]
income tax before credits" (p.28)           Diff. in avg. federal taxes between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation decile 9 = 554 (817) [0.498]
                                            Diff. in avg. federal taxes between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation decile 10 = 3,103 (1,460) [0.034]
                                            Diff. in avg. AGI between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 1 = -15,980 (3,039) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in avg. AGI between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 2 = -10,390 (491) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in avg. AGI between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 3 = -14,030 (1,659) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in avg. AGI between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 4 = -11,400 (679) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in avg. AGI between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 5 = -9,266 (924) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in avg. AGI between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 6 = -12,790 (2,689) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in avg. AGI between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 7 = -7,606 (2,488) [0.002]
                                            Diff. in avg. AGI between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 8 = -4,909 (1,191) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in avg. AGI between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 9 = -8,251 (4,684) [0.078]
                                            Diff. in avg. AGI between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 10 = -1,922 (7,637) [0.801]
                                            Diff. in avg. taxable income between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 1 = -8,997 (2,970) [0.003]
                                            Diff. in avg. taxable income between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 2 = -6,010 (371) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in avg. taxable income between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 3 = -9,244 (1,339) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in avg. taxable income between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 4 = -5,775 (529) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in avg. taxable income between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 5 = -4,537 (683) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in avg. taxable income between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 6 = -7,100 (2,320) [0.002]
                                            Diff. in avg. taxable income between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 7 = -2,171 (1,594) [0.173]
                                            Diff. in avg. taxable income between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 8 = 3,280 (1,054) [0.002]
                                            Diff. in avg. taxable income between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 9 = 3,813 (3,432) [0.266]
                                            Diff. in avg. taxable income between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 10 = 15,030 (4,610) [0.001]
                                            Diff. in avg. federal tax before credits between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 1 = -1,470 (453) [0.001]
                                            Diff. in avg. federal tax before credits between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 2 = -927 (86) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in avg. federal tax before credits between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 3 = -1,993 (433) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in avg. federal tax before credits between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 4 = -1,110 (136) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in avg. federal tax before credits between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 5 = -1,075 (200) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in avg. federal tax before credits between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 6 = -2,048 (570) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in avg. federal tax before credits between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 7 = -1,318 (535) [0.013]
                                            Diff. in avg. federal tax before credits between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 8 = -163 (233) [0.484]
                                            Diff. in avg. federal tax before credits between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 9 = -240 (810) [0.764]
                                            Diff. in avg. federal tax before credits between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 10 = 1,000 (1,470) [0.497]

                                                                               (continued on next page)

                                                                                           72
Appendix Table A.7. Results of Statistical Testing of Statements in Text (Continued)

             Statement in Text                                                                           Result of Statistical Tests
"Looking however at AGI, taxable              Diff. in avg. AGI between limited and CPS imputation in decile 1 = 15,420 (3,043) [<.001]
income, and federal income tax before         Diff. in avg. AGI between limited and CPS imputation in decile 2 = 8,789 (490) [<.001]
credits, the limited tax data estimates are   Diff. in avg. AGI between limited and CPS imputation in decile 3 = 11,880 (1,641) [<.001]
closer to the extensive tax data              Diff. in avg. AGI between limited and CPS imputation in decile 4 = 8,690 (654) [<.001]
counterparts throughout most of the           Diff. in avg. AGI between limited and CPS imputation in decile 5 = 6,199 (910) [<.001]
survey income distribution." (p.29)           Diff. in avg. AGI between limited and CPS imputation in decile 6 = 9,741 (2,718) [<.001]
                                              Diff. in avg. AGI between limited and CPS imputation in decile 7 = 4,526 (2,488) [0.069]
                                              Diff. in avg. AGI between limited and CPS imputation in decile 8 = 2,098 (1,196) [0.079]
                                              Diff. in avg. AGI between limited and CPS imputation in decile 9 = 5,743 (4,643) [0.216]
                                              Diff. in avg. AGI between limited and CPS imputation in decile 10 = 115 (8,076) [0.989]
                                              Diff. in avg. taxable income between limited and CPS imputation in decile 1 = 8,492 (2,590) [0.001]
                                              Diff. in avg. taxable income between limited and CPS imputation in decile 2 = 5,458 (360) [<.001]
                                              Diff. in avg. taxable income between limited and CPS imputation in decile 3 = 8,236 (1,266) [<.001]
                                              Diff. in avg. taxable income between limited and CPS imputation in decile 4 = 4,144 (499) [<.001]
                                              Diff. in avg. taxable income between limited and CPS imputation in decile 5 = 2,709 (673) [<.001]
                                              Diff. in avg. taxable income between limited and CPS imputation in decile 6 = 4,727 (2,168) [0.029]
                                              Diff. in avg. taxable income between limited and CPS imputation in decile 7 = 211 (1,571) [0.893]
                                              Diff. in avg. taxable income between limited and CPS imputation in decile 8 = -4,964 (930) [<.001]
                                              Diff. in avg. taxable income between limited and CPS imputation in decile 9 = -5,279 (3,401) [0.121]
                                              Diff. in avg. taxable income between limited and CPS imputation in decile 10 = -21,980 (5,178) [<.001]
                                              Diff. in avg. federal tax before credits between limited and CPS imputation in decile 1 = 1,762 (643) [0.006]
                                              Diff. in avg. federal tax before credits between limited and CPS imputation in decile 2 = 868 (83) [<.001]
                                              Diff. in avg. federal tax before credits between limited and CPS imputation in decile 3 = 2,101 (408) [<.001]
                                              Diff. in avg. federal tax before credits between limited and CPS imputation in decile 4 = 1,551 (120) [<.001]
                                              Diff. in avg. federal tax before credits between limited and CPS imputation in decile 5 = 1,671 (187) [<.001]
                                              Diff. in avg. federal tax before credits between limited and CPS imputation in decile 6 = 2,678 (706) [<.001]
                                              Diff. in avg. federal tax before credits between limited and CPS imputation in decile 7 = 1,716 (527) [0.001]
                                              Diff. in avg. federal tax before credits between limited and CPS imputation in decile 8 = 519 (277) [0.061]
                                              Diff. in avg. federal tax before credits between limited and CPS imputation in decile 9 = 399 (1,115) [0.720]
                                              Diff. in avg. federal tax before credits between limited and CPS imputation in decile 10 = -4,584 (1,737) [0.008]

                                                                                  (continued on next page)




                                                                                              73
Appendix Table A.7. Results of Statistical Testing of Statements in Text (Continued)

            Statement in Text                                                                       Result of Statistical Tests
"Interestingly, compared to the CPS tax     Diff. in avg. federal taxes between limited and CPS imputation in decile 1 = 1,003 (649) [0.122]
imputation, the limited tax data            Diff. in avg. federal taxes between limited and CPS imputation in decile 2 = 1,040 (105) [<.001]
imputation yields estimates of federal      Diff. in avg. federal taxes between limited and CPS imputation in decile 3 = 1,648 (422) [<.001]
income tax liabilities that are closer to   Diff. in avg. federal taxes between limited and CPS imputation in decile 8 = -171 (288) [0.553]
the extensive tax data estimates at many    Diff. in avg. federal taxes between limited and CPS imputation in decile 9 = 116 (1,119) [0.917]
of the bottom and top deciles of survey     Diff. in avg. federal taxes between limited and CPS imputation in decile 10 = -4,123 (1,744) [0.018]
income (but not in the middle)." (p.29)

"For state income tax liabilities, we       Diff. in avg. state taxes between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 1 = -50 (29) [0.085]
continue to find that the CPS tax           Diff. in avg. state taxes between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 2 = -63 (21) [0.003]
imputation and the CPS-TAXSIM               Diff. in avg. state taxes between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 3 = -275 (92) [0.003]
imputation understates the extensive tax    Diff. in avg. state taxes between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 4 = -99 (38) [0.009]
                                            Diff. in avg. state taxes between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 5 = -116 (51) [0.023]
data aggregates throughout most of the      Diff. in avg. state taxes between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 6 = -310 (104) [0.003]
survey-reported income distribution and     Diff. in avg. state taxes between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 7 = -196 (130) [0.132]
that the limited tax data overstates the    Diff. in avg. state taxes between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 8 = -64 (65) [0.325]
extensive tax data aggregates throughout    Diff. in avg. state taxes between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 9 = -387 (303) [0.202]
the distribution." (p.29)                   Diff. in avg. state taxes between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 10 = 189 (231) [0.413]
                                            Diff. in avg. state taxes between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 1 = -84 (28) [0.003]
                                            Diff. in avg. state taxes between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 2 = -105 (20) [0.003]
                                            Diff. in avg. state taxes between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 3 = -319 (92) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in avg. state taxes between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 4 = -150 (37) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in avg. state taxes between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 5 = -161 (50) [0.001]
                                            Diff. in avg. state taxes between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 6 = -333 (103) [0.001]
                                            Diff. in avg. state taxes between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 7 = -166 (131) [0.205]
                                            Diff. in avg. state taxes between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 8 = -96 (63) [0.128]
                                            Diff. in avg. state taxes between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 9 = -147 (306) [0.631]
                                            Diff. in avg. state taxes between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 10 = 747 (241) [0.002]
                                            Diff. in avg. state taxes between limited imputation and extensive calculation in decile 1 = 105 (11) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in avg. state taxes between limited imputation and extensive calculation in decile 2 = 103 (7) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in avg. state taxes between limited imputation and extensive calculation in decile 3 = 147 (21) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in avg. state taxes between limited imputation and extensive calculation in decile 4 = 113 (8) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in avg. state taxes between limited imputation and extensive calculation in decile 5 = 121 (9) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in avg. state taxes between limited imputation and extensive calculation in decile 6 = 105 (10) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in avg. state taxes between limited imputation and extensive calculation in decile 7 = 123 (14) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in avg. state taxes between limited imputation and extensive calculation in decile 8 = -102 (15) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in avg. state taxes between limited imputation and extensive calculation in decile 9 = 117 (37) [0.002]
                                            Diff. in avg. state taxes between limited imputation and extensive calculation in decile 10 = 96 (189) [0.611]

                                                                                 (continued on next page)


                                                                                             74
Appendix Table A.7. Results of Statistical Testing of Statements in Text (Continued)

            Statement in Text                                                                        Result of Statistical Tests
"For payroll taxes, we find that the         Diff. in avg. payroll tax between limited and CPS imputation in decile 1 = 401 (20) [<.001]
limited tax data imputation yields           Diff. in avg. payroll tax between limited and CPS imputation in decile 2 = 124 (21) [<.001]
estimates that are much closer to the        Diff. in avg. payroll tax between limited and CPS imputation in decile 3 = 127 (44) [0.004]
extensive tax data counterparts than the     Diff. in avg. payroll tax between limited and CPS imputation in decile 4 = 8 (28) [0.775]
CPS tax imputation, which understates        Diff. in avg. payroll tax between limited and CPS imputation in decile 5 = -198 (29) [<.001]
payroll taxes in most of the bottom half     Diff. in avg. payroll tax between limited and CPS imputation in decile 6 = -227 (41) [<.001]
of the survey income distribution and        Diff. in avg. payroll tax between limited and CPS imputation in decile 7 = -406 (51) [<.001]
overstates payroll taxes in the top half."   Diff. in avg. payroll tax between limited and CPS imputation in decile 8 = -616 (52) [<.001]
(p.29)                                       Diff. in avg. payroll tax between limited and CPS imputation in decile 9 = -714 (90) [<.001]
                                             Diff. in avg. payroll tax between limited and CPS imputation in decile 10 = -1,096 (130) [<.001]

"Comparably, the CPS-TAXSIM                  Diff. in avg. payroll tax between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 1 = -498 (21) [<.001]
imputation understates payroll taxes in      Diff. in avg. payroll tax between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 2 = -312 (24) [<.001]
the bottom six deciles of the survey         Diff. in avg. payroll tax between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 3 = -351 (45) [0.004]
income distribution." (p. 29)                Diff. in avg. payroll tax between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 4 = -279 (32) [0.775]
                                             Diff. in avg. payroll tax between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 5 = -99 (32) [0.002]
                                             Diff. in avg. payroll tax between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 6 = -61 (42) [0.1471]
                                             Diff. in avg. payroll tax between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 7 = 119 (54) [0.028]
                                             Diff. in avg. payroll tax between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 8 = 377 (55) [<.001]
                                             Diff. in avg. payroll tax between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 9 = 620 (95) [<.001]
                                             Diff. in avg. payroll tax between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 10 = 1,158 (126) [<.001]




                                                                                             75
Appendix Table A.7. Results of Statistical Testing of Statements in Text (Continued)

           Statement in Text                                                                       Result of Statistical Tests
"For the EITC, the limited tax data         Diff. in avg. EITC between limited imputation and extensive calculation in decile 1 = -17 (5) [<.001]
imputation yields estimates that are        Diff. in avg. EITC between limited imputation and extensive calculation in decile 2 = -12 (5) [0.016]
within 1% of the extensive tax data         Diff. in avg. EITC between limited imputation and extensive calculation in decile 3 = -14 (6) [0.020]
aggregates at every decile of survey        Diff. in avg. EITC between limited imputation and extensive calculation in decile 4 = -5 (3) [0.096]
income." (p.29)                             Diff. in avg. EITC between limited imputation and extensive calculation in decile 5 = 0 (3) [1.000]
                                            Diff. in avg. EITC between limited imputation and extensive calculation in decile 6 = -2 (2) [0.317]
                                            Diff. in avg. EITC between limited imputation and extensive calculation in decile 7 = 2 (1) [0.046]
                                            Diff. in avg. EITC between limited imputation and extensive calculation in decile 8 = 2 (1) [0.046]
                                            Diff. in avg. EITC between limited imputation and extensive calculation in decile 9 = 0 (1) [1.000]
                                            Diff. in avg. EITC between limited imputation and extensive calculation in decile 10 = -1 (1) [0.317]

"Finally, the limited tax data imputation   Diff. in avg. CTC between limited and CPS imputation for all deciles = 58 (4) [<.001]
also yields estimates of the CTC that are   Diff. in avg. CTC between limited and CPS imputation in decile 1 = 276 (13) [<.001]
closer to the extensive aggregates than     Diff. in avg. CTC between limited and CPS imputation in decile 2 = 0 (14) [1.000]
the CPS tax imputation, both on average     Diff. in avg. CTC between limited and CPS imputation in decile 3 = -7 (16) [0.662]
and throughout most of the survey           Diff. in avg. CTC between limited and CPS imputation in decile 4 = 28 (11) [0.011]
income distribution." (p.30)                Diff. in avg. CTC between limited and CPS imputation in decile 5 = 20 (13) [0.124]
                                            Diff. in avg. CTC between limited and CPS imputation in decile 6 = -1 (11) [0.928]
                                            Diff. in avg. CTC between limited and CPS imputation in decile 7 = -26 (11) [0.018]
                                            Diff. in avg. CTC between limited and CPS imputation in decile 8 = 19 (10) [0.057]
                                            Diff. in avg. CTC between limited and CPS imputation in decile 9 = 174 (10) [<.001]
                                            Diff. in avg. CTC between limited and CPS imputation in decile 10 = 102 (8) [<.001]

                                                                                (continued on next page)




                                                                                            76
Appendix Table A.7. Results of Statistical Testing of Statements in Text (Continued)

             Statement in Text                                                                      Result of Statistical Tests
"In contrast, the CPS tax imputation         Diff. in avg. EITC between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 1 = -375 (37) [<.001]
understates those aggregates for EITC in     Diff. in avg. EITC between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 2 = 236 (36) [<.001]
nearly every decile of survey income         Diff. in avg. EITC between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 3 = -153 (28) [<.001]
(except for the second), with these          Diff. in avg. EITC between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 4 = -493 (27) [<.001]
differences being most pronounced for        Diff. in avg. EITC between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 5 = -467 (28) [<.001]
families in the fourth and fifth deciles."   Diff. in avg. EITC between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 6 = -271 (19) [<.001]
(p.29)                                       Diff. in avg. EITC between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 7 = -168 (14) [<.001]
                                             Diff. in avg. EITC between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 8 = -127 (15) [<.001]
                                             Diff. in avg. EITC between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 9 = -70 (11) [<.001]
                                             Diff. in avg. EITC between CPS and extensive calculation in decile 10 = -44 (7) [<.001]
                                             Diff. in avg. EITC between deciles 4 and 1 for CPS imputation = -118 (47) [0.012]
                                             Diff. in avg. EITC between deciles 4 and 2 for CPS imputation = -729 (44) [<.001]
                                             Diff. in avg. EITC between deciles 4 and 3 for CPS imputation = -340 (38) [<.001]
                                             Diff. in avg. EITC between deciles 4 and 6 for CPS imputation = -222 (34) [<.001]
                                             Diff. in avg. EITC between deciles 4 and 7 for CPS imputation = -326 (28) [<.001]
                                             Diff. in avg. EITC between deciles 4 and 8 for CPS imputation = -366 (30) [<.001]
                                             Diff. in avg. EITC between deciles 4 and 9 for CPS imputation = -423 (28) [<.001]
                                             Diff. in avg. EITC between deciles 4 and 10 for CPS imputation = -448 (28) [<.001]
                                             Diff. in avg. EITC between deciles 5 and 1 for CPS imputation = -92 (43) [0.032]
                                             Diff. in avg. EITC between deciles 5 and 2 for CPS imputation = -703 (45) [<.001]
                                             Diff. in avg. EITC between deciles 5 and 3 for CPS imputation = -315 (37) [<.001]
                                             Diff. in avg. EITC between deciles 5 and 6 for CPS imputation = -196 (34) [<.001]
                                             Diff. in avg. EITC between deciles 5 and 7 for CPS imputation = -300 (31) [<.001]
                                             Diff. in avg. EITC between deciles 5 and 8 for CPS imputation = -340 (31) [<.001]
                                             Diff. in avg. EITC between deciles 5 and 9 for CPS imputation = -397 (29) [<.001]
                                             Diff. in avg. EITC between deciles 5 and 10 for CPS imputation = -423 (29) [<.001]

"The CPS-TAXSIM imputation                   Diff. in avg. EITC between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 1 = -542 (37) [<.001]
understates EITC aggregates in every         Diff. in avg. EITC between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 2 = -83 (38) [0.029]
decile of survey income." (p.30)             Diff. in avg. EITC between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 3 = -386 (29) [<.001]
                                             Diff. in avg. EITC between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 4 = -653 (27) [<.001]
                                             Diff. in avg. EITC between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 5 = -536 (27) [<.001]
                                             Diff. in avg. EITC between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 6 = -314 (20) [<.001]
                                             Diff. in avg. EITC between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 7 = -178 (13) [<.001]
                                             Diff. in avg. EITC between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 8 = -142 (14) [<.001]
                                             Diff. in avg. EITC between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 9 = -72 (10) [<.001]
                                             Diff. in avg. EITC between CPS-TAXSIM and extensive calculation in decile 10 = -43 (7) [<.001]

                                                                                 (continued on next page)
                                                                                            77
Appendix Table A.7. Results of Statistical Testing of Statements in Text (Continued)

           Statement in Text                                                                           Result of Statistical Tests
"For federal income tax liabilities, the      Diff. in mean abs. error for federal taxes between CPS imputation and extensive calculation = 7,202 (187) [<.001]
mean absolute error for the CPS tax
imputation is $7,202 for all families,
which is greater than the average federal
income tax amount ($6,824) and nearly
10% of average AGI ($73,680)." (p.30)

"The mean absolute errors in state            Diff. in mean abs. error between federal and state taxes for the CPS imputation = 5,835 (163) [<.001]
income tax liabilities and payroll tax        Diff. in mean abs. error between federal and payroll taxes for the CPS imputation = 5,682 (175) [<.001]
liabilities are much smaller than the
mean absolute error in federal income
tax liabilities as a share of AGI (each
approximately 2% of AGI), even though
these errors are sizeable as a share of
their mean values from the extensive tax
data (65% for state income taxes and
37% for payroll taxes)." (p.31)

"Once again, the mean absolute errors in      Diff. in mean abs. error for total taxes (as % of mean AGI) between quartiles 1 and 2 for CPS imp. = 0.0368 (0.0141) [0.009]
total tax liabilities as a share of AGI are   Diff. in mean abs. error for total taxes (as % of mean AGI) between quartiles 1 and 3 for CPS imp. = 0.0404 (0.0146) [0.006]
highest in the bottom and top quartiles."     Diff. in mean abs. error for total taxes (as % of mean AGI) between quartiles 4 and 2 for CPS imp. = 0.0441 (0.0072) [<.001]
(p.31)                                        Diff. in mean abs. error for total taxes (as % of mean AGI) between quartiles 4 and 3 for CPS imp. = 0.0478 (0.0081) [<.001]

"For example, Duncan and Hill (1985)          Diff. in mean abs. error for total taxes (as % of mean AGI) between CPS imputation and 7% = 0.1274 (0.0036) [<.001]
find that the average absolute difference
between survey and administrative
values of earnings in their 1982 sample
was $2123 ­ amounting to
approximately 7% of mean earnings.
Compared to this difference, the average
absolute difference that we calculate for
total taxes (13% of AGI, which is
typically a larger income base than
earnings) is considerably greater." (p.31)

                                                                                  (continued on next page)



                                                                                              78
Appendix Table A.7. Results of Statistical Testing of Statements in Text (Continued)

           Statement in Text                                                                       Result of Statistical Tests
"As a share of the mean amount, the         Diff. in mean abs. error for AGI (as % of mean AGI) between quartiles 1 and 2 for CPS imputation = 0.2355 (0.0687) [<.001]
mean absolute error in AGI is largest in    Diff. in mean abs. error for AGI (as % of mean AGI) between quartiles 1 and 3 for CPS imputation = 0.2941 (0.0707) [<.001]
the bottom quartile (65%)." (p.31)          Diff. in mean abs. error for AGI (as % of mean AGI) between quartiles 1 and 4 for CPS imputation = 0.2074 (0.0708) [0.003]

"The mean absolute difference in            Diff. in mean abs. error for taxable income between extensive and CPS imputation = 27,280 (649) [<.001]
taxable income for the CPS is $27,280,      Diff. in mean abs. error for taxable income (as % of mean amt.) between quartiles 1 and 2 for CPS imputation = 0.3111 (0.2041) [0.127]
which is 57% of the mean taxable            Diff. in mean abs. error for taxable income (as % of mean amt.) between quartiles 1 and 3 for CPS imputation = 0.4841 (0.2043) [0.018]
income amount and among the highest         Diff. in mean abs. error for taxable income (as % of mean amt.) between quartiles 1 and 4 for CPS imputation = 0.4514 (0.2032) [0.026]
(as a share of the mean amount) in the
bottom quartile." (p.31)

"Analogously, the mean absolute             Diff. in mean abs. error for federal taxes before credits between extensive and CPS imputation = 6,366 (191) [<.001]
difference in federal income tax before     Diff. in mean abs. err. for fed. taxes before credits (as % of mean amt.) between q. 1 and 2 for CPS imputation = 0.1817 (0.2350) [0.439]
credits for the CPS is $6,366, which is     Diff. in mean abs. err. for fed. taxes before credits (as % of mean amt.) between q. 1 and 3 for CPS imputation = 0.3909 (0.2328) [0.093]
69% of the mean taxable income amount       Diff. in mean abs. err. for fed. taxes before credits (as % of mean amt.) between q. 1 and 4 for CPS imputation = 0.3399 (0.2287) [0.137]
and among the highest in the bottom
quartile (as a share of the mean
amount)." (p.31)

"For federal income tax liabilities, the    Diff. in mean abs. error for federal taxes between limited and CPS imputation = -5,549 (150) [<.001]
mean absolute error between the limited
tax data imputation and extensive tax
data calculation is 24% for all families.
This is approximately a quarter of the
absolute error for the CPS tax
imputation (106%) and CPS-TAXSIM
imputation (109%)." (p.32)

"Similarly, the mean absolute error         Diff. in mean abs. error for AGI between limited and CPS imputation =-31,270 (948) [<.001]
between the limited and extensive tax       Diff. in mean abs. error for taxable income between limited and CPS imputation = -22,350 (552) [<.001]
data estimates is a mere 1% for AGI         Diff. in mean abs. error for federal taxes before credits between limited and CPS imputation = -4,928 (153) [<.001]
(compared to 44% for the CPS tax
imputation), 10% for taxable income
(compared to 57% for the CPS tax
imputation), and 16% for federal income
tax before credits (compared to 69% for
the CPS tax imputation)." (p.32)

                                                                                (continued on next page)
                                                                                           79
Appendix Table A.7. Results of Statistical Testing of Statements in Text (Continued)

            Statement in Text                                                                           Result of Statistical Tests
"The mean absolute difference between         Diff. in mean abs. error for state taxes between limited and CPS imputation = 1,025 (42) [<.001]
the limited and extensive tax data            Diff. in mean abs. error for payroll taxes between limited and CPS imputation = -1,396 (17) [<.001]
estimates is 16% for state income taxes
(compared to 65% for the CPS tax
imputation) and 3% for payroll taxes
(compared to 37% for the CPS tax
imputation)." (p.32)

"Taken together, the mean absolute error      Diff. in mean abs. error for total taxes between limited and extensive calculation = 1,913 (73) [<.001]
between the limited tax data imputation       Diff. in mean abs. error for total taxes between limited and CPS imputation = -7,472 (187) [<.001]
and extensive tax data calculation for        Diff. in mean abs. error for total taxes between limited and CPS-TAXSIM imputation = -7,957 (191) [<.001]
total tax liabilities is 15%, which is
approximately 20% of the absolute error
for the CPS tax imputation (72%) and
CPS-TAXSIM imputation (76%)."
(p.32)

See Tables 1, 2, 3a, and 3b for all other notes and sources. Standard errors in parentheses are calculated using replicate weights and p-values corresponding to t-test of null hypothesis (that mean
is equal to zero) are in brackets.
Approved for release by the U.S. Census Bureau, authorization numbers CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-014, CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-038.




                                                                                                 80
