                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

  MATERNAL MORTALITY RISK AND SPOUSAL DIFFERENCES IN THE DEMAND
                          FOR CHILDREN

                                       Nava Ashraf
                                      Erica M. Field
                                     Alessandra Voena
                                      Roberta Ziparo

                                   Working Paper 28220
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w28220


                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 December 2020



We thank Laura Argys, Jean-Marie Baland, Renaud Bourlès, Leonardo Bursztyn, Matthias
Doepke, Marcel Fafchamps, Corinne Low, Rachel Heath, Gautam Rao, Michèle Tertilt, and
Christine Valente for helpful comments. We thank Dr. Ruben Mbewe, Dr. Chomba Nambao, Dr.
Caroline Phiri, Ms. Jully Chilambwe, Ms. Hilda Wina and the staff at Chipata and Chaisa clinic
for their support to the project. Federica Esu and Sonakshi Sharma were essential
contributors to the field implementation of the study. We are also grateful to Conceptor
Chilopa, Aleta Haflett, Milambo Mavumba, Grace Msichili, Jessica Pettit and Sindy Yiu for
their support in the field. Ruchi Mahadeshwar, Maria Alejandra Rodriguez Vega, Kim
Sarnoff, Nicholas Swanson and Tianyu Zheng provided excellent research assistance. Funding
for this research was provided in part by the Global Development Network/International
Initiative for Impact Evaluation, the International Growth Centre, the John Templeton
Foundation, the William and Flora Hewlett Foundation, the Becker Friedman Institute and an
anonymous donor. The study is registered on the AEA RCT registry with ID number
AEARCTR-0000022. The study was approved by the Institutional Review Boards at the
University of Chicago, Stanford University and the University of Zambia. Voena thanks the
Sustainability Science program at the Harvard Kennedy School and the Sloan Foundation for a
Research Fellowship for financial support. The opinions expressed in this manuscript are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the view of the sponsors. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Nava Ashraf, Erica M. Field, Alessandra Voena, and Roberta Ziparo. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Maternal Mortality Risk and Spousal Differences in the Demand for Children
Nava Ashraf, Erica M. Field, Alessandra Voena, and Roberta Ziparo
NBER Working Paper No. 28220
December 2020
JEL No. J11,J13

                                         ABSTRACT

Fertility decisions are often made by partners who may disagree. We develop a model in which
an initial gender gap in ideal fertility prevents effective communication between spouses about
the costs of childbearing incurred by women. This mechanism is likely to further widen the
spousal disagreement over fertility in environments where maternal health risk is high and
imperfectly observed. We design an intervention to experimentally vary exposure to information
about maternal health costs to either the husband or the wife on a sample of approximately 500
couples in peri-urban Lusaka, in Zambia. At baseline, husbands display lower knowledge of
maternal mortality and morbidity compared to their wives. At followup, about one year after the
intervention, women whose husbands are treated experience a 43% reduction in the probability of
being pregnant. Consistent with our hypothesis, men who are directly treated report lower desired
fertility and have more accurate beliefs about their wife's desired fertility than the husbands of
treated women. Couples in which the husband is treated also increase communication about
family planning, and experience greater marital satisfaction.

Nava Ashraf                                     Alessandra Voena
Department of Economics                         Stanford University
London School of Economics                      Landau Economics Building
Houghton Street                                 579 Jane Stanford Way
London WC2A 2AE                                 Stanford, CA 94305
United Kingdom                                  and NBER
n.ashraf1@lse.ac.uk                             avoena@stanford.edu

Erica M. Field                                  Roberta Ziparo
Department of Economics                         Aix-Marseille Université
Duke University                                 5-9 Boulevard Bourdet, CS 50498
Social Sciences Building                        13205 Marseille Cedex 1 - France
Box 90097                                       roberta.ziparo@univ-amu.fr
Durham, NC 27708
and CEPR
and also NBER
emf23@duke.edu




An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28220
   Fertility decisions, like many other high-stakes economic choices, are more often made at
the household rather than the individual level. Agents within a household may disagree, but
different preferences do not necessarily lead to inefficient outcomes: a joint optimum can often
be achieved through a compensating transfer. In some cases, however, when spouses have
significantly different private optima, it may be difficult to reach efficient household outcomes
(Ashraf, Field and Lee, 2014; Doepke and Kindermann, 2019). One reason this may happen,
as we illustrate in this paper, is simply because spouses do not always have access to the same
information about childbearing, and hence might hold systematically different beliefs about the
costs and benefits of fertility choices over number and spacing of children. While we would
expect communication between partners to generate convergence in beliefs, a conflict of interest
may, in fact, impede the flow of information within the household, leading to fertility outcomes
that depart from the joint optimum.
   In this paper, we explore the role of information asymmetries and barriers to credible commu-
nication in shaping household decision-making over fertility. In particular, we examine spouses'
knowledge of maternal health risk, how it spreads between partners, and how it influences gender
differences in the demand for children. Our study takes place in Lusaka, Zambia, where married
men on average report high desired fertility, both in absolute terms and relative to women, as is
also seen across Sub-Saharan Africa (Westoff, 2010). Zambia also has one of the world's highest
maternal mortality ratios amounting to a lifetime risk of maternal death of one in 59 (Central
Statistical Office, 2014).
   First, we document a significant gap in reproductive health risk awareness between husbands
and wives, which we argue stems from gendered spheres of direct and indirect knowledge ac-
cumulation on maternal labor and delivery outcomes, which typifies much of the developing
world. In particular, we collect novel data on beliefs about maternal health costs, which reveal
that husbands in poor peri-urban Lusaka have limited knowledge relative to their wives of the
average maternal mortality and morbidity risk, and also the risk factors that influence childbirth
outcomes. This observation alone raises the immediate questions of what leads members of the
same household to maintain systematically different beliefs about maternal health risk, and to
what extent this gender gap in knowledge of maternal risk influences the gender gap in demand
for children.
   Second, to make sense of this stylized fact, we develop a theoretical model that explores



                                                1
information transmission and fertility decisions in the household when couples differ with respect
to both knowledge on childbearing risk and ex ante preferences over optimal number of children.
The model demonstrates how the combination of gender differences in both risk awareness and
ideal fertility can represent a barrier to information sharing and prevent convergence in beliefs
about maternal health risk within couples, resulting in an even greater wedge between male and
female demand for children and - as a result - welfare-reducing fertility outcomes.
   In the model, the wife controls fertility and can receive transfers from the husband to com-
pensate for deviations from her private optimum: this asymmetry in spousal agency over fertility
constitutes the third key dimension determining equilibrium information transmission between
spouses. We show that asymmetries of information on maternal health risk are an important
determinant of household fertility: when women are better informed than men about risk,
households are unable to implement optimal contracts over fertility. This happens because ini-
tial spousal differences in preferences and control over fertility prevent effective communication
and convergence in beliefs across spouses about the health cost of childbearing. As a result,
when spouses are badly informed about maternal health risk, providing information to the wife
will move the equilibrium fertility of the household closer to her private optimum only when
the husband's desire for children is relatively low. Since she is unable to credibly communicate
new information to him, contracting breaks down and transfers stop. In contrast, when the
husband receives new information, fertility moves closer to the joint optimum across all levels
of the ideal fertility of the husband. In this case, since the husband can implement his optimal
fertility through transfers, credible communication across spouses is possible. However, again
this happens only when the husband's demand for children or the cost of making transfers are
relatively low.
   We test the predictions of the model through a field experiment with over 500 couples that
delivers information on maternal health risk to husbands and wives, and randomizes the identity
of the recipient within each participating couple. Our results reveal that the intervention achieves
different outcomes when it targets men compared to when it targets women. Consistent with our
model's predictions, delivering information on maternal risk directly to men has a larger impact
on belief convergence in the household than the same information targeted to their wives. After
the intervention, relative to the control group, couples in which the husband is treated experience
a 5.2 percentage point (pp) decline in the probability of having a child or being pregnant in the



                                                 2
year following the intervention (a 43% reduction). Couples in which the wife is treated exhibit
fertility responses of similar magnitudes, but treated women see transfers in their favor from
their husband drop. Only treated husbands report lower demand for children and have more
accurate beliefs about their wife's desired fertility and health risk, while we observe no change
among husbands of treated women. Couples in which the husband is treated also increase
communication about family planning, increase spousal closeness and exhibit greater marital
satisfaction.
   Beyond uncovering a central barrier to optimal decision-making over family planning that is
likely to be relevant in many high fertility settings, a central contribution of our paper is to study
the diffusion of information within the household and its long-term consequences. In the context
of maternal mortality, we show that information asymmetries within households may persist
as equilibrium outcomes, and thereby influence how public health campaigns affect household
outcomes. While the vast literature on household decision-making assumes that household
members have access to the same information, or that new information spreads seamlessly within
the family (Chiappori, 1992; Lundberg and Pollak, 1996; Bourguignon et al., 1993), a smaller
body of literature has examined the degree to which asymmetric information between spouses
affects household decision-making (see de Laat (2005); Ashraf (2009); Stern and Friedberg (2010);
Chen (2013); Baseler (2020)). This paper contributes to a novel body of recent work that has
started to explore the transmission of information within the household (Ziparo, 2020; Apedo-
Amah, Djebbari and Ziparo, 2020), and it is the first, to our knowledge, to study its implications
for real-life decisions such as fertility.
   Our paper also contributes to understanding the role of information more generally for eco-
nomic outcomes, through providing evidence on both direct and spillover effects on behavior.
A rich body of evidence has shown that information can have a substantial impact on educa-
tional choices in developing countries (Jensen, 2010; Dizon-Ross, 2019) and on health outcomes,
through a process of beliefs updating or by enhancing salience (see, among others, Thornton
(2008); Dupas (2011); De Paula, Shapira and Todd (2014); Delavande and Kohler (2016); Ben-
nett, Naqvi and Schmidt (2018)). We contribute to this literature by highlighting that who in
the household receives the information may be crucial for its effect. Just as a cash transfer may
influence household behavior differently when delivered to a man or to a woman (Lundberg,
Pollak and Wales, 1997; Attanasio and Lechene, 2002; Duflo, 2003), health information can have



                                                  3
different effects depending on who in the household receives the information.
       Measuring information spillovers and diffusion within the household also sheds light on mo-
tivations for information sharing and influencing joint decisions in group settings. Through the
experimental design, we provide the first field experimental evidence to directly test models of
strategic communication, wherein persistent preference differences and conflict of interest im-
pede communication and belief updating (Crawford and Sobel, 1982; Mailath, 1987; Crawford,
1998, 2019). The effect of preferences misalignment on communication had been studied in
the lab: Dickhaut, McCabe and Mukherji (1995) and Cai and Wang (2006) test the model
of Crawford and Sobel (1982) in a laboratory set up, while Dickson, Hafer and Landa (2008)
show responsiveness of communication to strategic incentives in a committee voting laboratory
experiment.
       Through its empirical application, our study also contributes to the literature on decision-
making over fertility when spouses have different preferences.1 By examining the role of beliefs
about maternal mortality risk, we contribute to the literature on determinants of fertility deci-
sions, especially in terms of expectations, including the work by Rosenzweig and Schultz (1982)
on child mortality in Colombia and by Albanesi and Olivetti (2014) on maternal mortality in US
history. We emphasize that initial differences in ideal fertility between men and women, which
are large across sub-Saharan Africa and in Zambia (see figure 1 panel a), can generate persistent
and systematic disagreement over the demand for children (panel b).2
       From a policy perspective, we find that the reduction in fertility that we experimentally
induce is of the same order of magnitude of other household-level interventions which have
been shown to reduce pregnancy (Ashraf, Field and Lee, 2014), but is accompanied by an
improvement in the marital surplus, as measured by greater marital satisfaction, communication,
and closeness. As reducing unmet need for family planning in Sub-Saharan Africa becomes an
increasingly important policy goal, finding strategies to decrease excess male demand for children
that help enhance family unity, rather than underscore existing conflict within the household,
will be critical.
   1
     While the sociology and demography literature studying spouses' interactions on fertility decisions is well
established, few studies in economics have emphasized the role of intra-household interactions (Rasul (2008);
Ashraf, Field and Lee (2014); Doepke and Kindermann (2019) and Rossi (2019)) and culture (Fernandez and
Fogli, 2009) in this process.
   2
     Outside of economics, see studies about fertility and contraceptives use from a theoretical perspective (Blanc,
2001; Miller, Severy and Pasta, 2004; Brehm and Schneider, 2019), in developed countries (Bauer and Kneip,
2012; Stein, Willen and Pavetic, 2014), and in Sub-Saharan Africa (Ezeh, 1993; Bond and Dover, 1997; Dodoo,
1998; DeRose et al., 2004; Pulerwitz et al., 2010; Gottert et al., 2018).


                                                         4
                                                                         Figure 1: Spousal Disagreement in Ideal Fertility in Sub-Saharan Africa

(a) Difference in Reported Ideal Fertility between Hus- (b) Fraction of Couples that Disagrees over Having An-
band and Wife                                           other Child
    Difference in Husband's and Wife's Ideal Number of Children




                                                                                                                            40
                                                                  4




                                                                                                                                        Wife wants no more children, husband wants more
                                                                                                                                        Husband wants no more children, wife wants more
                                                                  3
                                                                  2




                                                                                                                  Percent

                                                                                                                            20
                                                                  1
                                                                  0
                                                                  -1




                                                                                                                            0
                                                                               Chad
                                                                               Niger
                                                                            Senegal
                                                                            Gambia
                                                                                CAR
                                                                             Guinea
                                                                             Nigeria
                                                                               Benin
                                                                                 Mali
                                                                             Angola
                                                                         Congo DR
                                                                         Cameroon
                                                                            Namibia
                                                                              Gabon
                                                                            Ethiopia
                                                                       Mozambique
                                                                            Eswatini
                                                                       Burkina Faso
                                                                            Uganda
                                                                              Congo
                                                                       Sierra Leone
                                                                            Lesotho
                                                                              Ghana
                                                                       Cote d'Ivoire
                                                                             Zambia
                                                                              Kenya
                                                                                Togo
                                                                         Sao Tome
                                                                        Madagascar
                                                                              Liberia
                                                                         Zimbabwe
                                                                           Tanzania
                                                                        South Africa
                                                                           Comoros
                                                                             Malawi
                                                                            Burundi
                                                                            Rwanda




                                                                                                                                      Namibia
                                                                                                                                      Eswatini
                                                                                                                                   Sao Tome
                                                                                                                                  South Africa
                                                                                                                                       Angola
                                                                                                                                      Lesotho
                                                                                                                                      Ethiopia
                                                                                                                                        Liberia
                                                                                                                                       Malawi
                                                                                                                                      Uganda
                                                                                                                                        Kenya
                                                                                                                                        Ghana
                                                                                                                                 Mozambique
                                                                                                                                   Zimbabwe
                                                                                                                                       Zambia
                                                                                                                                      Burundi
                                                                                                                                           Mali
                                                                                                                                          Togo
                                                                                                                                     Comoros
                                                                                                                                        Gabon
                                                                                                                                      Rwanda
                                                                                                                                 Sierra Leone
                                                                                                                                     Tanzania
                                                                                                                                   Cameroon
                                                                                                                                         Benin
                                                                                                                                   Congo DR
                                                                                                                                 Cote d'Ivoire
                                                                                                                                  Madagascar
                                                                                                                                      Senegal
                                                                                                                                        Congo
                                                                                                                                 Burkina Faso
                                                                                                                                       Guinea
                                                                                                                                          CAR
                                                                                                                                      Gambia
                                                                                                                                       Nigeria
                                                                                                                                         Chad
                                                                                                                                         Niger
Notes: Data from the most recent waves of Demographic and Health Surveys. Polygamous couples are excluded
from each sample for which such information is available.


                                                                  Our results imply that improving men's knowledge of maternal mortality risk has the po-
tential to shrink the gender gap in demand for children, but only if this information is targeted
directly to men. This speaks to the policy debate on male involvement in family planning,
which has found mixed evidence at best.3 Our paper suggests that family planning information
is not sufficient to change men's attitudes and behavior as long as beliefs about health risk are
significantly misaligned within the household. Existing differences in preferences impede com-
munication in the household, but targeted maternal health risk information to men can overcome
that barrier. The intervention also provides an inexpensive and easily scalable way to affect a
crucial aspect of fertility demand, while improving marital satisfaction, a "family-centric" path
forward for effectively reducing gender conflict over the demand for children across sub-Saharan
Africa.



1                                                                      Context
                                                                  We conducted this study in Lusaka, the capital city of Zambia. High fertility rates in Lusaka
coupled with rapid rural-urban migration has led to the establishment of informal settlements
                                                       3
     Although some randomized public health studies found that providing health education to husbands may
increase uptake of modern contraceptives (Wang et al., 1998; Terefe and Larson, 1983; Fisek and Sumbuloglu,
1978), one large study found no effect (Freedman and Takeshita, 1969). Recent evidence from rural Malawi and
Tanzania suggests that promoting contraceptive use among men have the potential of substantially increasing
take-up (Shattuck et al., 2011; McCarthy, 2019). Aligning spouses' fertility preferences has been indicated as an
effective strategy to increase the takeup of contraceptives in Mozambique (Miller, De Paula and Valente, 2020).

                                                                                                              5
(or compounds), in which a growing proportion of the city's population resides.4 Our study took
place in these communities. In this section, we describe the reproductive health challenges in
Zambia more generally and in our sample from the compounds of Lusaka.


1.1       Fertility, desired fertility and contraceptive use

       Zambian fertility rates are high. Estimates from the 2014 DHS indicate that the total
fertility rate in Zambia is 5.3 children per woman aged 15-49, one child below the total fertility
rate measured in the 1992 DHS. Urban areas have a lower rate, at 3.7 children per woman.
       High fertility in Zambia is associated with a high unmet need for family planning services:
14% of married women have an unmet need for spacing births and 7% have an unmet need
for limiting them. Nevertheless, desired fertility is also high and it differs significantly between
married men and married women: in the 2014 DHS, the ideal number of children is 5.1 for
married women and 5.7 for married men. Figure 2 highlights the discrepancy in the desire for
additional children as a function of the current number of living children in that sample (panel
a): when the current number of children exceeds one, women are substantially more likely than
their husband to want no more children.
       From our baseline sample, collected in the Fall of 2014 on 715 couples in peri-urban Lusaka,
similar patterns emerge. Ours is a prime-age urban sample, and the average age for women is 28.
Yet, women in the sample have on average 2.6 children, while their husbands have on average 2.9
(table 1, panel A).5 Unmet need for family planning is high. Overall, 32% of the women in our
sample report not using modern contraceptives. Of the 33% of women in our sample who want
no more children, 27% are not using any modern contraceptive (8% of our sample). Similarly,
of the 52% women in our sample who wish to delay giving birth by at least one year, 23% are
not using any modern contraceptive (12% of our sample in total).
       As observed in the nationally-representative sample from the DHS, men in our sample have
higher desired fertility on average than their wives: 4.43 for men, 4.19 for women (table 1, panel
A). Indeed, the distribution of women's reported ideal fertility first order stochastically domi-
nates that of men (see figure 3, panel b). In 35.7% of couples, there is no gap between husband
   4
     According to the World Bank, 43% of the Zambian population in 2017 resided in urban cities. Data available
at https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/sp.urb.totl.in.zs, last accessed May 2019.
   5
     Women aged 35 and above (16% of our sample), and hence closer to completed fertility, have on average 3.9
children.



                                                      6
Figure 2: Percent that Want No More Children by Current Number of Children in the DHS
and in the Baseline Survey

                                (a) DHS                                                     (b) Baseline Survey
           100




                                                                           100
           80




                                                                           80
       Percentage




                                                                       Percentage
              60




                                                                              60
      40




                                                                      40
           20




                                                                           20
           0




                                                                           0
                    0   1      2         3       4       5   6+                     0   1        2        3        4           5   6+
                            Current Number of Children                                        Current Number of Children
                                   Men           Women                                            Husbands             Wives




Notes: Left-hand side bar graph summarizes percentages of men and women for DHS 2013-2014 data;
right-hand side bar graph summarizes percentages of husbands and wives in our sample.



and wife in ideal number of children. In 36.6% of couples, the husband wants more children
than the wife (on average 1.9 more children). In the remaining 27.7%, the wife wants more
children than the husband (on average 1.6 more children). Nevertheless, given the particular
age distribution in our sample, men already have more children than their wives because of prior
relationships, and hence a larger fraction of women wants to have at least another child (71.4%)
relative to men (65.8%).
   In our sample, men and women also exhibit substantial differences in their attitudes towards
family planning and contraception. For instance, 38.3% of men report thinking that contracep-
tives are bad for a woman's health, against 17.2% of women (table 1, panel A). Similarly, 31.0%
of men report thinking that contraceptives reduce a woman's future ability to conceive, against
17.0% of women. In addition, 57.9% of men report thinking that contraceptives enable women
to be unfaithful, against 37.6% of women.


1.2             Knowledge, beliefs and communication about maternal health risk

   According to the 2014 DHS, the maternal mortality ratio in Zambia is equal to 398 deaths
per 100,000 live births. Given the high rates of fertility in the country, this ratio implies that,
in expectation, 1 in 59 Zambian women die giving birth. This lifetime risk has decreased from
1 in 27 based on the 2007 DHS.

                                                                  7
             Table 1: Fertility Outcomes, Preferences, Beliefs and Attitudes at Baseline


                                                                                       Women    Men       Diff. SE
         Panel A: Fertility and Family Planning
         Living children                                                               2.598    2.890    (0.089)***
         Ideal number of children                                                      4.188    4.426    (0.082)***
         Likelihood of having another child                                            6.490    6.171      (0.192)*
         Want another child (dummy)                                                    0.714    0.658     (0.026)**
         Diff in ideal and current number of children                                  1.584    1.553       (0.084)
         Fraction contrac. methods believed to be bad for health                       0.172    0.383    (0.013)***
         Fraction contrac. methods believed to lower fecundity                         0.170    0.310    (0.013)***
         Agrees that contrac. help women be unfaithful                                 0.376    0.579    (0.026)***
         Panel B: Maternal Mortality and Morbidity
         Ideal space between children (m)                                              41.142   36.636   (0.955)***
         Months woman should give body to recover post-birthing                        27.058   26.132     (0.975)
         Women with more kids at higher risk of complications                          0.777    0.720     (0.023)**
         Older women at higher risk of complications                                   0.846    0.743    (0.021)***
         Likelihood of complications if woman gets immediately pregnant                 8.000   7.880      (0.127)
         Likelihood of complications if woman gets pregnant 12 months after delivery   4.722    4.686      (0.137)
         Likelihood of complications if woman gets pregnant 24 months after delivery   2.400    2.155     (0.124)**
         Likelihood of complications if woman has less than 4 kids                      3.076   2.933      (0.121)
         Likelihood of complications if woman has more than 4 kids                      5.805   6.014      (0.136)
         Likelihood of complications if woman is younger than 40                        3.721    3.261   (0.130)***
         Likelihood of complications if woman is older than 40                          7.930    7.451   (0.118)***
         Reports that infidelity increases risk of complications                        0.420   0.555    (0.026)***
         Relative infidelity weight                                                    0.304    0.328    (0.009)***
         Panel C: Maternal Complications Experience and Communication
         Past maternal and birth complications or difficulties                         0.138    0.175     (0.019)*
         Past maternal complications or difficulties                                   0.113    0.114      (0.017)
         Immediate family member died from complications                               0.039    0.032      (0.010)
         Close relative died from complications                                        0.067    0.049      (0.012)
         Close friend died from complications                                          0.110    0.068    (0.015)***
         Distant friend died from complications                                        0.108    0.050    (0.014)***
         Communicated info about future possibility of complications                   0.534    0.276    (0.025)***
         Observations                                                                   714      714

Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Baseline survey collected in the Fall of 2014 in Lusaka on a sample of
714 couples.


       The primary causes of death in Zambia are obstructed labor, hemorrhage, blood pressure
disorders and sepsis (Banda, 2015). The high incidence of maternal mortality is associated with
high incidence of severe morbidity, which is typically believed to be orders of magnitude times
larger than maternal mortality.6 Data on morbidity, however, is not systematically available for
Zambia nor in other comparable contexts.7
       Our survey provides unique insights into men's and women's knowledge and attitudes towards
   6
     Across Sub-Saharan Africa, for example, the range of instances of severe morbidity over 1,000 births is
estimated between 109 for Nigeria and 9 for Tanzania, hence tens of times higher than mortality, see Geller et al.
(2018).
   7
     The exception is the Global Network Maternal and Newborn Health (MNH) Registry Data from 2014 and
2016, that places the ratio of extremely severe morbidity ("near miss") to mortality at 19:1 (Goldenberg et al.,
2017). Such an incidence would place the lifetime risk of death or near miss to almost 50%.



                                                             8
                                         Figure 3: Ideal Number of Children
                                                   DHS Data vs. Our Survey
                              (a) DHS                                                   (b) Baseline Survey
      50




                                                                       50
      40




                                                                       40
  Percentage




                                                                   Percentage
         30




                                                                          30
 20




                                                                  20
      10




                                                                       10
      0




                                                                       0
               0    1     2         3       4       5    6+                     0   1       2        3        4           5   6+
                        Ideal Number of Children                                          Ideal Number of Children
                              Men           Women                                            Husbands             Wives




Notes: Left-hand side bar graph summarizes means of men and women for DHS 2013-2014 data; right-hand
side bar graph summarizes means of husbands and wives in our sample.



maternal health risk. Men are less likely than women to identify high parity (72.0% of men and
77.7% of women) and advanced maternal age (74.3% of men and 84.6% of women) as risk
factors (table 1, panel B). In a sequence of questions in which respondents are asked to report
the likelihood, on a scale from 0 to 10, that a hypothetical woman with given set characteristics
(age, parity, most recent birth) may experience complications at birth, men report lower scores
than women in six out of seven cases.8
          As documented in Ashraf et al. (2017), a deeply-rooted traditional belief governs people's
beliefs of the causes of maternal mortality in Zambia. Marital infidelity by either spouse is
considered a primary cause of maternal health complications (Nsemukila et al., 1999; Umoiyoho
et al., 2005; Garenne et al., 1997; Gennaro et al., 1998), often discouraging women from seeking
medical help when complications arise (Phiri et al., 2014). Indeed, 55.5% of men and 42.0% of
women report infidelity as a leading cause of maternal mortality, assigning to it about a third
of the weight as a cause of maternal mortality, as opposed to lack of appropriate healthcare and
poor health status.9
          When asked about the wife's direct experience with complications and difficulties at birth,
      8
    See Appendix D1 for the wording of the relevant question.
      9
    When eliciting the perceived causes of maternal mortality, we did not prompt respondents. To elicit the
weight that respondents attribute to different causes, we gave respondents 30 buttons and asked them to allocate
between causes. See the Appendix for the wording of the questions.


                                                              9
men are more likely than women to report that such events have occurred (17.5% of men and
13.8% of women, table 1, panel C). To investigate the root of this difference, we coded the de-
scriptions of these instances of complications. Men are substantially more likely to report mis-
carriages and stillbirths as maternal complications. Once these cases are removed, the majority
of the reported complications involve hemorrhages, c-sections, breech presentations, obstructed
or prolonged labor, and tearing. Men and women have very similar propensity to report such
complications (11.4% of men and 11.3% of women).
    Exposure to maternal mortality episodes within the community is similar for women and
men when immediate family members or close family members are concerned, but substantially
different as the social distance to the victim increases. Only 6.8% of men report knowing a close
friend whose wife has died giving birth, while 11.0% of women know a close friend who has died
giving birth. An even greater gap is observed for distant friends (table 1, panel C). Despite this
gap in experience, only 27.6% of men and 53.4% of women report having attempted to discuss
maternal health risk with their spouse.
    One factor that appears to influence communication about maternal mortality risk is men's
underlying high desired fertility. Indeed, both husbands and wives in our survey report that
communication on maternal health is significantly more likely to occur and to not break down
when men no longer want children compared to when they want children right away (Appendix
table A1).
    Overall, our data indicates that, while maternal health is a relevant source of concern for the
couples in our sample, significant gaps in exposure to information and in the understanding of
maternal health risk exist within the household.



2     Model
    We construct a theoretical framework to examine how fertility decisions are made in the
household, highlighting the role played by communication about maternal health cost. We first
show that ex ante asymmetries of information on maternal health cost may break down the
spousal agreement over fertility. We then show how our intervention may affect communication
and realized fertility.




                                                10
2.1       Environment

       Men and women make fertility decisions, given their preferences for children and the maternal
health cost of fertility. We model these decisions within a static framework as completed fertility
is realized only once in a couple.


Maternal health cost Maternal health cost is a random variable denoted as . In Zambia,
a high-cost environment,  is distributed with probability density function (pdf) f Z () on the
interval [0, 1], with first and second moments equal to Z and  Z respectively. Worldwide,
instead,  has a pdf denoted as f G () on the interval [0, 1], with first and second moments
equal to G and  G respectively. Because Zambia is a (relatively) high maternal health cost
environment, we assume that G < Z .
       To match the descriptive statistics in our baseline sample (see table 1, panel B and panel
C), we assume that there exist two types of households:
       i) the equally uninformed households, in which, prior to the intervention, neither the husband
nor the wife observe the realization of  and they both believe that the wife cost is drawn from
the worldwide distribution (with mean G );
       ii) the asymmetrically informed households, in which the wife knows the cost realization j ,
while the husband does not observe the realization of the cost and believes the cost to be drawn
from the worldwide distribution (with mean G ).10


Actions The woman chooses how many children the household has (n). She does so through a
set of actions that encompass contraceptive use, frequency of sexual intercourse and investments
in her health.
       The husband can provide transfers t to influence the wife's actions, compensating her for
fertility levels that depart from her private optimum.


Preferences Spouses have different preferences that depend on the realized number of chil-
dren. In line with the literature (see for example Rossi (2019)), each spouse wants to minimize
the distance between realized fertility and their net fertility objectives, which are determined by
  10
     In the Appendix we discuss cases in which uninformed spouses know the real cost distribution in Zambia
(with mean Z ). In this case, uninformed agents are not biased. We present the effect of the intervention on
intra-household interactions when either the husband or the wife is treated. Allowing for bias in our baseline
model allows us to explain the evidence from our the baseline data, that suggests that men have systematically
different beliefs compared to women, on average.


                                                     11
the difference between ideal fertility and the maternal health cost. Formally, spouses' preferences
are the following:


                                                                    2
                                       UjH = - H - j - n                 - t

                                                                     2
                                        UjW = - W - j - n                +t

where i is each spouse's ideal fertility, j is the realized maternal health cost, n is the realized
number of children in the household, t  0 is the amount transferred by the man,  is the man's
(finite) disutility of (monetary or in-kind) transfers,11 and 0    1 captures the extent to
which the husband internalizes the maternal health cost.
       To match the empirical distribution of ideal fertility, we introduce the following assumption:

Assumption 1. The average difference in ideal fertility H - W is positive increases as H
increases.

       This assumption reflects the correlation between the spouses' difference in ideal fertility and
the ideal fertility of the husband observed in our data and in DHS data (figure A1).12 This
correlation is expected to arise when the distribution of the ideal fertility of the husband first
order stochastically dominates that of the wife and spouses match assortatively on preferences.


2.2       Benchmark case: fertility under complete information

       We start by describing optimal fertility levels with complete information on maternal health
cost. We define
                                                                     2
                           nH             H
                            j = argmaxn -  - j - n                       = (H - j )

and
                                                                     2
                            nW
                             j = argmaxn - 
                                            W
                                              - j - n                     = (W - j )

as the spouses' fertility private optima in this case.
  11
       could also be interpreted as the Pareto weight of the wife in the household welfare function, representing
her bargaining power in the household. In this case,  should be considered as depending on distribution factors
as the relative education of the wife with respect to that of the husband, her relative income, rights upon divorce,
traditional gender norms.
   12
      The assumption also allows to express our theoretical predictions with respect to H , matching our strati-
fication variables for heterogeneity. However, all the theoretical results related to communication and transfers
are symmetric around H - W = 0.



                                                        12
2.2.1    Structure of household decision making

   The structure of the decision-making is as follows: given the knowledge the husband has of
the wife's preferences, the husband computes the optimal mapping from transfers to fertility n(t)
so that the utility of the wife remains unchanged, and he chooses the optimal level of transfers
t , making a take-it-or-leave-it offer to the wife. Then, optimal fertility n is realized. We have
in mind an efficient contracting environment where the husband can compensate the wife for
her utility loss. The model is solved by backward induction.


2.2.2    Equilibrium transfers and number of children

   First, the husband computes the optimal transfers that would induce a fertility shift in favor
of his own preferences. He knows that the wife will implement her optimum nW
                                                                           j unless she

receives a transfer that compensates her for deviating. We characterize the wife's fertility choice
as a function of transfers in the following way:


                                  nW
                                   j       if               t=0
                         n(t) =
                                  nHt
                                   j       if           t  (W - j - nHt
                                                                     j )
                                                                         2


   where nHt
          j  is the optimal number of children for the husband when transfers occur. Maxi-
mizing the husband's utility function with transfers accounting for the wife's reaction, we have:
        nH
         j +nj
              W
nHt
 j =       1+
                  . At the optimum, the husband chooses t = (nHt   W 2
                                                              j - nj ) > 0.

   In equilibrium, transfers always occur and the optimal number of children in equilibrium is
the optimum for the husband in the presence of such transfers n     Ht
                                                               j = nj .




2.3     Fertility with incomplete information

   We now study equilibrium fertility for the two types of households that we consider, the
equally uninformed households and the asymmetrically uninformed households. In the latter
case, in which the wife has perfect knowledge of the cost realization and the husband does not,
we study the communication game about the cost realization.


2.3.1    Equally uninformed household

   Consider the case in which both spouses do not perfectly observe the realization of the health
cost and they have a biased perception of the distribution of the health cost, that is assumed to

                                                   13
have mean G . The structure of the game is the same as before.


Privately Optimal Fertility Given the new assumption on the distribution of the maternal
health cost, the privately optimal fertility of the wife is now equal to:

                                            1
                     nW
                      b = argmax                [-(W -  - n)2 ]f G ()d = W - G
                                        0

   and that of the husband is equal to

                                        1
                     nH
                      b = argmax            [-(H -  - n)2 ]f G ()d = H - G
                                    0

   The structure of the game is the same as before. The game is solved by backward induction.


Equilibrium transfers and number of children This time, maximising the husband utility
                                                    nH
                                                     b +nb
                                                          W
function with transfers, we have: nHt
                                   b  =                1+
                                                              . Even with biased beliefs, the husband's
incentive compatibility condition is always satisfied, so the optimal fertility in equilibrium is
equal to n     Ht
          b = nb .



2.3.2   Asymmetrically informed household

   We now consider the case in which the wife is perfectly informed about the cost realization
j and the husband is not. The structure of the game is modified as now there is the possibility
of a communication stage in which the wife can try to provide information about her health cost
realization. The structure of the game is modified as follows:

  1. The wife communicates about j

  2. The husband updates j and offers t(n) with commitment

  3. The wife chooses nu


  4. The husband pays t(nu)


Again, the model is solved by backward induction.




                                                      14
Optimal Fertility and Transfers Given that the wife is informed, her privately optimal
fertility is equal to the complete information case: nW
                                                      j = 
                                                           W
                                                             - j , while that of the husband
depends on his beliefs about j , and is equal to nH   H
                                                  u =  - EH [j ], where EH [j ] is the husband's

posterior on the expected maternal health cost of the wife after communication takes place.
Maximizing the husband's utility function with transfers, we have that equilibrium fertility with
                              nH    W
                               u + ( -EH [j ])
transfers is equal to nHt
                       u =          1+
                                               .
   We know from the complete information case that the wife accepts to adapt to the fertility
of the husband if t  (W - j - nHt 2
                               u ) . Given the husband's posterior EH [j ] , the transfer
                                                                           2
                                                        nH    W
                                                         u + ( -EH [j ])
offered to the wife would be t = W - EH [j ] -                1+
                                                                               . This transfer would give a
level of utility to the wife equal or greater than 0 (her outside option) only when j  EH [j ],
hence when the husband attributes a cost to the wife which is higher than the one she actually
faces.
   To understand when it is optimal for the husband to give a transfer to his wife, we need to
study the communication game in the first stage.


Communication Studying information sharing by the wife and information updating by the
husband, we have the following lemma.

Lemma 1. When the wife perfectly observes the realization of j , no informative communication
occurs between her and her husband, unless preferences are aligned (H -W = 0 and 1- <  + ).
Under Assumption 1, transfers and fertility behave as follows:

  (i) For a given W , when H is high enough, transfers occur and fertility is based on the
         husband's optimal choice;

  (i) otherwise, fertility follows the woman's optimum nj = 
                                                             W
                                                               - j .

Proof. See Appendix B
   The lack of information transmission is linked to the control the wife has on fertility: when
transfers do not occur, the wife implements her private optimum, that implies no utility loss.
When she has to transmit information, her incentives are such that she tries to push transfers
beyond her utility loss, to reach an indirect utility higher than her back-up option. Since these
incentives are independent from the cost realisation, no information can be transmitted and a
pooling equilibrium is the only equilibrium possible.


                                                   15
2.4     Fertility and communication after the intervention

   We now discuss the effect of an informational intervention that credibly communicates j to
participants, such as the one in our study.


2.4.1   Wife treated

   When the wife is treated, she gets a perfectly informative signal on her cost realization.
When the wife is already informed prior to the intervention, no change occurs. When she
and her husband are uninformed, however, the households may be affected by the information.
Studying the aggregate change in communication and fertility after the intervention when the
wife is treated, we have the following result:

Proposition 1. After the intervention, when the wife is treated, no informative communication
occurs between husband and wife. Under Assumption 1, when H is low, transfers and fertility
decrease in households in which the wife was ex ante uninformed. When H is high, transfers
slightly increase and fertility slightly decreases in households in which the wife was ex ante
uninformed.

Proof. See Appendix B


2.4.2   Husband treated

   In the husband treatment arm, the spouse getting a perfectly informative signal is the hus-
band. In this case, all types of households are affected. The households in which the wife was
informed and the husband was not (the asymmetrically informed households) become households
in which everybody is fully informed. For the other type of households, the equally uninformed
ones, we now have asymmetry of information (but reversed by gender), and we have to study
the information transmission from the husband to the wife.


Optimal actions when the husband is informed We now analyze the case in which the
husband is perfectly informed about the cost realization and the wife is not. This corresponds
to our intervention treatment, in which we provide precise information on maternal health to
the husband, whenever the wife is not already perfectly informed herself.
   The main difference with the case in which the wife has to communicate comes from the fact
that the husband transmits information through the transfer he offers to the wife, and that he

                                                 16
can get to his private optimum by offering the appropriate transfer. In other words, transfers
can provide a signal of the health cost realization to the wife.


Structure of household decision making Again, the structure of the game is modified
to account for the possibility of communication between husband and wife. The husband can
provide information about the health cost realization j to the wife. The structure of the game
is as follows:

   1. The husband offers t(n(j )) signaling j

   2. The wife updates about j and chooses n

   3. The husband pays t(n )

Transfers are based on the information set of the wife and fertility on the signal given by the
husband. The model is again solved by backward induction.


Equilibrium transfers and number of children The equilibrium fertility that the husband
                                                               nh (m(j ))+ (W -m(j ))
asks when proposing the transfers to the wife is nHt
                                                  v =                    1+
                                                                                      .   This constitutes an
informative signal of the cost realisation since the husband commits to pay transfers based on
this fertility level.
       Transfers are aligned to the wife's information set. When the wife has a posterior equal
to EW [j ], transfers are determined based on the fertility outcome and the wife receives t =
(W - EW [j ] - nHt 2
                v ) , so that her level of indirect utility is equal to 0, her outside option.
                                                                                               13




Communication To study information sharing by the husband and information updating by
the wife, we have to understand the husband's incentives to truthfully report the maternal health
cost j .
       When  is sufficiently high and  is sufficiently low, the husband always gets the highest
level of utility telling the truth, so truthful communication occurs in equilibrium. When  is
very high, the husband has no incentives to tell the truth, and no communication occurs in
equilibrium. This is due to the fact that the wife is aware that any information sharing by the
husband would aim at minimizing transfers, regardless of the realization of . For intermediate
  13
    The husband always prefers to make a transfer since, without a transfer, fertility would coincide with the
wife's ideal fertility in expectation nW = W - EW [j ].


                                                     17
levels of  and  , there is some information updating, without full information transmission.
The information updating depends on the difference in ideal fertility between the husband and
the wife (see the proof of proposition 2 for the details).
       As soon as some information transmission occurs, average fertility is affected as well. Com-
munication, transfers and fertility are affected in the following way:

Proposition 2. After the intervention, when the husband is treated and both spouses were
ex ante uninformed, for  sufficiently high and H sufficiently small, or for  sufficiently low,
informative communication about j occurs. Transfers increase in all households with sufficiently
low H . Fertility decreases among:

  (i) households in which the wife was informed and H is high;

 (ii) households in which the wife was previously uninformed and H is low.

(iii) households in which the wife was previously uninformed and  is low.

Proof. See Appendix B
       The results on information transmission between husband and wife rely on the specificity
of the fertility agreement: the husband can implement his optimal fertility through transfers.
When the difference in ideal fertility or the cost of transfers are sufficiently low, optimal transfers
differ across types and this implies a unique separating equilibrium. For higher levels of differ-
ence in ideal fertility or transfers cost, partial or no information transmission occur. Standard
refinements of equilibria apply.14


2.5       Testable predictions

       In the previous subsections, we formally described how communication, transfers and fertility
are affected by the intervention: while average fertility is expected to decrease both when we
treat the husband and the wife, communication and transfers evolve very differently across the
two treatments, leading to different implications for policy purposes.
       We can hence formulate several predictions for how our outcomes of interest would be affected
by the intervention, that we can formally test using our experimental data from Zambia. The
first two predictions relate to primary outcomes are: maternal health knowledge and fertility.
  14
    NITS condition applies for values of parameters not satisfying the monotonicity of the message function
defined by the differential equation 5 (Chen, Kartik and Sobel, 2007).When a separating equilibrium exists, the
intuitive criterion apply (Cho and Kreps, 1987). See the proof in appendix for details.

                                                      18
Prediction 1. Fertility. After the intervention, fertility decreases both when men are treated
and when women are treated, with a stronger average effect when men are treated.

Prediction 2. Communication and beliefs updating. After the intervention,

  (i) when the wife is treated, no information transmission occurs between husband and wife and
     beliefs evolve on average only for the wife;

 (ii) when the husband is treated, information transmission occurs when interests are sufficiently
     aligned and beliefs evolve on average for both spouses.

   The third prediction is about a secondary outcome, affected indirectly by the intervention:
the transfers between husband and wife.

Prediction 3. Transfers. After the intervention,

  (i) when the wife is treated, transfers to the wife decrease on average;

 (ii) when the husband is treated, transfers to the wife increase on average.

   Finally, we present some predictions about heterogeneous effects of the intervention along
two dimensions: the idiosyncratic health cost faced by the wife and the fertility preferences of
the husband.

Prediction 4. Ex ante health cost of the wife After the intervention, heterogeneous effects
according to the ex ante health cost of the wife are as follows:

  (i) when j is low, fertility does not change neither when the husband is treated nor when the
     wife is treated;

 (ii) when j is high, fertility decreases both when the husband is treated and when the wife is
     treated.

Prediction 5. Ex ante fertility preferences After the intervention, heterogeneous effects
according to the husband's ex ante fertility preferences are as follows:

  (i) communication occurs when the husband is treated and H is low;




                                                19
 (ii) fertility decreases both when the wife is treated and when the husband is treated. When
      the wife is treated, the effect is concentrated in households in which H is low. When the
      husband is treated, fertility decreases for any value of H , with a strongest effect when H
      is low.

    Prediction 2 is tested in sections 5.5 and 5.6. Prediction 1 is tested in section 5.2 and
prediction 3 is tested in section 5.7. Finally, the heterogeneous effects described in prediction 4
and 5 above are tested in section 5.8.



3     The experiment
    To study and compare the effect of providing information about maternal mortality to men
and women, we designed a randomized experiment that also allows us to identify gender dif-
ferences in the responsiveness to information separately from potential gender differences in
take-up.


3.1    Design

    Our intervention experimentally varied the provision of information about maternal health
risk to either the husband or the wife of each household relative to a control group. Both spouses
in all households were invited to participate in a gender-specific group meeting. Each household
was randomly assigned to one of three study arms (see table 2):
    i) The husband was exposed to both a maternal mortality curriculum and a family planning
curriculum (F P + M M )h and the wife was exposed to the family planning curriculum F P w .
This arm is denoted in short as F P + M M h .
    ii) The wife was exposed to both the maternal mortality curriculum and the family planning
curriculum (F P + M M )w and the husband was exposed to the family planning F P h curriculum.
This arm is denoted in short as F P + M M w .
    iii) Both spouses received the FP curriculum. This arm is hence denoted in short as F P .
    In subsection 3.2, we discuss the rationale for the design and its implications for identification.




                                                  20
                                  Table 2: Experimental design


                                                    Husband           Wife
                       Husband treated            F P + MMh           FP
                       Wife treated                   FP          F P + MMw
                       Control                        FP              FP



3.2    Identification and empirical specification

   The primary rationale for our design is the intent to identify the differential effects of provid-
ing information on maternal mortality to men and women. Because the information is delivered
in a group meeting setting and alongside information about family planning, we have ensured
that all participants are exposed to both the group meeting setting and the family planning
information. While this design choice may make some effects harder to detect, given that the
control group may be influenced by the family planning information itself, it also allows for the
unambiguous identification of the effects of the maternal mortality curriculum.
   Our experiment focuses on two sets of empirical objects. First, we are interested in separately
estimating the average treatment effects of delivering both maternal health and family planning
information ((F P + M M )j ) to each spouse j  {h, w} compared to just delivering family
planning information ((F P )j ) on a hypothetical outcome of interest Y , which is often measured
at the household level (e.g. take up of family planning and fertility) or at the individual level (e.g.
knowledge of maternal health, attitudes towards family planning), for either the treated spouse
(direct effect) or the untreated spouse (indirect or spillover effect). In order to estimate this
object, we would ideally estimate AT E j = E [Y (F P + M M )j ] - E [Y (F P )j ]. The second object
we are interested in estimating is the comparison of the (direct or spillover) impact of providing
the information about maternal mortality for men compared to women on household-level and
individual-level outcomes, that is, for example, AT E = AT E h - AT E w .
   The main challenge associated with estimating these objects is that, in our design, partic-
ipants choose to attend a community meeting, generating an imperfect take-up problem. To
address this challenge, we can adopt the standard double-blind approach: the surveyors who in-
vite households to the community meetings do not know what type of meeting each individual is
invited to and only one type of invitation card is provided to participants in all treatment arms,
ensuring that selection into participation in the community workshop is the same within genders,


                                                  21
and hence that we can estimate a treatment-on-the-treated effect T OT j within husbands and
wives separately.
       Even with double-blind invitations, we may be left with a second concern: the pool of
women and men who decide to attend the community meeting may come from different types of
households, if the characteristics that govern the selection into participation of treated men differ
from those governing the selection of treated women.15 If this is the case, then the difference in
the treatment-on-the-treated effects by gender may not only be driven by the differential impact
of maternal health information on men compared to women, but also by the differential take-up:


           E [Y (F P + M M )h - Y (F P )h |ph = 1] - [E [Y (F P + M M )w - Y (F P )w |pw = 1]]


       where pj takes value 1 when spouse j attends the community meeting and 0 otherwise (take-
up).
       To address this issue, we invited both spouses to attend workshops together, and hence hav-
ing a three-arm design in which men and women in all households receive information on family
planning, while the treated spouse receives maternal health information as well. Considering
households in which both spouses have attended a community workshop implies estimating
T OT , which identifies the difference in the treatment-on-the-treated effects estimated on di-
rectly comparable samples:


                 T OT = E [ Y (F P + M M h ) - Y (F P ) |ph = 1, pw = 1]

                          - E [(Y (F P + M M w ) - Y (F P )) |ph = 1, pw = 1]

                          = E [ Y (F P + M M h ) - Y (F P + M M w ) |ph = 1, pw = 1].                         (1)


       The cost of achieving this comparability is that we can estimate the effect of receiving a
maternal mortality intervention when both spouses are exposed to the family planning curriculum
(T OT j = E [(Y (F P + M M j ) - Y (F P )) |ph = 1, pw = 1]). This set up can then allows us to
study both direct effects of the intervention on treated respondent and indirect effects on the
respondent's spouse.
  15
     Suppose, for example, that women from more conservative households are unable to attend a meeting on their
own, while their husbands would be willing to participate. If conservative households have different treatment
effects from the rest of the sample, we may detect a difference between treatment effects across arms that depends
on take-up and not on differential effects across genders.



                                                       22
    Our estimation equations follow straightforwardly from our design. When considering out-
come Y for household i, we estimate the following specification on the sample of treated house-
holds:


                   Yi =  + H Husband T reatedi + W W if e T reatedi + Xi +                   i                (2)


    Variables Husband T reatedi = 1 F P + M M h              i
                                                                 and W if e T reatedi = 1 [F P + M M w ]i are
indicators for assignment to either the husband's or the wife's treatment arm. Hence, H and
W identify the average treatment-on-the-treated effects for men and women respectively, while
their difference captures the difference in the effect of treating a different spouse (equation 1).
In the tables, we report the p-value of this F-test. The vector of baseline control variables Xi
includes wife's age, husband's age, wife's education, husband's education, number of children,
age of last child born before the group meeting, number of people who attended the group
meeting, modern contraceptive use at baseline, quadratic weekly income plus the stratification
variables.16
    We also consider specifications in which the outcome variable is measured at the individual,
rather than household, level for spouse j  {h, w} in household i. Our design allows us to
compare the direct effect of treatment on each spouse with the spillover (indirect treatment)
effect on the partner, by estimating


Yij = H
      h                                           h
        Husband Respondentj × Husband T reatedi + H Husband Respondentj × W if e T reatedi
     w                                          w
   + H W if e Respondentj × Husband T reatedi + W W if e Respondentj × W if e T reatedi

   + Xi + Xi × Husband Respondentj + i,j                                                                      (3)


where Husband Respondentj = 1 [j = h] and W if e Respondentj = 1 [j = w] are dummies
                                                                h
capturing the identity of the respondent. Here, the coefficient H represents the direct effect of
treating the husband on the husband's outcome variable Yih and W
                                                               h
                                                                 represent the spillover effect
of treating the wife on the husband's outcome Yih . Conversely, the coefficient H
                                                                                w
                                                                                  represents the
spillover effect of treating the husband on the wife's outcome variable Yiw and W
                                                                                w
                                                                                  represent
  16
     Stratification variables are a dummy for whether wife over 35, a dummy for whether the couple has no
children, for whether the wife thinks that the husband wants another child later, for whether the wife thinks the
husband does not want another child, for whether the husband does not know any woman who died at childbirth,
for whether the wife is actively trying to get pregnant, and variables for block size and availability of baseline
data.


                                                       23
the direct effect of treating the wife on the wife's outcome Yiw . We report the p-values of the
following F-tests:
         a) the difference between direct effects, i.e. between the effect of treating the husband on
                                                        h   w
his answer and that of treating the wife on her answer (H = W ), denoted as Direct treatment
effects F-test p-value ;
         b) the difference between spillover effects, i.e. between the effect of treating the husband on
                                                                         w   h
the wife's answer and that of treating the wife on the husband's answer (H = W ), denoted as
Symmetry of intra-household spillover effects F-test p-value ;
         c) the difference between direct and spillover effects on the husband, i.e. between the effect
                                                                     h   h
of treating the husband himself or his wife on the husband's answer (H = W ), denoted as
Direct vs. spillover effect on husband F-test p-value ;
         d) the difference between direct and spillover effects on the wife, i.e. between the effect of
                                                               w   w
treating the wife herself or her husband on the wife's answer (W = H ), denoted as Direct vs.
spillover effect on wife F-test p-value.



4          Implementation and data collection
         The study involved two waves of a panel household survey, administered separately to both
the husband and the wife of each household, and a randomized controlled trial.


4.1         Sample

         Couples were recruited from the catchment area of Chipata and Chaisa Clinics, located in the
poor suburbs of Lusaka. The sample is representative of the peri-urban population of Zambia.
Eligibility for the study followed some exclusion criteria meant either to protect women that
may face adverse consequences if using hormonal contraception or to exclude women that could
not adjust their fertility behavior to the information provided in the intervention.17
    17
     Any couple in which the wife was aged between 18 and 40 and lived in the catchment area of the Chipata
and Chaisa clinic was eligible to be recruited. A random-address generator was used to recruit couples. The
following exclusion criteria was agreed upon with the competent Research Ethics Committees: (i) households in
which the wife had diabetes, heart disease or high blood pressure at baseline; (ii) households in which the wife
was younger than 18 years of age or older than 40 at baseline; (iii) households in which the wife was less than
8 weeks postpartum; (iv) households in which the wife has been sterilized or had a hysterectomy; (v) men or
women who were not currently married; (vi) households in which the wife was pregnant at any point between
the recruitment and the intervention phase; (vii) households in which the spouses were actively trying to have a
baby when invited for the intervention; (viii) households in which the wife was on long-term contraceptives when


                                                      24
4.2     Data collection and intervention

    The first wave of data consisted of a baseline survey in the first visit administered both to the
husband and the wife. Baseline data collection occurred between August and December 2014.
715 couples were interviewed, with the husband and the wife surveyed separately. The sample
was re-screened prior to the actual start of the intervention, which occurred in November 2015.
In order to determine which treatment arm each household was assigned to, we randomized
treatment at the couple level stratifying on the following characteristics: (i) whether the couple
had a child or not; (ii) whether the wife was older or younger than 35 years old; (iii) whether
the couple wanted another child at baseline; (iv) residential size of the block in which the couple
lived; (v) whether the wife believed that the husband wanted another child; (vi) whether the wife
believed that the husband wanted another child as soon as possible; (vii) whether the husband
knew someone who died at childbirth.
    The intervention stage took place between November 2015 and May 2016. It involved a
community meeting - in which spouses would receive information on maternal health related
issues and family planning - occurring during weekends. Households were invited to attend on a
weekly roll-out basis. We randomly varied the first intervention week by treatment arm for each
household. To avoid contamination across treatment arms, each type of community meeting
took place in a different time slot. This implied that there was a non-negligible amount of time
between the randomization and the actual invitation to the intervention.
    The lag between the baseline data collection and the intervention led to a strong reduction
in eligibility in the sample. Hence, between October 2015 and February 2016, 442 households
were subsequently included in the sample. For these households, a subset of baseline questions
was asked to the wife for stratification purposes.18 Thus, the sample of households eligible for
intervention consists of 1,137 couples. Of these, in total, 772 households were eligible to be
invited to the intervention. This implies that 21% of the sample became ineligible between
baseline and intervention, mostly due to pregnancy and to shifts outside the catchment area
of our partner clinics. Recruitment and invitations were double-blind and drop-outs occurred
invited for the intervention. Exclusion criteria (iv) to (vii) relate to our study objectives, but are not medically
motivated.
  18
     These additional couples were enrolled in the study if they satisfied the eligibility criteria and consented to
participate. While other study participants took part in a baseline survey before being invited to community
meetings, these couples did not undergo a complete baseline. We recruited them first, then went back and
conducted the invitations to community meetings, similar to the rest of the sample.



                                                        25
before treatment assignment, and hence should be orthogonal.
   Participants were asked to show up for the meetings together with their spouse, and were
separated into different rooms for parallel, gender-specific sessions. Participants were not told
the content of their partner's session. Each session involved approximately 20 participants and
was led by two trained local facilitators, one man and one woman, who worked with meetings
of men and women to ensure we do not risk identifying a facilitator-specific effect. In the FP
curriculum, the educators discussed the types of modern contraceptives available at the clinic,
dispelled common misconceptions surrounding family planning, and referred the participants to
the public clinic for further information. In the FP+MM curriculum, the educators delivered
this same information, but also added informational content about maternal health risk. The
material focused on the magnitude of the risk of maternal mortality in Zambia, the primary
medical causes of maternal mortality and morbidity and the risk factors such as low birth
spacing, high parity and advanced age.
   The trained facilitators followed a scripted curriculum, helped by visual material that was
designed for the study. These features allowed our team to extensively monitor the information
presented and ensure consistency across all groups. All scripts are included in Appendix C. Illus-
trated materials, designed by a local artist for the study and organized in flipcharts, supported
the group meeting.
   We tested and implemented a number of steps to maximize participants' attendance to the
community workshops. First, workshops were held on weekends. The exact time of the work-
shops was decided based on focus group discussions and a small survey. Assignment of workshop
time slots to study arms was randomized. Second, couples who missed their first community
workshops were re-invited again several additional times. Third, each spouse received 25 Zam-
bian Kwacha (approximately 5 USD at the time of the intervention) as transport reimbursement,
an amount comparable to the amounts households receive in Lusaka for attending this type of
events. Last, a raffle was associated with each set of workshops, and only participants to the
workshop received a raffle ticket. Each couple had approximately a 1 in 10 chances of winning
the prize, which was a small electric cooking stove. In the end, a total of 562 attended couples
out of 772 (73% of invited couples) attended a group meeting.
   After the group meetings, we used a Becker-DeGroot-Marschak mechanism to elicit the
participants' willingness to pay (WTP). We elicited the husband's WTP for a voucher to get



                                               26
priority access to family planning services at the public clinic. The facilitators explained to
the participants that the voucher granted access to a nurse dedicated to the study, who would
provide them with information about family planning and with any method of their choice.
         Finally, between October 2016 and March 2017, we collected follow-up data for the house-
holds that attended the intervention, with an attrition rate of 10%: for those households, we
recollected measures of knowledge of maternal health, use of and attitudes toward contracep-
tion, balance of power, fertility demand and realized fertility. Attrition is comparable across
treatment arms.



5          Empirical results
         We begin by examining our main outcome variable, which is realized fertility. We then move
to study whether differences in realized fertility between the treatment groups and the control
group arise from differences in contraceptive use and are motivated by differences in the demand
for children. Last, we examine whether communication between spouses and respondents' own
beliefs change as a result of the intervention. We also examine heterogeneous treatment effects
by baseline demand for children.


5.1         Balance

         The intervention sample is balanced on both demographic characteristics and baseline fertility
preferences. We also verify that there is no selective attrition across treatment arms from
participation in the intervention and endline completion (Appendix table A3).


5.2         Realized and expected fertility

         In table 3, we report estimates of realized and expected fertility outcomes at endline: whether
the wife is currently pregnant (column 1), the probability of giving birth starting at 8 months
following the intervention (column 2), the likelihood of having more children on the 0-10 ladder
scale as assessed by the wife (column 3) and by the husband (column 4), and the spacing between
the intervention and birth (column 5).19
    19
   To construct the birth spacing variable, we assume a due date of 4.5 month after the survey for pregnant
women.



                                                     27
                              Table 3: Realized and Expected Fertility


                                    (1)              (2)           (3)              (4)             (5)
                                  Wife:            Wife:         Wife:          Husband:         Wife:
                                 Currently       Became        Likelihood      Likelihood        Birth
                                 Pregnant        Pregnant      Have More       Have More        Spacing
                                                 Post-Int.        Kids            Kids            (mo)
 Husband Treated (H )             -0.052*         -0.051*       -0.81**          -0.60*           0.28
                                  (0.029)         (0.030)        (0.36)          (0.31)          (0.48)
 Wife Treated (W )                 -0.040          -0.033         -0.62           -0.36           -0.20
                                  (0.031)         (0.033)        (0.38)          (0.30)          (0.43)
 Stratification Variables           Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
 Demographic Controls               Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
 F-test p-value (H =W )             0.70            0.60          0.56             0.45            0.32
 Mean of Control Group              0.12            0.17          6.45             5.89           9.98
 Observations                       534             534            534             516             534

Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. SE clustered at the meeting level. Stratifying control variables include
if couple has children, wife over 35, wife thinks that husband wants another child later, wife thinks husband
does not want another child, husband does not know of women who died at childbirth, block size, and baseline
data present. Demographic control variables include wife age, husband age, wife education, husband education,
number of children, age of last child born before meeting, wife is actively trying to get pregnant, baseline
contraceptive use, and household weekly income.


    When the husband is treated, we observe a 5.2pp decrease in the probability of the wife being
pregnant at endline and a 5.1pp decrease in the probability of giving birth after the intervention
(in both cases, p < 0.10). The former corresponds to a 43% reduction relative to the control
group, the latter corresponds to a 30% reduction. No significant effect is observed when the
wife is treated, but we cannot rule out that the effect of treating wives or husbands on fertility
is the same (the p-values for the F-test are reported in table 3 and are equal to 0.70 and 0.60
respectively).
    Assessed likelihood of future births is also significantly lower when the husband is treated both
in the wife's report and in the husband's one (with 13% and 10% reductions relative to the control
group, respectively), again with no discernible difference with respect to the W if e T reated case.
In Appendix figure A2 , we plot the coefficients of a set of linear probability models in which
the dependent variable takes value 1 if the ladder point answer is greater or equal to the value
reported on the horizontal axis. Both in the case of the husband's assessment (panel a) and in
the wife's assessment (panel b) the reduction in the ladder point answer is driven by the highest
values of assessed likelihood.


                                                      28
       Finally, we examine birth spacing from the time of the intervention till the occurrence of birth,
assuming that women who are pregnant at the time of the survey are 4.5 months pregnant. We
find no difference in this measure of spacing by treatment arm (column 5), due to the fact that
the followup time horizon allows us to observe pregnancies better than births. Overall, the
findings are in line with prediction 1 of the model.


5.3       Demand for children

       In table 4, we examine the effect of the intervention on two measures of desired fertility: a
dummy for whether the respondent wants another child (column 1) and a dummy for whether
the respondent wants another child over the next two years (column 2). We also examine each
respondent's belief about their spouse's desired fertility: a dummy for whether the respondent
believes that the spouse wants at least another child (column 3), and a dummy for whether the
respondent believes that the spouse wants more children than self (column 4) or fewer (column
5).
       We find that treated husbands are 7.3pp less likely to report to want another child (p < 0.10,
an 11% reduction relative to the control group), 13pp less likely to believe that their wife wants
another child (p < 0.01, a 17% reduction relative to the control group) and 7.9pp less likely to
report that they believe the wife wants more children than themselves (a 34% reduction relative
to the control group). Effects on the other outcome variables exhibit similar magnitudes but are
imprecisely estimated. Husbands whose wife is treated do not exhibit any statistically significant
change in their reported desired fertility or in their belief about their wife's desired fertility. We
can, therefore, rule out that the effect on these outcomes of treating the husband is the same as
the effect of treating the wife (p-values are 0.01, 0.03 and 0.10 respectively).


5.4       Contraceptive use

       After the intervention, men exposed to maternal mortality information do not exhibit higher
willingness-to-pay for a voucher that grants access to contraceptives at the clinic (table 5 column
1) and, in fact, are no more likely to use it.20 At endline, their wives, or wives who have been
  20
    The voucher for free contraceptives was provided for comparability with Ashraf, Field and Lee (2014).
However, since we conducted the study nine years after the one in Ashraf, Field and Lee (2014), the value of such
a voucher is greatly reduced because of the vast improvement in access to contraceptives in the years preceding
our study. For example, use of modern contraceptives by prime age women in Zambia increased from 33% to



                                                       29
                                      Table 4: Demand for Children


                                                      (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)
                                                    Wants        Wants     Believes     Believes     Believes
                                                   More Kids   Ano. Kid     Spouse      Spouse       Spouse
                                                               in < 2yrs    Wants        Wants        Wants
                                                                           Ano. Kid      More       Less Than
                                                                                       Than Self        Self
 H Respondent                                       -0.073*      -0.064    -0.13***    -0.079**        0.012
                         h
       × H Treated (H      )                        (0.039)     (0.050)     (0.035)     (0.039)      (0.041)
 H Respondent                                        0.020       -0.032      -0.037     -0.0094       -0.016
                          h
       × W Treated (W        )                      (0.036)     (0.050)     (0.040)     (0.045)      (0.046)
 W Respondent                                        -0.016       0.018      -0.013      0.067        -0.051
                         w
       × H Treated (H      )                        (0.040)     (0.053)     (0.044)     (0.054)      (0.032)
 W Respondent                                        0.033       -0.027      0.017     -0.00053        0.017
                          w
       × W Treated (W        )                      (0.038)     (0.049)     (0.038)     (0.054)      (0.033)
 Stratification Variables                             Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes           Yes
 Demographic Controls                                 Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes           Yes
 H Respondent Interactions                            Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes           Yes
 F-test p-values:
                               h  w
 Direct treatment effects (H     =W )                0.05        0.56        0.00         0.26        0.92
                                         w   h
 Symmetry of intra-hh spillover effects (H =W  )     0.50        0.45        0.67         0.30        0.52
                                         h   h
 Direct vs. spillover effect on husband (H =W )      0.01        0.51        0.03         0.10        0.54
                                      w  w
 Direct vs. spillover effect on wife (W =H )         0.30        0.40        0.43         0.15        0.04
 Mean of Control Group for H                         0.67        0.36        0.75         0.23        0.19
 Mean of Control Group for W                         0.70        0.29        0.73         0.24        0.15
 Observations                                        1050        1050        1018         1050        1050


Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. SE clustered at the meeting level. Stratifying control variables include
if couple has children, wife over 35, wife thinks that the husband wants another child later, wife thinks husband
does not want another child, husband does not know of women who died at childbirth, block size, and baseline
data present. Demographic control variables include wife age, husband age, wife education, husband education,
number of children, age of last child born before meeting, wife is actively trying to get pregnant, baseline
contraceptive use, and household weekly income.



exposed to maternal mortality information directly, do not report a higher use of modern or
traditional contraceptives (columns 2 to 6). Hence, comparing self-reported contraceptive use
between the treatment groups and the control group at endline suggests that the intervention
had no detectable effect on this margin. This outcome may reflect the challenge of measur-
ing contraceptive use with extensive margin questions in an environment where self-reported
extensive margin use is very high.
    To further investigate the channels by which the fertility effects may arise, we exploit the
fact that, for 330 households in the endline sample, we have baseline information about use,
attitudes and knowledge of contraceptives. We can hence compare the evolution of behavior
and beliefs across treatment arms between the baseline survey and the endline survey.
45% between the 2007 and the 2014 waves of the Zambia Demographic and Health Survey.


                                                        30
                     Table 5: Demand for and Use of Modern Contraceptives


                                (1)          (2)             (3)          (4)         (5)           (6)
                             Husband:       Wife:           Wife:       Wife:        Wife:         Wife:
                             WTP for      Using any         Using      Consis-       Using         Using
                             voucher       contrac.        modern       tently       trad.        contrac.
                                                           contrac.   using any     contrac.       while
                                                                       contrac.                   partner
                                                                          for                     unaware
                                                                       contrac.
                                                                        users
 Husband Treated (H )           0.23         -0.027         -0.018      0.039         -0.026        -0.026
                               (0.53)       (0.042)        (0.049)     (0.030)       (0.038)       (0.020)
 Wife Treated (W )                           -0.017         -0.022      0.015          0.013        -0.025
                                            (0.045)        (0.050)     (0.032)       (0.040)       (0.024)
 Stratification Variables       Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes
 Demographic Controls           Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes
 F-test p-value (H =W )                       0.84           0.95        0.40          0.33          0.96
 Mean of Control Group         9.26           0.78           0.68        0.93          0.15          0.05
 Observations                  533            534            534         354            534          534


Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. SE clustered at the meeting level. Stratifying control variables include
if couple has children, wife over 35, wife thinks that husband wants another child later, wife thinks husband
does not want another child, husband does not know of women who died at childbirth, block size, and baseline
data present. Demographic control variables include wife age, husband age, wife education, husband education,
number of children, age of last child born before meeting, wife is actively trying to get pregnant, baseline
contraceptive use, and household weekly income.



    We begin by examining changes between baseline and endline in contraceptive use on the
intensive margin according to the wife's reports. We find no change in the occurrence or the
frequency of sexual intercourse, but, for the arm in which the husband was treated, we find
a decrease in the instances of reported unprotected sexual intercourse (table 6), concentrated
among those women who do not consistently use contraceptives.
    We also examine changes in attitudes towards contraceptives, as reported in Appendix table
A9, and in particular whether respondents agree or disagree with statements on contraceptives
can fuel infidelity, grant women full control over fertility, and be bad for a woman's health.
As expected, all experimental arms exhibit an improvement in attitudes about contraceptives,
particularly among men. This is consistent with the fact that all participants in the study were
exposed to a family planning curriculum. In the absence of an experimental arm that does not
receive the F P curriculum nor the M M curriculum, it is not possible, however, to attribute
this shift to our intervention rather than to other changes occurring in the community, or to an
experimenter demand effect.

                                                      31
Table 6: T-test: Evolution from Baseline to Endline - Contraceptive Use during Sex with
Husband


                                                  Baseline Endline     E-B Difference   SE     Obs
           Any Sex
           Hus Treated                              0.87     0.82          -0.05        0.05   121
           Wife Treated                             0.84     0.77          -0.07        0.05   105
           Control                                  0.79     0.82          0.03         0.05   95
           Sex frequency past week
           Hus Treated                              2.39     2.46          0.07         0.23   121
           Wife Treated                             2.15     2.03          -0.12        0.21   105
           Control                                  2.19     2.46          0.27         0.31   95
           Times using contrac. past week
           Hus Treated                              1.78     2.46         0.68***       0.25   85
           Wife Treated                             1.89     1.90           0.01        0.22   70
           Control                                  1.83     1.79          -0.03        0.27   63
           Proportion using contrac. past week
           Hus Treated                              0.70     0.79          0.09         0.07   85
           Wife Treated                             0.80     0.81          0.01         0.06   70
           Control                                  0.70     0.68          -0.02        0.08   63
           Unprotected Sex
           Hus Treated                              0.27     0.17          -0.10*       0.05   121
           Wife Treated                             0.20     0.16           -0.04       0.05   105
           Control                                  0.21     0.22           0.01        0.05   95

                                     *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Mean comparison between baseline and endline, by treatment arm.
Variables are from wife's report.


5.5    Knowledge of maternal mortality and morbidity

   To study how the intervention affected the respondents' knowledge of maternal mortality
and morbidity, both directly on the treated spouse and indirectly on the partner, we examine
the respondents' knowledge of the primary risk factors and a set of ordinal measures of risk
perceptions. In table 7, we measure whether the respondent reports any of the main factors
affecting maternal mortality and morbidity (advanced age, high parity and low birth spacing,
column 2). As expected, we find that treated husbands are more likely to identify these variables
as key risk factors in their reports, relative to the control group (a 14pp increase in total,
p < 0.01). A similar, but less stark increase can be observed in the reports of the husbands of
treated wives. Treated wives are also more likely to identify these variables as key risk factors
in their reports, relative to the control group. Also, wives of treated men exhibit small and
imprecise changes in their understanding of risk factors.

                                                   32
              Table 7: Perceived Risk Factors of Maternal Mortality and Morbidity


                                                       (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)
                                                   Months to   Any of the   Correct on   Correct on   Correct on
                                                    recover      3 Risk        age         parity       either
                                                                Factors
 H Respondent                                         1.09      0.14***        0.050        0.044       0.039
                         h
       × H Treated (H      )                         (1.89)     (0.051)      (0.041)      (0.033)      (0.025)
 H Respondent                                       -3.86**      0.076        -0.062       -0.069       -0.031
                          h
       × W Treated (W        )                       (1.67)     (0.050)      (0.038)      (0.043)      (0.025)
 W Respondent                                       7.75**       0.029         0.024        0.030      0.034*
                         w
       × H Treated (H      )                         (3.07)     (0.045)      (0.028)      (0.032)      (0.019)
 W Respondent                                         1.35       0.088*        0.016       0.022       -0.0061
                          w
       × W Treated (W        )                       (1.84)     (0.052)      (0.030)      (0.026)      (0.023)
 Stratification Variables                             Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes
 Demographic Controls                                 Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes
 H Respondent Interactions                            Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes
 F-test p-values:
                               h  w
 Direct treatment effects (H     =W )                 0.92       0.46         0.52         0.60         0.16
                                         w   h
 Symmetry of intra-hh spillover effects (H =W  )      0.00       0.50         0.08         0.07         0.03
                                         h   h
 Direct vs. spillover effect on husband (H =W )       0.01       0.18         0.01         0.01         0.00
                                      w  w
 Direct vs. spillover effect on wife (W =H )          0.04       0.26         0.75         0.79         0.03
 Mean of Control Group for H                         28.85       0.30         0.83         0.84         0.92
 Mean of Control Group for W                         36.22       0.47         0.91         0.87         0.95
 Observations                                        1050        1049         1050         1050         1050


Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. SE clustered at the meeting level. Stratifying control variables include
if couple has children, wife over 35, wife thinks that husband wants another child later, wife thinks husband
does not want another child, husband does not know of women who died at childbirth, block size, and baseline
data present. Demographic control variables include wife age, husband age, wife education, husband education,
number of children, age of last child born before meeting, wife is actively trying to get pregnant, baseline
contraceptive use, and household weekly income.



    With respect to risk perceptions, we examine differences in the assessment of risk on a 0-
10 ladder scale for different hypothetical women (Appendix table A4, columns 1 to 6) and for
the wife herself (column 7). When examining effects on the ladder point answers, two similar
patterns arise. When we examine the assessment of the risk of a young woman, we find no
effect on average nor across the distribution of ladder point answers (figure 4, panel a and b).
However, when asked to assess the risk of a hypothetical older woman, treated men significantly
raise their assessment (direct effect), as do their wives (spillover effect). Men whose wife are
treatment do not raise their assessment (no spillover effects), while their wife does (direct effect,
panel c and d).
    Similarly, when we examine the assessment of the risk of a woman with high or low parity
(Appendix figure A3), we find a positive direct effect on treated female respondents that does
not translate into any difference in the assessment provided by their husband. Also, we find no


                                                        33
                              Figure 4: Effect on Assessed Likelihood of Complication - Age

           (a) Younger than 40: Husband Respondent                                                    (b) Younger than 40: Wife Respondent

                 .2




                                                                                                    .2
                                                                                                    .1
                 .1
           Coefficients




                                                                                              Coefficients
                                                                                                    0
                 0




                                                                                                    -.1
                 -.1




                                                                                                    -.2
                 -.2




                          0   1   2     3       4      5          6          7   8   9                       0   1   2     3       4      5          6          7   8   9
                                               Ladder point                                                                       Ladder point

                                      Husband treated         Wife treated                                               Husband treated         Wife treated




                (c) Older than 40: Husband Respondent                                                        (d) Older than 40: Wife Respondent




                                                                                                    .3
                 .2




                                                                                                    .2
                 .1
           Coefficients




                                                                                              Coefficients
                                                                                                  .1
              0  -.1




                                                                                                    0
                 -.2




                                                                                                    -.1




                          0   1   2     3       4      5          6          7   8   9                       0   1   2     3       4      5          6          7   8   9
                                               Ladder point                                                                       Ladder point

                                      Husband treated         Wife treated                                               Husband treated         Wife treated




Notes: The figure depicts the effect of the intervention on the assessed likelihood of having pregnancy complica-
tions, as expressed by a ladder from 0 to 10, for a woman younger or older than 40 years old. The respondents
are the husband (left) and wife (right). The different colors indicate which spouse was treated.


differences in response by birth spacing nor in the risk assessment of the wife's own risk (see also
Appendix). As we discuss below, it appears that this variable increases not only for the treated
groups, relative to baseline, but also for the control group.
    In line with prediction 2 of our model, these results point towards a differential pattern of
information transmission within the household: while wives of treated husbands report different
answers than the control group, the husbands of treated women do not. In fact, we can often rule
                                                            h     h
out that direct and spillover effects on husbands' answers (W vs. H ) are the same. Information
diffusion from the wife to the husband appears to be limited.
    Our intervention does not focus on directly dispelling superstition beliefs (a challenging
endeavor given how rooted such beliefs our in these communities), but rather to rationalize
maternal mortality into a medical framework, where promiscuity can lead to sexually transmitted
diseases. Possibly for this reason, we find that respondents do not change or may increase the

                                                                                         34
likely to think that infidelity can cause maternal mortality (Appendix table A5).


5.5.1   Comparison with beliefs at baseline

   We now study the evolution of beliefs over time and within the household across experimental
arms. In particular, we examine changes in the seven main ladder scale answers at baseline for
the intervention sample and at endline for each treatment arm. As reported in Appendix table
A6 and Appendix table A7, in most cases, the ladder-scale answer given by respondents increases
when they are treated compared to their baseline report. Nevertheless, we observe an increase
in the ladder answer for some questions also in the control group, notably in the risk assessment
of the respondent's own wife. This change may be due to changes occurring in the community,
or to the fact that the F P curriculum, by encouraging men to support their wives in talking to
a nurse at the health clinic, may have had a small effect on the assessment of maternal mortality
risk as well. These changes are likely to attenuate the estimated treatment effect in the main
analysis.


5.6     Communication between spouses

   In order to measure whether (and how) our intervention affected the interactions between
spouses, we employ several measures of intra-household communication, as reported by each
spouse (table 8): a dummy measuring whether the respondent communicated about maternal
mortality risk with the spouse (column 1), whether the spouse communicated about maternal
mortality risk with the respondent (column 2), whether spouses agree on using contraceptives
(column 3), whether the respondent tried to convince his/her spouse to use contraceptives (col-
umn 4), whether the partner changed the respondent's mind (column 5), and whether the partner
tried to convince the respondent to use contraceptives (column 6). When the husband is treated,
we observe a shift in all of these variables in the husbands' reports. A similar, but less precise
pattern of response arises from the reports by wives of treated husbands. We find limited change
in these variables reported by husbands of treated wives or by the treated wives themselves.
   This finding is consistent with the prediction that maternal health communication would
be more likely to occur from treated husbands to untreated wives than from treated wives to
untreated husbands (prediction 2).




                                               35
                                  Table 8: Communication between Spouses


                                                      (1)        (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)
                                                   Comm.       Partner     Agreement      Tried     Partner    Partner
                                                   MM risk     comm.       on contrac.   Convince   Changed    Tried to
                                                  to partner   MM risk         Use       Partner     Resp's    Convince
                                                                                           Use      mind of    Resp Use
                                                                                         contrac.   contrac.   contrac.
                                                                                                      using
H Respondent                                       0.13**       0.077*      -0.094**     0.072**      0.030    0.051*
                        h
      × H Treated (H      )                        (0.052)      (0.044)      (0.044)     (0.033)     (0.029)   (0.030)
H Respondent                                        -0.031       -0.033       -0.046      0.020       0.027    0.046*
                         h
      × W Treated (W        )                      (0.059)      (0.052)      (0.039)     (0.028)     (0.026)   (0.028)
W Respondent                                        -0.020       -0.026       -0.024      0.044      0.0087     0.022
                        w
      × H Treated (H      )                        (0.051)      (0.055)      (0.044)     (0.027)     (0.017)   (0.019)
W Respondent                                        -0.020        0.019       -0.013      0.029       0.016     0.031
                         w
      × W Treated (W        )                      (0.050)      (0.048)      (0.039)     (0.024)     (0.018)   (0.021)
Stratification Variables                             Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes
Demographic Controls                                 Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes
H Respondent Interactions                            Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes
F-test p-values:
                              h  w
Direct treatment effects (H     =W )                0.02            0.35      0.14         0.30      0.69        0.60
                                        w   h
Symmetry of intra-hh spillover effects (H =W  )     0.88            0.92      0.67         0.56      0.57        0.49
                                        h   h
Direct vs. spillover effect on husband (H =W  )     0.00            0.02      0.27         0.16      0.92        0.87
                                     w  w
Direct vs. spillover effect on wife (W =H )         1.00            0.37      0.80         0.59      0.68        0.67
Mean of Control Group for H                         0.48            0.46      0.86         0.05      0.05        0.05
Mean of Control Group for W                         0.42            0.71      0.83         0.04      0.02        0.02
Observations                                        1049            1047      1046         1046      1046        1046


Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. SE clustered at the meeting level. Stratifying control variables include
if couple has children, wife over 35, wife thinks that husband wants another child later, wife thinks husband
does not want another child, husband does not know of women who died at childbirth, block size, and baseline
data present. Demographic control variables include wife age, husband age, wife education, husband education,
number of children, age of last child born before meeting, wife is actively trying to get pregnant, baseline
contraceptive use, and household weekly income.



5.7     Transfers and well-being

    In table 9, we explore the effects of the maternal mortality curriculum on transfers made.
Husbands whose wives are treated report being 13pp less likely to have made a gift to the wife
in the past month (column 1), leading to a decline in value of gift equal to 40% of the mean of
the control group (column 2), while we observe no difference in the fraction of income left for
the wife to spend or in reported domestic violence (column 3). We do not detect a positive shift
of transfers in favor of women when their husbands are treated, unlike what the model predicts
with prediction 3. We can, however, rule out that the effect of treating husbands and that of
treating wives is the same (p-values 0.00 in column 1 and 0.02 in column 2).
    In table 10, we study four different measures of self-reported marital and personal satisfaction.
We find that treated husbands and their wives both report higher marital satisfaction. For



                                                               36
                                       Table 9: Marital Transfers


                                                     (1)            (2)              (3)
                                                  Gifts to       Value of         Hit wife
                                                 wife past       gifts last     last month
                                                  month           month            (freq.)
                                                 (dummy)
                 Husband Treated (H )              0.017            -9.29          -0.023
                                                  (0.052)          (16.5)         (0.038)
                 Wife Treated (W )                -0.13**         -37.9**        -0.00020
                                                  (0.058)          (14.9)         (0.043)
                 Stratification Variables           Yes              Yes            Yes
                 Demographic Controls               Yes              Yes            Yes
                 F-test p-value (H =W )             0.00             0.02           0.54
                 Mean of Control Group              0.49           93.83            0.08
                 Observations                       502              502            502

Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. SE clustered at the meeting level. Stratifying control variables include
if couple has children, wife over 35, wife thinks that husband wants another child later, wife thinks husband
does not want another child, husband does not know of women who died at childbirth, block size, and baseline
data present. Demographic control variables include wife age, husband age, wife education, husband education,
number of children, age of last child born before meeting, wife is actively trying to get pregnant, baseline
contraceptive use, and household weekly income.


instance, treated husbands are 6.3pp more likely to report to be happy with their own marriage
(an 7.8% increase relative to control, p < 0.10), while their wives are 7.2pp more likely to report
to be happy with their own marriage (a 9.6% increase, p < 0.10). Husbands of treated wives also
report comparable increases in marital satisfaction, while the treated wives themselves report
worse marital satisfaction, albeit not statistically significant.


5.8     Heterogeneity analysis

    In this subsection, we present the heterogeneity analysis of treatment effect depending on the
husband's demand for more children and the wife's risk status to further match the theoretical
predictions. We first show that treatment effects on fertility are concentrated among higher-risk
women. We then also show that they are strongest when husbands do not want more children.


5.8.1    Risk Status

    Following our model, we examine the heterogeneous effect of treatment by risk type (predic-
tion 4). We use two variables that we have available for the entire intervention sample, among


                                                      37
                 Table 10: Spousal Closeness and Satisfaction after Intervention


                                                           (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)
                                                        IOS scale    Happy      Satisfied    Satisfied
                                                                      with      with sex     with life
                                                                    marriage       life
      H Respondent                                       0.26*       0.063*       0.051       0.0034
                              h
            × H Treated (H      )                        (0.13)     (0.037)      (0.038)      (0.057)
      H Respondent                                        0.16      0.076**       0.037       -0.0021
                               h
            × W Treated (W        )                      (0.16)     (0.038)      (0.038)      (0.055)
      W Respondent                                        0.065      0.072*      -0.0067       -0.032
                              w
            × H Treated (H      )                        (0.18)     (0.038)      (0.040)      (0.043)
      W Respondent                                       -0.079      -0.054      -0.083*       -0.041
                               w
            × W Treated (W        )                      (0.18)     (0.046)      (0.048)      (0.048)
      Stratification Variables                             Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes
      Demographic Controls                                 Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes
      H Respondent Interactions                            Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes
      F-test p-values:
                                    h  w
      Direct treatment effects (H     =W )                   0.14    0.04         0.02         0.57
                                              w   h
      Symmetry of intra-hh spillover effects (H =W  )        0.70    0.93         0.39         0.68
                                              h   h
      Direct vs. spillover effect on husband (H =W )         0.39    0.69         0.66         0.92
                                           w  w
      Direct vs. spillover effect on wife (W =H )            0.43    0.00         0.13         0.85
      Mean of Control Group for H                            6.06    0.81         0.83         0.53
      Mean of Control Group for W                            5.63    0.75         0.79         0.65
      Observations                                           1017    1017         1017         1050

Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. SE clustered at the meeting level. Stratifying control variables include
if couple has children, wife over 35, wife thinks that husband wants another child later, wife thinks husband
does not want another child, husband does not know of women who died at childbirth, block size, and baseline
data present. Demographic control variables include wife age, husband age, wife education, husband education,
number of children, age of last child born before meeting, wife is actively trying to get pregnant, baseline
contraceptive use, and household weekly income.



those we collected even for the non-baseline sample: a woman's age and history of complica-
tions. We combine these two measures into a risk type dummy: a woman is defined as high risk
type if the wife is higher than 35 years old or has experienced birth/pregnancy complications
before. High-risk women exhibit significant change in fertility outcome, with a 13pp decrease
in the probability of pregnancy for husband treated sample and 12pp for wife treated sample
(table 11). While there is no statistically significant shift in the realized fertility of low risk type,
they improve on learning outcomes: treated husbands are 21pp more likely to correctly identify
the risk factors affecting maternal health (p < 0.01). The comparison suggests that learning is
effective in households with low complication risk too, while it contributes more to the fertility
outcome of high risk households. In Appendix tables A10 and A11, we show similar patterns
when considering the two components of the index separately.



                                                        38
                             Table 11: Heterogeneity Analysis by Risk Status


                                                               (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)
                                                             Wife:      Husband:      Wife:      Husband:
                                                            Currently    Wants      Any of the   Any of the
                                                            Pregnant    More Kids     3 Risk       3 Risk
                                                                                     Factors      Factors
        Husband Treated                                       -0.022      -0.059       0.023      0.21***
                        1
           × Low Risk (H   )                                 (0.033)     (0.049)     (0.057)      (0.067)
        Husband Treated                                      -0.13**      -0.099       0.047      -0.0094
                         2
           × High Risk (H   )                                (0.052)     (0.083)     (0.081)      (0.089)
        Wife Treated                                          -0.013       0.043       0.11*       0.10*
                        1
           × Low Risk (W   )                                 (0.034)     (0.049)     (0.060)      (0.060)
        Wife Treated                                         -0.12**      -0.030     -0.0035       0.026
                         2
           × High Risk (W    )                               (0.055)     (0.082)      (0.10)      (0.094)
        High Risk                                             0.095        0.10       -0.024       0.089
                                                             (0.070)     (0.084)      (0.11)      (0.093)
        Stratification Variables                               Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
        Demographic Controls                                   Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
                                        1    1
        F-test p-value Low Risk H=W (H     =W   )              0.79        0.02         0.13        0.06
                                         2    2
        F-test p-value High Risk H=W (H    =W    )             0.74        0.33         0.60        0.72
                                               1   2
        F-test p-value H Low risk=High risk (H    =H  )        0.07        0.70        0.82         0.07
                                                1    2
        F-test p-value W Low risk=High risk (W =W       )      0.10        0.50        0.31         0.49
        Mean of Control Group                                  0.12        0.67         0.47        0.30
        Observations                                           534          516         534         515


      Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. SE clustered at the meeting level. Stratifying control
      variables include if couple has children, wife over 35, wife thinks that husband wants another child
      later, wife thinks husband does not want another child, husband does not know of women who died
      at childbirth, block size, and baseline data present. Demographic control variables include wife age,
      husband age, wife education, husband education, number of children, age of last child born before
      meeting, wife is actively trying to get pregnant, baseline contraceptive use, and household weekly
      income.



5.8.2     Husband's Demand for Children

   In table 12, we present results for the heterogeneity on the husband's demand for children:
we stratified treatment assignment on whether they want another child within 1 year, after 1
year or not at all, and consider each group separately. Significant changes in fertility outcome
occur in the sample of households in which husbands want no more children or want children
later, in line with prediction 5 of our model. Households with low husband's demand for children
are more prone to changing behavior when they receive maternal health information.


5.9      Robustness checks

   In the main specification, we have selected a small set of controls, that are held fixed in
all specifications. To further limit the discretion in the choice of control, we perform post

                                                            39
             Table 12: Heterogeneity Analysis by Husband's Demand for children


                                                       (1)         (2)           (3)           (4)
                                                     Wife:      Husband:       Wife:       Husband:
                                                    Currently    Wants       Any of the    Any of the
                                                    Pregnant    More Kids     3 Risk        3 Risk
                                                                              Factors       Factors
     Husband Treated                                  -0.035     0.0028         0.055         0.076
                                1
        × H Wants Kids     Now (H )                  (0.048)      (0.12)       (0.15)        (0.16)
     Husband Treated                                 -0.094*       -0.14         0.17       0.25**
                                  2
        × H Wants Kids     Later (H )                (0.055)      (0.10)       (0.11)        (0.11)
     Husband Treated                                -0.095**     -0.12**       -0.047        0.087
                                  3
        × H Wants Kids     Never (H )                (0.046)     (0.051)      (0.067)       (0.069)
     Wife Treated                                      0.042      -0.042       -0.049         0.11
                                1
        × H Wants Kids     Now (W )                  (0.071)      (0.12)       (0.12)        (0.15)
     Wife Treated                                     -0.043       -0.12        0.065         0.14
                                  2
        × H Wants Kids     Later (W )                (0.064)      (0.11)       (0.11)        (0.12)
     Wife Treated                                    -0.12**     0.089*         0.17*        0.062
                                  3
        × H Wants Kids     Never (W )                (0.046)     (0.050)      (0.086)       (0.073)
     H Wants Kids Later                                0.020       -0.14       -0.25*        -0.050
                                                     (0.069)      (0.15)       (0.14)        (0.12)
     H Wants Kids Never                                0.086       0.057        -0.18         0.038
                                                     (0.067)     (0.096)       (0.12)        (0.12)
     Stratification Variables                           Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
     Demographic Controls                               Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
                               1     1
     F-test p-value Now H=W (H    =W     )              0.19       0.67         0.47          0.84
                                 2     2
     F-test p-value Later H=W (H =W )                  0.22        0.76          0.29         0.39
                                 3     3
     F-test p-value Never H=W (H   =W      )            0.60       0.00         0.01          0.71
                                   1       3
     F test p-value H Now=Never (H =H         )        0.41        0.34         0.56          0.95
                                    1        3
     F test p-value W Now=Never (W =W           )      0.08         0.31        0.14          0.80
     Mean of Control Group                             0.14        0.66         0.50          0.30
     Observations                                       440         426          440           426


    Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. SE clustered at the meeting level. Stratifying control
    variables include if couple has children, wife over 35, wife thinks that husband wants another child
    later, wife thinks husband does not want another child, husband does not know of women who died
    at childbirth, block size, and baseline data present. Demographic control variables include wife age,
    husband age, wife education, husband education, number of children, age of last child born before
    meeting, wife is actively trying to get pregnant, baseline contraceptive use, and household weekly
    income.



double selection LASSO to select control variables (Belloni, Chernozhukov and Hansen, 2014).
The results of this exercise for all of our main dependent variables are reported in Appendix
tables A12 and A12. The qualitative and quantitative implications of our analysis are broadly
unchanged, but coefficients become more precise in some instances.




                                                      40
6     Concluding remarks
    In an intervention in which men or women in Lusaka (Zambia) receive information about
maternal health risk, we find that pregnancy declines over the following year, particularly when
men are treated. The intervention, nonetheless, has different effects on participating households
depending on who receives the information. Treated men and their wives update their beliefs
over the risk factors of maternal health complications. The same happens to treated women,
but not to their husband. When men are treated, communication about reproductive health,
self-reported spousal closeness and marital satisfaction all increase. When women are treated,
we see no change in these outcomes, and transfers in their favor from the husband decline.
    These findings are consistent with a model in which the existence of conflict of interest over
fertility outcomes within the household can prevent women from effectively communicating with
their husband about maternal health risk. The model can also explain the findings from our
baseline data: women, in general, have more accurate knowledge of the risk factors for maternal
mortality. Because of the friction caused by conflict of interest, as well as other barriers to
communication such as the stigma associated with maternal mortality in many parts of Africa,
women face a cost in protecting their health by appropriately spacing births. Hence, there
may be significant gains to interventions that target men as the recipients of maternal health
information, which are currently rare.
    In a domain where separate spheres are important, in that women are more likely to learn
about a phenomenon than men (or viceversa), it may be difficult for the information to spread
within the household, and hence public intervention may be particularly important. Such do-
mains may arise not only with maternal health, but also child health, investments in children's
human capital, and other important household decisions whose costs or benefits, in many con-
texts, are observed primarily by one household member, but influence the decision making of
the entire household.
    A simple policy intervention is to educate couples together. While our model would predict
that similar updating would occur from educating men alone versus a husband and a wife
together (because educating him spreads to the wife), we cannot assess how much of the effect
we see is due to men learning this information on maternal health information together with
other men around them, rather than other couples around them (or solely with their wife). We
leave this to future research.


                                                41
   More generally, this paper reveals how small differences in preferences can be exacerbated by
information frictions, creating greater polarization and enabling significant inefficiencies to arise.
Overcoming the information frictions breaks this cycle. In our setting, treating men directly leads
to updating of information for both spouses, a greater alignment in fertility demand, reduced
fertility and greater marital satisfaction. In a world in which there is often pressure from donor
organizations for sub-Saharan African country governments, in particular, to reduce fertility, our
paper describes a "family-centric" solution that does not sacrifice marital happiness to achieve
health policy goals.


References
Albanesi, Stefania, and Claudia Olivetti. 2014. "Maternal health and the baby boom."
 Quantitative Economics, 5(2): 225­269.
Apedo-Amah, Marie Christine, Habiba Djebbari, and Roberta Ziparo. 2020. "Gender,
 Information and the Efficiency of Household Production Decisions: An Experiment in Rural
 Togo." Institute of Labor Economics (IZA) IZA Discussion Papers 12948.
Ashraf, Nava. 2009. "Spousal control and intra-household decision making: An experimental
 study in the Philippines." The American Economic Review, 1245­1277.
Ashraf, Nava, Erica Field, and Jean Lee. 2014. "Household bargaining and excess fertility:
 an experimental study in Zambia." American Economic Review, 104(7): 2210­37.
Ashraf, Nava, Erica Field, Giuditta Rusconi, Alessandra Voena, and Roberta Zi-
 paro. 2017. "Traditional beliefs and learning about maternal risk in Zambia." American Eco-
 nomic Review, 107(5): 511­515.
Attanasio, Orazio, and Valerie Lechene. 2002. "Tests of the income pooling in household
 decisions." Review of economic dynamics, 5(4): 720­748.
Banda, Pamela C. 2015. "Status of maternal mortality in Zambia: use of routine data." African
 Population Studies, 29(2).
Baseler, Travis. 2020. "Hidden Income and the Perceived Returns to Migration: Experimental
 Evidence from Kenya." Available at SSRN 3534715.
Bauer, Gerrit, and Thorsten Kneip. 2012. "Fertility From a Couple Perspective: A
 Test of Competing Decision Rules on Proceptive Behaviour." European Sociological Review,
 29(3): 535­548.
Belloni, Alexandre, Victor Chernozhukov, and Christian Hansen. 2014. "Inference on
 treatment effects after selection among high-dimensional controls." The Review of Economic
 Studies, 81(2): 608­650.
Bennett, Daniel, Asjad Naqvi, and Wolf-Peter Schmidt. 2018. "Learning, hygiene and
 traditional medicine." The Economic Journal, 128(612): F545­F574.
Blanc, Ann K. 2001. "The effect of power in sexual relationships on sexual and reproductive
  health: an examination of the evidence." Studies in family planning, 32(3): 189­213.



                                                 42
Bond, Virginia, and Paul Dover. 1997. "Men, women and the trouble with condoms: prob-
 lems associated with condom use by migrant workers in rural Zambia." Health transition
 review, 377­391.
Bourguignon, François, Martin Browning, Pierre-Andre Chiappori, and Valerie
 Lechene. 1993. "Intra Household Allocation of Consumption: A Model and Some Evidence
 from French Data." Annales d'Économie et de Statistique, , (29): 137­156.
Brehm, Uta, and Norbert F. Schneider. 2019. "Towards a Comprehensive Understanding
 of Fertility:The Model of Dyadic Pathways." Comparative Population Studies, 44.
Cai, Hongbin, and Joseph Tao-Yi Wang. 2006. "Overcommunication in strategic informa-
 tion transmission games." Games and Economic Behavior, 56(1): 7 ­ 36.
Central Statistical Office. 2014. "Central Statistical Office (CSO), Ministry of Health (MOH),
 and ICF International."
Chen, Joyce J. 2013. "Identifying Non-Cooperative Behavior Among Spouses: Child Outcomes
 in Migrant-Sending Households." Journal of Development Economics, 100(1): 1­18.
Chen, Y., N. Kartik, and J. Sobel. 2007. "On the Robustness of Informative Cheap Talk ."
Chiappori, Pierre-Andrè. 1992. "Collective labor supply and welfare." Journal of Political
 Economy, 437­467.
Cho, In-Koo, and David M. Kreps. 1987. "Signaling Games and Stable Equilibria." The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 102(2): 179­221.
Crawford, Vincent. 1998. "A survey of experiments on communication via cheap talk." Journal
 of Economic theory, 78(2): 286­298.
Crawford, Vincent P. 2019. "Experiments on cognition, communication, coordination, and
 cooperation in relationships."
Crawford, Vincent P, and Joel Sobel. 1982. "Strategic information transmission." Econo-
 metrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 1431­1451.
de Laat, Joost. 2005. "Moral Hazard and Costly Monitoring: The Case of Split Migrants in
  Kenya." Mimeo, Brown University.
Delavande, Adeline, and Hans-Peter Kohler. 2016. "HIV/AIDS-related expectations and
 risky sexual behaviour in Malawi." The Review of Economic Studies, 83(1): 118­164.

De Paula, Áureo, Gil Shapira, and Petra E Todd. 2014. "How beliefs about HIV status
 affect risky behaviors: Evidence from Malawi." Journal of Applied Econometrics, 29(6): 944­
 964.
DeRose, Laurie F, F Nii-Amoo Dodoo, Alex C Ezeh, and Tom O Owuor. 2004. "Does
 discussion of family planning improve knowledge of partner's attitude toward contraceptives?"
 International family planning perspectives, 87­93.
Dickhaut, John W., Kevin A. McCabe, and Arijit Mukherji. 1995. "An Experimental
 Study of Strategic Information Transmission." Economic Theory, 6(3): 389­403.
Dickson, Eric, Catherine Hafer, and Dimitri Landa. 2008. "Cognition and Strategy: A
 Deliberation Experiment." Journal of Politics, 70: 974­989.
Dizon-Ross, Rebecca. 2019. "Parents' beliefs about their children's academic ability: Impli-
 cations for educational investments." American Economic Review, 109(8): 2728­65.


                                             43
Dodoo, F Nii-Amoo. 1998. "Men matter: additive and interactive gendered preferences and
 reproductive behavior in Kenya." Demography, 35(2): 229­242.
Doepke, Matthias, and Fabian Kindermann. 2019. "Bargaining over Babies: Theory, Ev-
 idence, and Policy Implications." American Economic Review, 109(9): 3264­3306.
Duflo, Esther. 2003. "Grandmothers and granddaughters: old-age pensions and intrahousehold
 allocation in South Africa." The World Bank Economic Review, 17(1): 1­25.
Dupas, Pascaline. 2011. "Do Teenagers Respond to HIV Risk Information? Evidence from a
 Field Experiment in Kenya." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(1): 1­34.
Ezeh, Alex Chika. 1993. "The influence of spouses over each other's contraceptive attitudes
 in Ghana." Studies in family planning, 163­174.
Fernandez, Raquel, and Alessandra Fogli. 2009. "Culture: An empirical investigation of
  beliefs, work, and fertility." American economic journal: Macroeconomics, 1(1): 146­77.
Fisek, Nusret H., and K. Sumbuloglu. 1978. "The effects of husband and wife education
  on family planning in rural Turkey." Studies in Family Planning, 9.
Freedman, Ronald, and John Y. Takeshita. 1969. Family Planning in Taiwan: An Exper-
  iment in Social Change. Princeton University Press.
Garenne, Michel, Khadidiatou Mbaye, Mohamed D Bah, and Paul Correa. 1997.
 "Risk factors for maternal mortality: a case-control study in Dakar hospitals (Senegal)."
 African Journal of Reproductive Health, 14­24.
Geller, Stacie E, Abigail R Koch, Caitlin E Garland, E Jane MacDonald, Francesca
 Storey, and Beverley Lawton. 2018. "A global view of severe maternal morbidity: moving
 beyond maternal mortality." Reproductive health, 15(1): 98.
Gennaro, Susan, Lennie A Kamwendo, Ellen Mbweza, and Rose Kershbaumer. 1998.
 "Childbearing in Malawi, Africa." Journal of Obstetric, Gynecologic, & Neonatal Nursing,
 27(2): 191­196.
Goldenberg, Robert L, Sarah Saleem, Sumera Ali, Janet L Moore, Adrien Lokan-
 gako, Antoinette Tshefu, Musaku Mwenechanya, Elwyn Chomba, Ana Garces,
 Lester Figueroa, et al. 2017. "Maternal near miss in low-resource areas." International
 Journal of Gynecology & Obstetrics, 138(3): 347­355.
Gottert, Ann, Clare Barrington, Heath Luz McNaughton-Reyes, Suzanne Maman,
 Catherine MacPhail, Sheri A Lippman, Kathleen Kahn, Rhian Twine, and Audrey
 Pettifor. 2018. "Gender norms, gender role conflict/stress and HIV risk behaviors among men
 in Mpumalanga, South Africa." AIDS and Behavior, 22(6): 1858­1869.
Jensen, Rober. 2010. "The (perceived) returns to education and the demand for schooling."
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(2): 515.
Lundberg, Shelly, and Robert A. Pollak. 1996. "Bargaining and distribution in marriage."
 The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 10(4): 139­158.
Lundberg, Shelly J, Robert A Pollak, and Terence J Wales. 1997. "Do husbands and
 wives pool their resources? Evidence from the United Kingdom child benefit." Journal of
 Human resources, 463­480.
Mailath, George J. 1987. "Incentive compatibility in signaling games with a continuum of
 types." Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 1349­1365.



                                            44
McCarthy, Aine Seitz. 2019. "Intimate partner violence and family planning decisions: Ex-
 perimental evidence from rural Tanzania." World Development, 114: 156­174.
Miller, Grant, Áureo De Paula, and Christine Valente. 2020. "Subjective Expectations
 and Demand for Contraception." National Bureau of Economic Research.
Miller, Warren B., Lawrence J. Severy, and David J. Pasta. 2004. "A Framework for
 Modelling Fertility Motivation in Couples." Population Studies, 58(2): 193­205.
Nsemukila, Buleti G, Dean S Phiri, Hady M Diallo, Sekelani S Banda, Wendy K Be-
 naya, and Naomi Kitahara. 1999. A Study of Factors Associated with Maternal Mortality
 in Zambia, 1998. Zambia Ministry of Health.
Phiri, Selia N, Knut Fylkesnes, Ana L Ruano, and Karen M Moland. 2014. " `Born
 before arrival': user and provider perspectives on health facility childbirths in Kapiri Mposhi
 district, Zambia." BMC pregnancy and childbirth, 14(1): 1.
Pulerwitz, Julie, Annie Michaelis, Ravi Verma, and Ellen Weiss. 2010. "Addressing
 gender dynamics and engaging men in HIV programs: lessons learned from Horizons research."
 Public health reports, 125(2): 282­292.
Rasul, Imran. 2008. "Household bargaining over fertility: Theory and evidence from malaysia."
 Journal of Development Economics, 86(2): 215­241.
Rosenzweig, Mark R, and T Paul Schultz. 1982. "Child mortality and fertility in Colombia:
 individual and community effects." Health policy and education, 2(3-4): 305­348.
Rossi, Pauline. 2019. "Strategic Choices in Polygamous Households: Theory and Evidence
 from Senegal." Review of Economic Studies, 86(3): 1332­1370.
Shattuck, Dominick, Brad Kerner, Kate Gilles, Miriam Hartmann, Thokozani
  Ng'ombe, and Greg Guest. 2011. "Encouraging Contraceptive Uptake by Motivating Men
  to Communicate About Family Planning: The Malawi Male Motivator Project." American
  Journal of Public Health, 101(6): 1089.
Stein, Petra, Sebastian Willen, and Monika Pavetic. 2014. "Couples' fertility decision-
  making." Demographic Research, S16(63): 1697­1732.
Stern, Steven, and Leora Friedberg. 2010. "Marriage, Divorce, and Asymmetric Informa-
  tion." Virginia Economics Online Papers, 385.
Terefe, Almaz, and Charles P. Larson. 1983. "Modern contraception use in Ethiopia: Does
  involving husbands make a difference?" American Journal of Public Health.
Thornton, Rebecca L. 2008. "The demand for, and impact of, learning HIV status." American
 Economic Review, 98(5): 1829­63.
Umoiyoho, Aniefiok J, Aniekan M Abasiattai, Edem J Udoma, and Saturday J
 Etuk. 2005. "Community perception of the causes of maternal mortality among the Annang
 of Nigeria's South-East coast." Tropical Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 22(2): 189­
 192.
Wang, C. C., E. Vittinghoff, L. S. Hua, W. H. Yun, and Z. M. Rong. 1998. "Reducing
 pregnancy and induced abortion rates in china: Family planning with husband participation."
 American Journal of Public Health, 88.
Westoff, Charles F. 2010. "Derired Number of Children: 2000-2008." DHS Comparative Re-
 ports, , (25).
Ziparo, Roberta. 2020. "Why do spouses communicate: love or interest? A model and some
  evidence from Cameroon." Manuscript.
                                              45
