                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     WORLD WAR I AND THE RESTRUCTURING OF INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS

                                         Ted Fertik
                                     Naomi R. Lamoreaux

                                      Working Paper 28224
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28224


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2020




This paper is forthcoming in French in La rupture? La Grande Guerre, l'Europe et le XXème
siècle, eds. Pierre-Cyrille Hautcoeur, Florence Descamps, Patrick Fridenson, and Laure
Quenouelle-Corre (Paris: Comité pour l'histoire économique et financière de la France, 2021).
We are grateful to the volume editors for their comments and also to participants in the
preparatory conference, "The Great War at the Century's Scale: Breaking Up, Parenthesis or
New Cycle," held at French Ministry of Finance in Paris in 2018. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Ted Fertik and Naomi R. Lamoreaux. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
World War I and the Restructuring of International Business
Ted Fertik and Naomi R. Lamoreaux
NBER Working Paper No. 28224
December 2020
JEL No. N10,N40,N60,O14

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper considers the effect of the First World War on large-scale businesses in Second-
Industrial-Revolution industries like steel, electricity, and chemicals. For firms in the nations of
the Entente, we argue, the war mainly interrupted long-term trends that resumed in the aftermath
of the conflict. For Germany, however, the war and its subsequent territorial settlements had a
disruptive impact on the economic geography of key industries. The global restructuring that
resulted from the collapse of the Habsburg, Romanov, and Ottoman empires and Germany's loss
of its colonial possessions set up a new kind of international rivalry as German firms sought to
regain their dominance by contracting with emerging nations in the European periphery and the
Global South to build industrial capacity, forcing Britain and the now capital-rich United States to
compete for this business or see their influence in these areas decline. The end result of this
rivalry was the construction of massive steel works in Brazil and other industrializing countries
around the world. These investments would provide the foundation for the import-substituting
policies of the post-World War II era.


Ted Fertik
Working Families Party
1 Park Lane
Mount Vernon, NY 10552
ted.fertik@gmail.com

Naomi R. Lamoreaux
Department of Economics
Yale University
27 Hillhouse Ave., Rm. 39
Box 208269
New Haven, CT 06520-8269
and NBER
naomi.lamoreaux@yale.edu
                                                                                                                1


                   World War I and the Restructuring of International Business

                               Edward S. Fertik and Naomi R. Lamoreaux



           Beginning in the late nineteenth century and continuing through the first third or so of the

twentieth century, the leading economies of Europe and North American underwent a

technological transformation known as the Second Industrial Revolution. New science-based

industries such as steel, chemicals, electricity, and automobiles took center stage, as First

Industrial Revolution industries such as textiles and shoes passed into relative decline. Because

the new industries were much more capital- and energy-intensive than those they surpassed, the

Second Industrial Revolution required a transformation in the organization of enterprise. Small,

economically specialized, owner-run enterprises gave way to large, horizontally and vertically

integrated, managerially directed enterprises capable of exploiting economies of both scale and

scope. 1

           The First World War occurred in the midst of this process of transformation, and despite

its cataclysmic effect on the economies of the main belligerents, the war was, for the most part,

just an interruption. This was especially true for the Entente. Although Second Industrial

Revolution industries had a major role to play in the war effort, these sectors had started to

develop before the war (some were already quite mature), and they continued along essentially

the same path afterwards. There were, of course, some special consequences for particular

industries such as chemicals, where German firms had been in the lead and war authorities

expropriated their intellectual property for the benefit of competitors. But otherwise for Entente

countries the story was generally one of continuity rather than change. The situation was


           1
         For an overview, see Alfred D. Chandler, Jr., Scale and Scope: The Dynamics of Industrial Capitalism
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1990).
                                                                                                       2


different in Germany, however. There the war and its subsequent territorial settlements had a

considerable impact on the economic geography of key industries like steel, which in turn

affected the structure of business organization.

       The war mattered as well for the spread of Second Industrial Revolution industries

around the globe. Two developments were especially relevant. The first was the reordering of

the international financial pecking order--the rise of the United States to the status of a creditor

nation and the relative weakening of the economies and finances of the European belligerents,

particularly Britain, whose currency had anchored the international gold standard throughout the

long nineteenth century. The second was the global restructuring that resulted from the collapse

of the Habsburg, Romanov, and Ottoman empires and Germany's loss of its colonial

possessions. This restructuring encouraged the development of nationalist movements in the

European periphery and Global South, movements whose leaders demanded the economic

accoutrements of modern nationhood, particularly investments in Second Industrial Revolution

industries like steel. It also set up a new kind of international rivalry among the leading

industrial powers to meet those demands. Germany was the main instigator of the competition as

it sought to rebuild its international economic position. German steel firms began to contract

with emerging nations to satisfy their demand for industrial capacity, forcing Britain and the now

capital-rich United States to compete for this business or see their influence in these areas

decline. The end result of this rivalry was the construction of massive steel works in Brazil and

other industrializing countries around the world. These investments would provide the

foundation for the import-substituting policies of the post-World War II era.
                                                                                                      3


The Entente: Continuities in the Growth of Large-Scale Enterprises


       As Alfred D. Chandler, Jr. has shown, innovations like the railroad and telegraph, which

increased the speed of transportation and communications, made it possible to concentrate

production in large plants and thus to exploit technological changes that increased the efficient

scale of production. These benefits were most pronounced in Second Industrial Revolution

industries such as steel, chemicals, and automobiles where there were both significant technical

economies of scale and advantages to concentrating production near sources of bulky raw

materials. As Chandler has also shown, however, it was not sufficient for enterprises in these

new industries simply to build large-capacity plants. Reaping economies of large-scale

production depended on the ability to run these plants smoothly at high levels of capacity, which

in turn required, first, a steady flow of raw material inputs so that production did not have to be

slowed while awaiting supplies, and second, the capacity to ensure that sales kept pace with the

volume of production to prevent costly accumulations of inventory. In many industries,

maintaining the necessary flow of inputs and outputs required firms to integrate backward into

raw materials or forward into distribution. However, the extent to which such integration was

required depended on the thickness of existing supply and distribution networks, as well as on

the characteristics of the product. Thus vertical integration was much less necessary in a

compact country such as Britain than in the much larger and less densely populated United

States. It was also more necessary in an industry like steel, where any delays in ore supplies

forced blast furnaces to be shut down at enormous cost, or in industries such as sewing machines
                                                                                                                 4


and reapers where sales depended on building consumers' confidence that these expensive

purchases could be easily serviced if they broke down. 2

        Different countries were in different stages of this process of industrial reorganization on

the eve of the First World War. Among the three main victorious Entente powers, the United

States was furthest along, and so we focus our discussion on its experience in order to highlight

the sources of the transformation. Although France was substantially behind Britain, the war had

broadly similar effects on businesses in these two countries, and so we discuss their experiences

together. In all three countries, Second Industrial Revolution industries were of major importance

to the war effort, and as a result firms in these sectors grew larger and more profitable. The

boost was only temporary, however, and in the war's aftermath firms had to find civilian uses for

their expanded capacity. For the most part they returned to the development path they had been

on before the fighting started.


The United States


        At first glance it might seem as if the war marked a break in the development of large-

scale enterprises in the United States because big businesses were much more stable after the war

than they had been before. Richard C. Edwards has tracked the performance of the 100 largest

firms in the U.S. in 1903 and in 1919. Firms in the first group did relatively poorly; fully two-

thirds either lost ground in terms of the real value of their assets or had been liquidated by 1917.

By contrast, the 100 largest firms in 1919 did remarkably well, with very few of them (less than


        2
          Alfred D. Chandler, Jr., The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American Business
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1977); Chandler, Scale and Scope; Oliver E. Williamson, "The
Modern Corporation: Origins, Evolution, Attributes," Journal of Economic Literature 19 (Dec. 1981): 1537-1568;
George J. Stigler, "The Division of Labor is Limited by the Extent of the Market," Journal of Political Economy 59
(June 1951): 185-193; Leslie Hannah, "Logistics, Market Size, and Giant Plants in the Early Twentieth Century: A
Global View," Journal of Economic History 68 (March 2008): 46-79.
                                                                                                           5


10 percent) experiencing any similar decline, even a half century later. 3 This stabilization had

little or nothing to do with the war, however. To be successful in the oligopolistic industries of

the Second Industrial Revolution, large firms had to learn to compete on dimensions other than

price. They also had to learn how to navigate an increasingly hostile political environment. Big

businesses had largely mastered these lessons by the time the U.S. entered the Great War in

1917, and they were able to reap the rewards of the resulting stability with the return of peace.

As a result, over the next decade productivity growth in manufacturing was the highest in the

twentieth century, and it was especially rapid in industries such as primary metals, chemicals,

petroleum, and automobiles. 4

        During the last quarter of the nineteenth century firms in emerging Second Industrial

Revolution industries had often found themselves enmeshed in destructive price wars as they

competed to secure enough orders to run their plants at the capacity needed to capture economies

of scale. To stem this competition they had experimented with a variety of collusive

arrangements, starting with simple "gentlemen's" agreements not to cut prices and progressing to

highly structured pools and cartels. These arrangements were not initially illegal, but they were

unenforceable at law, and as result rarely lasted for long. Out of desperation, firms responded to

their inability to control price competition by merging; approximately 1,800 firms disappeared

into nearly 160 horizontal combinations during the so-called Great Merger Movement of 1896-

1904. 5 Mergers were not in themselves a cure for competition, however. Unless the

consolidations were able to erect barriers to entry (which most were not), whenever they tried to



        3
          Richard C. Edwards, "States in Corporate Stability and the Risks of Corporate Failure," Journal of
Economic History 35 (June 1975): 428-457.
        4
          Alexander J. Field, A Great Leap Forward: 1930s Depression and U.S. Economic Growth (New Haven:
Yale University Press, 2011), 52-53
        5
          Naomi R. Lamoreaux, The Great Merger Movement in American Business, 1895-1904 (New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1985).
                                                                                                            6


raise prices to recoup their profits, new firms would enter the market and the combines' market

shares would drop. Shaw Livermore collected earnings data from 1901 to 1932 for 136 mergers

that he deemed powerful enough at the time of their formation "to influence market conditions."

He found that 37 percent of them were complete failures, while only 44 percent could be

regarded as successes. 6 Moreover, those that did not fail had to worry about antitrust

prosecution. The mergers had provoked a political reaction that made illegal combinations in

restraint of trade or that attempted to monopolize commerce. The Supreme Court broke up the

Standard Oil, American Tobacco, and DuPont in 1911, and General Electric and the Aluminum

Company of America shortly thereafter signed consent decrees with the Justice Department. In

the wake of those victories, the government launched suits against a number of big companies,

including U.S. Steel, International Harvester, and National Cash Register. 7

        The firms that survived this shakeout period learned to compete in the new institutional

environment by means other than price cutting. They deployed advertising and other marketing

strategies to build brand loyalty, improved their internal operations by integrating backward into

raw-material production and forward into distribution, stayed on the technological cutting edge

by investing in in-house R&D, engaged in mergers for strategic advantage rather than horizontal

combination, and more generally erected barriers to entry in any way they could without inviting

antitrust prosecution. 8 In the steel industry, for example, years of destructive price competition

and failed pools led in the late 1890s to a series of mergers among finished goods producers,

including American Steel and Wire, American Tin Plate, American Sheet Steel, National Tube,




        6
          Shaw Livermore, "The Success of Industrial Mergers," Quarterly Journal of Economics 50 (Nov. 1935):
68-96. See also Lamoreaux, Great Merger Movement, Ch. 5.
        7
          Henry R Seager and Charles A. Gulick, Jr., Trust and Corporation Problems (New York: Harper & Bros.
1929),
        8
          Chandler, Visible Hand; Lamoreaux, Great Merger Movement, Ch. 5.
                                                                                                              7


and in 1901 to that great merger of mergers, the United States Steel Corporation, the first billion-

dollar corporation, which took in all of these earlier mergers plus Carnegie Steel and other major

crude-steel manufacturers. Under the leadership of Judge Elbert H. Gary, U.S. Steel stabilized

competition in the industry. Gary's strategy was two-fold: to erect barriers to entry by buying

up or negotiating long-term leases on the lion's share of the nation's iron ore reserves (largely

accomplished by 1907); and to discourage price competition in the industry by a combination of

example and moral suasion (the famous Gary dinners held after the Panic of 1907). These

policies attracted the attention of antitrust authorities in the federal government, which filed suit

against the company in 1911. The case dragged on for years, finally reaching the Supreme Court

in 1917, whereupon it was delayed until after the war and finally, in 1920, resolved in favor of

the corporation. The industry then continued during the 1920s on the oligopolistic path that Gary

had laid out during the company's first decade. Because the existing crude-steel producers (U.S.

Steel, Bethlehem, Republic, and a few smaller enterprises) together controlled virtually all of the

iron-ore reserves in the country, there was no threat of competition from new entrants. Sheltered

by U.S. Steel's pricing umbrella, each of the firms concentrated on developing its own market

niche. 9

           Whereas the steel industry had largely completed its transition to a new oligopolistic

structure by the outbreak of the First World War, automobiles was just beginning the process.

The industry was still populated by a large number of relatively small firms, most of which

produced cars by craft or group assembly methods, but a few firms were pulling ahead,

increasing their share of the market. The most important of these was the Ford Motor Company.



           9
          Lamoreaux, Great Merger Movement, Chs. 5-6; Seager and Gulick, Trust and Corporation Problems,
Chs. 13-14; Gertrude G. Schroeder, The Growth of Major Steel Companies, 1900-1950 (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
Press, 1953); Chandler, Scale and Scope, 127-140.
                                                                                                                8


Henry Ford, the company's founder, believed that if he could build a low-priced, high-quality

car, that would be both rugged and powerful, he could sell as many as he could turn out. He set

about designing a car and, more importantly, figuring out how to manufacture it at a low cost

using dedicated machine tools and assembly lines. By 1913 he had succeeded and almost

immediately began to plan for the development of a huge vertically integrated manufacturing

complex, buying the land for what would become the famous River Rouge facility in 1915.

During the war, Ford manufactured boats there, but the war interrupted Ford's plans for the

facility, and it was not until the early 1920s that the company seriously began to develop the site,

building the world's largest car factory, an electrical generating plant, transportation facilities,

and ultimately steel and glass factories. 10 Nor were Ford's innovations copied by other

companies as they geared up production for the war. The first company to adopt the new

methods on a large-scale was General Motors (GM) beginning in 1923. Chrysler followed later

in the decade. The new mass production methods made the "big three" dominant; together they

accounted for about two-thirds of industry output in 1929. Most other companies continued to

use group assembly methods, until they were killed off during the Great Depression. 11

        Another major innovation of the period--the in-house research laboratory--followed a

similar time path, first emerging before the war but spreading mostly afterwards. One of the first

companies to create an in-house laboratory was the American Telephone and Telegraph

(AT&T). Its officers had long opposed investing in research and development (R&D) because

they believed that it was better to buy inventions on the market than to try to forecast the future


        10
            David A. Hounshell, From the American System to Mass Production, 1800-1932: The Development of
Manufacturing Technology in the United States (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1984): Chs. 6-7.
         11
            Daniel M. G. Raff, "The Puzzling Profusion of Compensation Systems in the Interwar Automobile
Industry," in Coordination and Information: Historical Perspectives on the Organization of Enterprise, eds. Naomi
R. Lamoreaux and Daniel M. G. Raff (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995), 13-29; Timothy F. Bresnahan
and Daniel M. G. Raff, "Intra-Industry Heterogeneity and the Great Depression: The American Motor Vehicles
Industry, 1929-1935," Journal of Economic History 51 (June 1991): 317-331.
                                                                                                                9


direction of technological change. 12 In 1907, however, a change in leadership brought a change

in views. At about the same time, new breakthroughs in wireless communication (radio) posed

challenges to the telephone's dominance in short-distance communication, forcing the company

to double down on long-distance communication, which radio could not then deliver. Managers

who supported the idea of in-house R&D secured funding for a small laboratory to develop the

necessary amplifier. The lab did not succeed in this effort--AT&T had to buy the necessary

patents from outside inventors--but the facility helped make the technology commercially

practicable. Perhaps more important, the lab demonstrated its utility by securing numerous

relatively minor patents that could be used defensively, bolstering the company's competitive

position in a way that was consistent with the antitrust laws. Executives became convinced of

the lab's value and gradually expanded its budget. In 1925, the company founded Bell Labs,

which over the next few decades would garner thousands of patents and seven Nobel Prizes. 13

        The history of the research laboratory founded by General Electric Company (GE), was

similar. GE had been formed by merger in 1892, and it maintained its dominance for decades

with the help of a formidable patent portfolio, entering into cross-licensing agreements with its

only significant competitor in electrical lighting and power equipment, Westinghouse. GE

created its first in-house industrial research laboratory in 1901 to develop an improved lamp

technology that would replace Edison's original lighting patents, which had expired. Although

the company eventually had to purchase patent rights for the technology it needed in Germany,


        12
            Naomi R. Lamoreaux and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, "Inventors, Firms, and the Market for Technology in the
Late Nineteenth and Early Twentieth Centuries," in Learning By Doing in Firms, Markets, and Countries, eds.
Lamoreaux, Daniel M. G. Raff, and Peter Temin (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999), 19-57.
         13
            Leonard S. Reich, "Industrial Research and the Pursuit of Corporate Security: The Early Years of Bell
Labs," Business History Review 54 (Winter 1980): 502-529; and Reich, The Making of American Industrial
Research (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1985), Ch. 7; Kenneth Lipartito, "Rethinking the Invention
Factory: Bell Laboratories in Perspective," in The Challenge of Remaining Innovative: Insights from Twentieth-
Century American Business, eds. Sally H. Clarke, Naomi R. Lamoreaux, and Steven W. Usselman (Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press, 2009), 132-159.
                                                                                                               10


the patents accumulated by the laboratory proved extraordinarily valuable in bargaining with

rivals, and GE gradually expanded its investment in R&D. These bargaining chips became all

the more important in 1911, when an antitrust suit forced the company to abandon an effort to

cartelize the electric lamp industry, and the company substantially expanded its commitment to

the lab. 14 Whether one looks at GE's expenditures on the lab or the number of research

employees, the story is the same: steady expansion in the early twentieth century, especially

after 1911; little growth during the First World War and its immediate aftermath, when GE

research personnel were working on war projects elsewhere; and then a resumption of growth in

the 1920s that quickened in the latter part of the decade. 15

        Relatively few companies built in-house R&D labs during the first decade of the

twentieth century, but the numbers gradually accelerated over the next several decades.

According to surveys conducted by the National Research Council, about 37 new industrial

research labs were founded per year between 1909 and 1918. The number grew to 66 per year

between 1919 and 1928 and to 74 per year from 1929 to 1936, and then dropped back to 39 per

year over the next decade. Research employment in these labs increased by a factor of almost

ten during the interwar period, rising from about 6,700 in 1921 to 19,500 in 1933 to 58,300 in

1940. 16 Some scholars have attributed the growth of in-house R&D during this period to the

experience of the First World War, but neither the timing nor the incidence of the investments is




        14
           Leonard S. Reich, "Lighting the Path to Profit: GE's Control of the Electric Lamp Industry, 1892-1941,"
Business History Review 66 (Summer 1992): 305-334; W. Bernard Carlson, "Innovation and the Modern
Corporation: From Heroic Invention to Industrial Science," in Companion Encyclopedia of Science in the Twentieth
Century, eds. John Krige and Dominque Pestre (London: Routledge, 2003), 203-226.
        15
           George Wise, Willis R. Whitney, General Electric, and the Origins of U.S. Industrial Research (New
York: Columbia University Press, 1985), 246-247; Reich, Making of American Industrial Research, Chs. 4-5.
        16
           David C. Mowery and Nathan Rosenberg, Technology and the Pursuit of Economic Growth (New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1989): 62-67.
                                                                                                               11


consistent with that explanation. 17 The trends are more consistent with the reorganization of

American business and the new patterns of oligopolistic competition that were developing by the

second decade of the twentieth century, particularly the discovery that patents could be used to

erect barriers to competition. 18 In addition, during the stock-market boom of the late 1920s,

investors encouraged the development of in-house R&D by rewarding companies that had

amassed large portfolios of patents. 19

        The one exception to this generalization about timing is chemicals, an industry that was

more directly affected by the war because German firms had been the main global suppliers of

dyestuffs and other organic chemicals. The outbreak of fighting in Europe, and especially the

tightening of the British blockade on German shipping early in 1915, led to serious shortages of

these materials and stimulated investment in the industry. Du Pont, for example, began to build

a dyestuffs factory in New Jersey in early 1917. These activities obtained a boost after the U.S.

entered the war, and the federal government offered the new entrants tariff protection. In

addition, empowered by the Trading with the Enemies Act, the government expropriated all U.S.

patents that had been granted to German chemical firms and licensed them on a non-exclusive

basis to American manufacturers. Although German companies returned to the U.S. market after

the war and patented at even higher levels than before, the war seems to have allowed American

firms to gain a foothold in the industry. After the war, patenting by U.S. firms increased in

categories of chemicals where they had received licenses of German technology, and there was a


        17
             Carlson, for example, asserts that World War I demonstrated the value of R&D to managers but does not
provide any evidence for this claim. See "Innovation and the Modern Corporation," 217.
          18
             Mowery and Rosenberg, Technology and the Pursuit of Economic Growth, Ch. 4. In the late 1930s,
antitrust authorities would move against this method of forestalling competition. See Naomi R. Lamoreaux, "The
Problem of Bigness: From Standard Oil to Google," Journal of Economic Perspectives 33 (Summer 2019),
forthcoming.
          19
             See Tom Nicholas, "Stock Market Swings and the Value of Innovation, 1908-1929," in Financing
Innovation in the United States, 1870 to the Present, eds. Naomi R. Lamoreaux and Kenneth L. Sokoloff
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2007), 217-245.
                                                                                                           12


tremendous growth in investment in R&D labs in the industry. 20 Nonetheless, the story was not

one of unqualified success. Du Pont struggled throughout the 1920s with its dyestuffs business

and only achieved profitability with the help of more tariff protection and imported German

scientists. 21 The company was much more successful with its diversification into paints. This

investment was a product of the war only in the sense that Du Pont was searching for new uses

for the plants it had built to produce smokeless powder for the military. Nonetheless, it was the

need to learn to manage the investment in paints, not dyestuffs, that led the company to pioneer

the development of the decentralized multi-divisional business structure (m-form). A few other

companies went through a similar restructuring during the 1920s, but this innovation was not

generally adopted by large-scale American businesses until the second half of the twentieth

century. 22

        One other important change that seemed to be associated with First World War was the

rise of the United States to the top of the international financial pecking order and its shift from

debtor to creditor status. Although this change was crystallized by the war, it was in fact the

culmination of trends long in the works. The U.S. economy had been growing rapidly for

decades in relative terms, and it was only a matter of time before it achieved creditor status.

Indeed, the U.S. had surpassed Britain in total industrial output in the 1890s and in industrial

output per capita around 1910. During the nineteenth century, the U.S. had been a major

exporter of raw materials and agricultural products and a major importer of manufactured goods.



        20
            L. F. Haber, The American Chemical Industry, 1900-1930: International Growth and Technological
Change (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1971), 185-188; Petra Moser and Alessandra Voena, "Compulsory
Licensing: Evidence from the Trading with the Enemy Act," American Economic Review 102 (Feb. 2012): 296-
427; Mowery and Rosenberg, Technology and the Pursuit of Economic Growth, 62-67.
         21
            David A. Hounshell and John Kenly Smith, Jr., Science and Corporate Strategy: Du Pont R&D, 1902-
1980 (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1988), Ch. 3.
         22
            Alfred D. Chandler, Jr., Strategy and Structure: Chapters in the History of American Industrial
Enterprise (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1962).
                                                                                                                13


Beginning in the 1890s, however, the share of manufactured goods in total U.S. exports had

begun to increase dramatically. The rise was especially significant in the more resource-

intensive manufacturing industries of the Second Industrial Revolution, particularly automobiles

and advanced machine technologies that used significant amounts of steel. It was a culmination

of the business developments we have been discussing, as well as other extensive late-nineteenth

investments in the discovery and extraction of mineral resources. 23

        The shift to the status of creditor nation did not result in a decline in foreign investment

in the U.S. Although inflows of funds fell off during the war years, by the late 1920s foreign

investment in the U.S. had more than regained its prewar level. What was different in the 1920s

was the extent of U.S. investment abroad, which more than quadrupled between 1914 and

1929. 24 Americans had been building manufacturing plants in Europe before the war and that

trend continued afterwards, but capital flows to Europe increased as a result of the war. A major

portion of the new American foreign investment was the staggering $10 billion in direct U.S.

government loans to the Entente Powers. 25 U.S. businesses also significantly expanded their

investments in other parts of the world, especially in Latin America, to build electrical

infrastructure and advanced manufacturing capabilities. 26 We will return to that important

development below.


         23
            Gavin Wright, "The Origins of American Industrial Success, 1879-1940," American Economic Review
80 (Sept. 1990): 651-668; Douglas A. Irwin, "Explaining America's Surge in Manufacturing Exports, 1880-1913,"
Review of Economics and Statistics 85 (May 2003): 364-376; and Irwin, Clashing over Commerce: A History of US
Trade Policy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2017), Chs. 6-7; Paul A. David and Gavin Wright, "Increasing
Returns and the Genesis of American Resource Abundance," Industrial and Corporate Change 6 (Mar. 1997): 203-
245; Robert C. Allen, "International Competition in Iron and Steel, 1850-1913," Journal of Economic History 39
(Dec. 1979): 911-937.
         24
            Hugh Rockoff, "Until It's Over, Over There: The US Economy in World War I," in The Economics of
World War I, eds. Stephen Broadberry and Mark Harrison (Cambridge, Eng.: Cambridge University Press, 2005),
xxx-xxx.
         25
            On the political significance of this massive and utterly novel form of international capital movement,
Adam Tooze, The Deluge: The Great War, America and the Remaking of Global Order (New York: Penguin, 2014).
         26
            Mira Wilkins, The Maturing of Multinational Enterprise: American Business Abroad from 1914 to 1970
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1974).
                                                                                                                  14


Britain and France


         Many business histories of Britain and France use the First World War as a break point in

their narratives. If one examines the details of these accounts, however, the war most often

appears as an interruption in underlying trends rather than a transformative event that altered the

trajectory of business development. 27 Certainly, the war was a major drain on the economies of

these two countries that required a massive redirection of resources, and certainly, both countries

suffered severe macroeconomic dislocations in the early 1920s. 28 In terms of the development of

large-scale enterprises, however, it is difficult to discern much of a break in trend. Britain was

substantially ahead of France on the eve of the First World War, and it continued to widen its

lead afterwards. Circa 1907-1912, Britain had 93 enterprises with capitalizations in excess of £2

million, whereas France only had 21. In 1929, Britain had 186 enterprises with capitalizations in

excess of £3 million and France only had two. 29

         The development of large-scale enterprises in Britain followed a time path that was

similar to that of the United States, but the rise was smaller in amplitude and did not generate a

comparable political backlash. Much as in the U.S., vigorous price competition in the late

nineteenth century had led to a wave of mergers and to significant instability in the ranks of large

firms in the early twentieth century until executives mastered the new rules of oligopolistic

competition. The share of the largest 100 firms in manufacturing output rose from 15 percent in


         27
             A good example is Youssef Cassis, Big Business: The European Experience in the Twentieth Century
(Oxford, Eng.: Oxford University Press, 1997). A quick search of the journal Business History turned up nearly 100
articles with 1914 as an end date in the title.
          28
             See Stephen Broadberry and Mark Harrison, "The Economics of World War I: An Overview," in
Economics of World War I, eds. Broadberry and Harrison, 1-40; Pierre-Cyrille Hautcoeur, "Was the Great War a
Watershed? The Economics of World War I in France," same volume,169-205; and Broadberry and Peter Howlett,
"The United Kingdom during World War I: Business as Usual?" same volume, 206-234. See also Peter Temin,
Lessons from the Great Depression (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1989), Lecture 1.
          29
             The 1907-12 figures are nominal capital, and the 1929 figures are paid-up capital. Cassis, Big Business,
10, 33.
                                                                                                           15


1907 to 17 percent in 1919 and then increased over the decade of the 1920s to 26 percent, only to

drop again during the Great Depression and Second World War. The most significant growth

came during the post-World War II period, when the share rose from 22 percent in 1948 to 40

percent in 1970. 30

        In France, the growth of large-scale enterprises awaited to an even greater extent the

post-World War II era. There was no wave of mergers at the turn of the century comparable to

the ones that occurred in the U.S. and Britain, and the wave that occurred during the late 1920s

was much smaller than in Britain (and also than in the U.S., despite the antitrust laws in effect

there). The top 100 companies in France accounted for just 12 percent of industrial output in

1912, and they still accounted for only 16 percent in 1929. 31 It would not be until the third

quarter of the century that there was a major surge in the growth of large-scale business

organizations. As Maurice Lévy-Leboyer wrote in 1980, "Today, for the first time, the corporate

sector in France seems to conform to the general pattern of economic structure and hierarchical

organization that is evident in other major industrial countries." 32

        Such large-scale enterprises as there were in France were concentrated in heavy

industries, though even there the largest firms were smaller in France than in Britain. Youssef

Cassis notes, for example, that the British steel producer Stewarts & Lloyds was in the bottom

half of the top 100 British firms in 1930, but that it was larger than any of the large firms then



        30
            Leslie Hannah, The Rise of the Corporate Economy (2nd edn.; London: Methuen, 1983), 180;
Christopher J. Schmitz, The Growth of Big Business in the United States and Western Europe, 1850-1939
(Houndsmills, Eng.: Macmillan, 1993).
         31
            Jean-Pierre Daviet, "An Impossible Merger? The French Chemical Industry in the 1920s," in
Management and Business in Britain and France: The Age of the Corporate Economy, eds. Youssef Cassis,
François Crouzet, and Terry Gourvish (Oxford, Eng.: Oxford University Press, 1995), 171-190 at 171; Schmitz,
Growth of Big Business, 47.
         32
            Maurice Lévy-Leboyer, "The Large Corporation in France," in Managerial Hierarchies: Comparative
Perspectives on the Rise of the Modern Industrial Enterprise, eds. Alfred D. Chandler, Jr., and Herman Daems
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1980), 117-160 at 117. See also Cassis, Big Business, Chs. 1-2.
                                                                                                                  16


operating in France. 33 In the early twentieth century, however, neither country was a world

leader in steel, even though the key modern steel technology, the Bessemer process, had been

originally developed in Britain. Britain was the top steel producer in the world in 1888 but

already by the First World War produced less than half as much steel as Germany and less than

one fourth as much as the U.S. Over the same period, moreover, its share of world steel exports

declined from about three-quarters to under one quarter. 34 The extensive debate over the sources

of this relative decline need not concern us here. 35 The key point is that the trend was already

significantly underway before the war started and that it resumed in the war's aftermath. France

produced only about a quarter as much steel as Germany on the eve of the First World War. Its

relative position improved somewhat with the reacquisition of Alsace-Lorraine (France's output

of steel surpassed Britain's by 1929 as a result), but there was no corresponding change in the

scale of business organization. 36

         In terms of its share of global production, France's most successful industry in the early

twentieth century was automobiles. It was the world's leading producer at the turn of the century

and second only to the U.S. from 1904 to 1930. The firms that would become France's three

leading automobile manufacturers during the 1920s were already well established before the

First World War. Citroën was still relatively small, but Peugeot and Renault were already in the


         33
             Cassis, Big Business, 5.
         34
             Peter Temin, "The Relative Decline of the British Steel Industry, 1880-1913," in Henry Rosovsky,
Industrialization in Two Systems: Essays in Honor of Alexander Gerschenkron (New York: John Wiley & Sons,
1966), 140-155 at 140.
          35
             The dominant view that emerged from this debate was that the decline was not a result of entrepreneurial
or managerial failure but rather from the protectionist policies pursued by the U.S. and Germany and from the shift
to new major deposits of iron ore that had newly been discovered or that had been made useable by technological
advances. See Temin, "Relative Decline of the British Steel Industry"; Donald N. McCloskey, Economic Maturity
and Entrepreneurial Decline: British Iron and Steel, 1870-1913 (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
1973); Bernard Elbaum, "The Steel Industry before World War I," in The Decline of the British Economy, eds.
Elbaum and William Lazonick (Oxford, Eng.: Oxford University Press, 1986), 51-81. Steven Tolliday, however,
argues in the same Elbaum and Lazonick volume that the resulting industry structure limited the possibilities for
rationalization during the interwar period. See "Steel and Rationalization Policies, 1918-1950," 82-108.
          36
             Cassis, Big Business, 16, 60-61.
                                                                                                              17


top ranks of the European automobile industry. British firms began gaining on French producers

around 1909, and two (Morris and Austin) would emerge along with Ford, which opened a

branch plant in England in 1909, to dominate the British segment of the industry during the

interwar period. Before the war, however, none of the French or British firms operated on the

scale of Ford--in 1913 Ford produced over 200,000 cars, as opposed to 5000 by the largest

French manufacturer and 3000 by the largest British--and, though the leading companies in both

countries benefited from war contracts, Ford's innovations in mass production would not diffuse

in either France or Britain until the 1920s. 37

        In other Second Industrial Revolution industries, firms in Britain and France were more

dependent on foreign technology. Electrical companies were formed in both countries in the late

nineteenth century to exploit the lighting and power systems developed by American inventors

Charles F. Brush, Thomas A. Edison, and Elihu Thomson. The Anglo-American Brush Electric

Lighting Corporation was founded in 1880, for example, and Thomson-Houston Française in

1893. The latter was the only large firm in the French industry until the 1920s, but there were a

number of important entrants in Britain, including companies tied to both American and German

firms. 38 One of them, the British Thomson-Houston Company (which was owned by GE after

the 1892 merger in the United States) combined with a number of other important electrical

companies in the late 1920s to form the giant Associated Electrical Industries. Its most

important competitor (and the largest firm in the industry circa 1930) was the General Electric

Company (no connection with the American GE), which had its origins in the 1880s but grew


        37
            Roy Church, The Rise and Decline of the British Motor Industry (Houndmills, Eng.: Macmillan, 1994),
Ch. 1; Roy Church and Michael Miller, "The Big Three: Competition, Management, and Marketing in the British
Motor Industry, 1922-1939," in Essays in British Business History, ed. Barry Supple (Oxford, Eng.: Oxford
University Press, 1977), 163-186; Cassis, Big Business, 55-57; Patrick Fridenson, Histoire des Usines Renault
(Paris: Seuil, 1972); James M. Laux, The European Automobile Industry (New York: Twayne, 1992).
         38
            I. C. R. Byatt, The British Electrical Industry, 1875-1914: The Economic Returns to a New Technology
(Oxford, Eng.: Oxford University Press, 1979)
                                                                                                               18


into one of 50 largest firms in Britain through a number of important mergers that occurred

during the war and its immediate aftermath. The third most important firm in the industry in the

interwar period, the English Electric Company, was also a product of wartime mergers, but it did

not achieve much success until after it was reorganized in 1931. In general, however, the

mergers seem to have pushed British firms into the top ranks of world producers, and by 1925

Britain had forged ahead of both the US and Germany in the export of electrical equipment. 39 In

France, Thomson-Houston Française dwarfed other French electric companies in the early part

of the century but faced growing competition in the 1920s, especially from the Compagnie

Générale d'Électricité, which grew during and after the war, again to a large extent by mergers.

French firms did not, however, achieve the same level of global success as British, and most

outward investment by French electrical companies was confined to territories within the French

empire. 40

        Although the mergers that transformed the electrical industry would probably have

occurred in the absence of the war, the chemical industry was more directly affected by the

conflagration, both because of the enormous demand for explosives and because of Germany's

prewar dominance in important segments of the industry, particularly dyestuffs. The most

significant long-run consequence of the war was the creation of new dye-making capacity in both

countries as a result of government initiatives. The British government played a critical role in

organizing and financing the transformation of an incumbent firm, Read Holliday, into British

Dyes Ltd., and the French government similarly promoted the creation of Cie Nationale de




          39
             Hannah, Rise of the Corporate Economy, 110-112; Robert Fitzgerald, "International Business and the
Development of British Electrical Manufacturing, 1886-1929," Business History Review 91 (Spring 2017), 31-70.
          40
             Cassis, Big Business, 27-28, 58-59; William J. Hausman, Peter Hertner, and Mira Wilkins, Global
Electrification: Multinational Enterprise and International Finance in the History of Light and Power, 1878-2007
(Cambridge, Eng.: Cambridge University Press, 2008), 160-161.
                                                                                                               19


Matières Colarantes (CNMC). Neither firm was particularly successful. The British government

pushed in 1926 for British Dyes to merge with the country's other major chemical firms, Nobel

Industries and United Alkali, to form Imperial Chemical Industries (ICI). ICI was a large,

managerially directed enterprise that quickly developed significant in-house research capabilities

enabling it finally to succeed in dyestuffs and also to develop an extensive list of innovative

products. In France, CNMC struggled until it was acquired in 1923 by Kuhlmann, the largest

French company that was exclusively a chemical producer. Kuhlmann bought up other

companies during the 1920s but does not seem to have rationalized its management of these

concerns the way ICI did in Britain and certainly was not comparable in size. The other large

chemical firms in France straddled various industries (St. Gobain was primarily a glass

manufacturer and what became Péchiney made aluminum), and their trajectories were less

affected by the war than Kuhlmann's. Rhône-Poulenc, which would become France's most

important chemical firm in the post-World War II period, was a later arrival, the product of the

merger of two medium-sized companies in 1928. 41 Thus even in chemicals, developments in the

late 1920s played a key role in the industry's ultimate success in both Britain and France.

        We do not wish to belittle the economic trauma of the war or of the return to peace and to

the gold standard. The tangle of war debts and the problem of German reparations continued to

afflict European industrial firms, who throughout the 1920s had to negotiate fluctuating

exchange rates and ongoing capital shortages. British and French businesses would undoubtedly

have done better under more favorable macroeconomic circumstances. Nonetheless, it should not

be forgotten that many of them emerged from the war with profits of scandal-inducing

magnitudes that they could use for new investments and that there were also significant infusions


        41
             Haber, Chemical Industry, 189-195, 291-306; Chandler, Scale and Scope, 356-366; Cassis, Big Business,
27, 58-60.
                                                                                                  20


of American capital into Europe after the war. Moreover, some of the most important problems

these enterprises faced, such as shrinking export markets for their goods, resulted from the long-

run rise of the U.S. to the status of the major industrial power, a change that the war crystalized

but did not cause. The relatively slow growth of large-scale enterprises was of a piece with pre-

war trends, and though the war was a major disruption to their business, it did not alter the basic

trajectory of their development.



The Transformation of German Industry


       As in the United States, the rise of big business in Germany was a story of the Second

Industrial Revolution. Though German railroads were largely state-owned, in the key, tightly

interconnected sectors of steel, chemicals, and electrical machinery, Imperial Germany was the

only Second Industrial Revolution economy that generated corporate behemoths to match

America's giants. To Carnegie and Bethlehem Steel, Germany had Thyssen, Krupp and the

Gutehoffnungshütte, each of which was vertically integrated from coal and ore mining all the

way to machines and armored ships, and which made up for their smaller domestic market by

becoming the world leaders in steel exports. To Dow and Du Pont, Germany had Bayer and

BASF. And to GE and Westinghouse, Germany had AEG and Siemens. In terms of

technological advance, Germany was widely considered the world leader in chemistry, and in

electrical engineering Germany's top firms had no inferiority complex. Lacking a mass market

for standardized agricultural equipment, Germany had no machinery firms on the order of

International Harvester, but its machinery sector as a whole was enormous, and dominated

international markets in many product lines, from printing presses and diesel motors (M.A.N.), to
                                                                                                                21


cranes and mining equipment (DEMAG), to equipment for municipal water and gas utilities

(BAMAG).

        World War I led to far more dramatic shifts in business organization in Germany than in

Britain, France, or the United States, for the simple reason that Germany was the only one of the

industrial leaders to be on the losing side of the war. Territorial changes and the powerful

admixture of nationalist resentment and financial weakness that led to Germany's searing

postwar episode of hyperinflation both contributed to major reorganizations of German big

business. Germany's Versailles-imposed territorial losses--especially the return of Alsace-

Lorraine to France and the splitting of Upper Silesia between Poland and Germany--upset the

economic geography of Germany's key heavy industrial regions. The Ruhr iron and steel firms

had had their major iron ore properties in what was now French Lorraine, as well as many blast

furnaces. The Saar was placed outside of the German customs area, and was to be put essentially

at the disposal of French industry as part of the reparations program. 42 The major plants of the

Upper Silesian coal and steel industry were now in Poland, facing vexing trade regulations and

enormous political pressures from a Polish state which--quite sensibly, and, in fact, correctly--

feared that German-owned companies would be a locus of irrendentist machinations. 43 These

territorial shifts called forth major industrial reorganizations, in particular a marked shift among

the Ruhr steel producers away from Lorraine ores to Swedish ones. (Ironically, this gave a

productivity boost to the German industry, since the Swedish ores contained roughly twice as

high a concentration of iron as the French ones. Once German blast furnace practice adapted to




          42
             On the wrenching postwar changes to the German iron and steel industry, Gerald D. Feldman, Iron and
Steel in the German Inflation, 1916-1923 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1977).
          43
             Alfred Reckendrees, "Business as a Means of Foreign Policy or Politics as a Means of Production? The
German Government and the Creation of Friedrich Flick's Upper Silesian Industrial Empire (1921­1935),"
Enterprise and Society 14, no. 1 (March 2013), 99-143.
                                                                                                              22


its new material inputs, it easily made up in increased efficiency for what it lost in brute

capacity. 44) What had formerly been a zone of extensive firm-level integration across national

borders became a site of industrial and geopolitical conflict. 45

        The hyperinflation, which eviscerated the savings of middle class Germans, was in many

ways a boon to large-scale German industry. With the so-called "flight to real values," big

German firms found themselves quite suddenly able to engage in a spectacular consolidation

spree of "concern-building." Some large firms bought others outright, as with the purchase by

the Haniel-family-owned Gutehoffnungshütte coal, iron, steel and machinery combine of the

Bavarian M.A.N. machinery giant. 46 Others, most famously the coal and steel baron Hugo

Stinnes, formed Interessengemeinschaften ("communities of interest") with Siemens in a

somewhat abortive attempt to find economies of scope. 47 Other combines were formed by

industrialists who were little more than profiteers, most infamously Friedrich Flick, who scooped

up coal and steel properties in central Germany and ­ secretly ­ in Polish Upper Silesia. 48

        With the stabilization of the German currency and German public finances after the U.S.-

engineered Dawes Plan of 1924, German industry had to quickly adjust from an easy money

regime to a very hard one. Already before 1924 major German firms had begun to borrow from

American banks, but in small amounts and without much fanfare. After the Dawes loan, the


         44
            W. O. Blanchard, "The Iron and Steel Industry of Europe," Journal of Geography 27, no. 7 (Oct. 1928):
253­54. Hermann Wenzel, "Zur Frage der Eisenerzversorgung Deutschlands, insbesondere Rheinland-Westfalens","
in Die Rohstoffversorgung der deutschen eisenerzeugenden Industrie. Verhandlungen und Berichte des
Unterausschusses für Gewerbe: Industrie, Handel und Handwerk (III. Unterausschuß), by Ausschuss zur
Untersuchung . . . (Berlin: E. S. Mittler & Sohn, 1928), 58.
         45
            On the pre-war pattern of cross-border investment, see especially Carl Strikwerda, "The Troubled
Origins of European Economic Integration: International Iron and Steel and Labor Migration in the Era of World
War I," The American Historical Review 98, no. 4 (October 1993): 1106­29.
         46
            Christian Marx, Paul Reusch und die Gutehoffnungshütte: Leitung eines deutsch Großunternehmens
(Göttingen: Wallstein Verlag, 2013).
         47
            Gerald Feldman, The Great Disorder: Politics, Economics and Society in the German Inflation, 1914-
1924 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1993).
         48
            Kim Christian Priemel, Flick: eine Konzerngeschichte vom Kaiserreich bis zur Bundesrepublik
(Göttingen: Wallstein Verlag, 2013).
                                                                                                            23


marquee names of German industry increasingly turned to America for the funding necessary to

"rationalize" German industry in line with the demands of international competitiveness--where

Germany labored under the dual burden of a hard gold currency while France and especially

Britain were still floating­and reparations, which effectively were a tax on German exports. 49

The rationalization wave of horizontal mergers was motivated by a desire to both imitate and

compete with America. 50 American money was used not just for financial legerdemain but for

massive investment in cutting edge integrated plant. Out of it came the Vereinigte Stahlwerke

AG (Vestag), Europe's second-largest corporation and the second-largest steel producer in the

world after U.S. Steel, and IG Farbenindustrie, Europe's largest corporation and the single

largest chemical manufacturer on the planet. 51 These firms were dominant enough to be able to

largely dictate the structure of export markets in their respective fields, such as through the

International Steel Cartel, whose policies corresponded in many respects to the requirements of

the Vestag's throughput. 52

        The war also affected German international business through the damage it did to the

German banking system. The war and the post-war inflation essentially eliminated the

international asset position of the German banking system. Themselves dependent on foreign

borrowing, German banks had minimal ability to finance the exports of German industry. The

weakness of the German banking system combined with Germany's urgent need to increase

exports in order to maintain employment and to comply with the Dawes Plan pushed German


        49
             William C. McNeil, American Money and the Weimar Republic: Economics and Politics on the Eve of
the Great Depression (New York: Columbia University Press, 1986).
          50
             Alfred Reckendrees, "Die Vereinigte Stahlwerke A. G. 1926-1933 und `das glänzende Beispiel
Amerika,'" Zeitschrift für Unternehmensgeschichte 41, no. 2 (Jan. 1996): 159­86.
          51
             Alfred Reckendrees, Das "Stahltrust"-Projekt: Die Gründung der Vereinigte Stahlwerke A.G. und ihre
Unternehmensentwicklung 1926-1933/34 (München: C.H.Beck, 2000). On the formation of IG Farben, Peter Hayes,
Industry and Ideology: IG Farben in the Nazi Era (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987).
          52
             See, for example, Stephen A. Schuker, The End of French Predominance in Europe: The Financial
Crisis of 1924 and the Adoption of the Dawes Plan (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1976), 373.
                                                                                                             24


banks and German heavy industry to come together to lobby the German government for credit

facilities, especially to resume the historic role of German heavy industry as a supplier for

Russian industrialization. 53 Other European countries also developed various forms of public-

private partnerships to provide export credit insurance or guarantees, mostly as a way to support

exporters through conditions of significant exchange risk in overseas sales. The British, for

example, introduced an export credit guarantee program in 1921, and by the time an American

government researcher studied the question in 1934, almost every European country had

developed some form of this basic instrument. 54 But in most countries, and especially in Britain,

France, and ­ finally, in 1934 ­ the U.S., officials strenuously worked to assure bondholders that

export credit insurance in no way represented the extension of government-backed long-term

capital to foreigners, since this would undermine foreign sovereigns' incentive to pay existing

debts. 55 The elimination of almost all of Germany's overseas claims as a result of the war meant

that German suppliers were less entangled with questions of foreign debt and concessions, and

the relative weight of specialized machinery and equipment in German exports as opposed to

textiles meant that German industry had less to fear from nascent import substitution than

Britain's in particular. By 1926, once most of the disruption wrought by the war had been

stabilized, German industry was more concentrated, more geared to exports, and more

sophisticated in its modes of enlisting state support than any of its major rivals. 56




        53
             Gerald D. Feldman, "Die Deutsche Bank vom Ersten Weltkrieg bis zur Weltwirtschaftskrise 1914-1933,"
in Die Deutsche Bank, 1870-1995, by Lothar Gall et al. (München: C. H. Beck, 1995), 249­58.
          54
             Stella K. Margold, Export Credit Insurance in Europe Today (Washington, DC: GPO, 1934)
          55
             Michael R. Adamson, "`Must We Overlook All Impairment of Our Interests?' Debating the Foreign Aid
Role of the Export-Import Bank, 1934­41," Diplomatic History 29, no. 4 (Sep. 2005): 589­623.
          56
             See the summary of the iron and steel industry's strategy in Feldman, Iron and Steel in the German
Inflation, 451-6.
                                                                                                            25


New Nationalist Ambitions


        German international business confronted a new world whose needs it was in some ways

ideally suited to serve. The territorial clauses of the peace treaties vanquished the Hohenzollern,

Habsburg, Romanov and Ottoman Empires, leaving in their wake the new or rump states of

Yugoslavia, Austria, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Poland, Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia, and Turkey,

and substantially redrawing the borders of already independent Bulgaria (for the worse) and

Romania (for the better), not to mention the Soviet Union, which expropriated practically all

private business and called into question whether Russia--the great emerging market of the pre-

1914 period--would ever again be an open field for international business. 57 Germany's

overseas empire as well as most of the former Ottoman Empire were placed under the League of

Nations "mandate" system, with the ostensible purpose of shepherding them towards

independent nationhood. In colonies, protectorates, and independent but weak states across the

world, nationalist stirrings transformed the political calculus of elites. Across the board,

nationality was, for the first time in world history, declared the foundational principle of

international legal ordering and the international state system, and nationalism--the conviction

that the fate of a people was indissolubly tied to the fortunes of an autonomous, territorial state--

became a paramount force in international life. 58




        57
            Robert Gerwarth, The Vanquished: Why the First World War Failed to End (New York: Farrar, Straus
and Giroux, 2016). Hassan Malik, Bankers and Bolsheviks: International Finance and the Russian Revolution
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2018).
         58
            Erez Manela, The Wilsonian Moment: Self-Determination and the International Origins of Anticolonial
Nationalism (Oxford ; New York: Oxford University Press, 2009). Embrace of self-determination, however, in no
way implied sovereign equality. See Susan Pedersen, The Guardians: The League ofNations and the Crisis
ofEmpire (New York: Oxford University Press, 2015); Maja Spanu, "The Idea of Self-Determination: Hierarchy and
Order after Empire" Unpublished dissertation, European University Institute, 2015; and Manu Goswami,
"Rethinking the Modular Nation Form: Toward a Sociohistorical Conception of Nationalism," Comparative Studies
in Society and History 44, no. 4 (Oct. 2002): 770­99.
                                                                                                             26


        In this brave new world, national governments, both new and old, faced immense

pressure to ensure political autonomy through economic means. 59 This took myriad forms,

depending on the nature of different countries' past integration into the circuits of international

capitalism, ranging from nationalization of foreign-owned firms, to renegotiation of concessions

and sovereign debt, to tariffs and other forms of protection for domestic industries. Some of the

new demands emanated directly from developing countries' experience of the war, particularly

the interruptions to global shipping that transmitted an acute inflationary shock from the Global

North to the Global South. 60 What all of the demands had in common were efforts to drive what

were felt to be better bargains vis-à-vis foreign capitalists and firms. 61 But what scholars have

generally overlooked is that nationalism also called forth a need for foreign assistance in building

out Second Industrial Revolution industries, especially steel, which loomed large in the

industrialization programs of numerous old and new states. Industries like electricity also

required foreign assistance, but these investments were relatively unproblematic from the point

of view of business interests in the most powerful states: electricity is a non-competing good;

and foreigners earned healthy profits selling generators and contracting to build out electricity

grids. Steel promised profits from construction and kit, but also a hit to the export markets of

national steelmakers.




        59
            The following paragraphs draw heavily from Edward Fertik, "Steel and Sovereignty: The United States,
Nationalism, and the Transformation of World Order, 1898-1941," Unpublished dissertation, Yale University, 2018,
especially chapters 2, 3, and 6.
         60
            See Adam Tooze and Ted Fertik, "The World Economy and the Great War," Geschicte und Gesellschaft
40, no. 2 (Jun. 2014), 214-238.
         61
            For a survey, Henryk Szlajfer, Economic Nationalism and Globalization: Lessons from Latin America
and Central Europe (Leiden: Brill, 2013). The experience of the former Habsburg lands is comprehensively covered
in Alice Teichova, "East-central and south-east Europe, 1919-39," in The Cambridge Economic History of Europe
Volume VIII, The Industrial Economies: The Development of Economic and Social Policies (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1989), 887-982.
                                                                                                    27


       This international situation set up potential conflicts of interest within the national

political economies of the leading World War I belligerents. In particular, states that wished to

industrialize were often indebted and sometimes in default to bondholders in Britain, France, and

America, which made any provision of medium-term credit for industrialization programs

problematic; and import substitution would likely come at the expense of exports from these

same countries. At the same time in Britain and Germany in particular, builders of heavy

machinery were politically potent. Their high-value added goods generated healthy export

earnings in the immediate term, and, due to the path dependent quality of initial investments in a

particular technology in industries like steel, over the longer term as well. It was common to hear

manufacturers and government officials warn that a failure to establish a foothold in a newly

industrializing market could leave a country's heavy machinery makers permanently shut out.

Their not-yet-Taylorized plants employed large numbers of skilled workers with high levels of

shop floor power. Encouragement and even a measure of subsidization of these exports was,

comparatively, a low-cost method of keeping down economically and politically troublesome

unemployment.

       In the 1920s, these conflicts were muted, as the governments of new states mostly

complied with the rules of the pre-1914 regime of sovereign borrowing, wagering their

industrialization programs on the easy availability of long-term capital via the New York--and,

by 1926, London and Paris­capital markets. Capital for electrification of major cities and

railroads in developing countries, for example, flowed out in massive quantities, either through

funds raised by developing country governments, or through concessions to Belgian, French,

British, Canadian and American firms. These projects often had a genuinely multinational

quality to them. For example the largest corporation in Brazil in the 1920s was the Canadian-
                                                                                                                 28


owned Brazilian Traction, which was the monopoly electricity provider in Rio de Janeiro and

São Paulo. The firm, however, had bondholders throughout Europe and raised much of its capital

in the 1920s in New York through the investment bank Dillon Read. 62

        The Depression, however, threw conflicts of interest into stark relief. 63 The "mother of all

sudden stops" brought on history's largest wave of sovereign defaults, including--fatefully--

Germany itself. 64 The governments of the countries in which bondholders were concentrated--

France, Britain, and America above all--faced substantial political pressure to prioritize

bondholders' demands, but also faced pressure to boost employment through support for exports.

Germany, where the unemployment situation was severe, but the bondholders' lobby essentially

non-existent, had a freer hand.

        As early as 1930, conservative German governments looked to exploit Germany's

economic plight and the alarming rise of the far right to win concessions from the reparations

creditors, who were also their enemies in World War I. 65 Chancellor Heinrich Brüning's June

1931 threat to default on Germany's reparations debt triggered a run on the Reichsmark and a

complete collapse of the German banking system, ushering in the most acute phase of the Great

Depression and the beginnings of a regime of exchange controls that would soon sweep across

large swathes of the globe where balance of payments crises threatened massive economic




        62
             Duncan McDowall, The Light: Brazilian Traction, Light, and Power Company Limited, 1899-1945
(Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1988).
          63
             Noel Maurer has explained the U.S.'s refusal to deploy the Marines in defense of bondholders' interests
in the 1930s ­ in marked contrast to earlier decades ­ as a result of conflicts of interest between bondholders and
direct foreign investors, for example sugar growers in Cuba. Maurer, The Empire Trap: the rise and fall of U.S.
intervention to protect American property overseas, 1893-2013 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2013).
Here we are referring to conflicts of interest between foreign investors generally and manufacturers of heavy
equipment.
          64
             Olivier Accominotti and Barry Eichengreen, "The mother of all sudden stops: capital flows and reversals
in Europe, 1919­32," Economic History Review 69 no. 2 (May, 2016), 469-492.
          65
             Peter Krüger, Die Aussenpolitik der Republik von Weimar (Darmstadt: Wissenschaftlicher
Buchgesellschaft, 1985).
                                                                                                             29


dislocation. 66 Even as Germany won reprieve thanks to Herbert Hoover's unilateral reparations

moratorium, its leaders began a gradual but marked shift away from cooperation with the other

major capitalist powers. 67 Germany began a search for new markets and new sources of raw

materials, and with increasing sophistication, used its exchange controls regime to pioneer new

forms of bilateral trade and credit arrangements. In 1934, when Hjalmar Schacht imposed the so-

called "New Plan," all of Germany's foreign trade became instrumentalized towards Hitler and

Göring's superordinate priority of rearmament and war-readiness. The objective of Schacht's

New Plan was to find the imports necessary to keep German rearmament moving without

exploding the German balance of payments. 68 As a logical consequence of successive German

governments' decisions to default on the country's international debts, Germany began a process

of selective disengagement from economic relations with especially the U.S. and the British

Empire, who were its largest trading partners, in favor of relations with the poorer but

independent countries of Southeast Europe, the Middle East, Latin America, and East Asia. 69

This economic-cum-diplomatic demarche has long been considered a prelude to Hitler's

expansionist and genocidal wars of conquest. In fact it was largely concentrated on parts of the

world which German strategists had no illusions of being able to conquer and consisted of far

more carrots than sticks. 70 The carrot was access to German markets at above world-market


         66
            That the German financial crisis was caused by the actions of Germany's political leaders, and not
through the leapfrogging of the Vienna Creditanstalt collapse in May 1931, is powerfully demonstrated in Thomas
Ferguson and Peter Temin, "Made in Germany: The German Currency Crisis of July 1931," Research in Economic
History 21 (2003), 1-53.
         67
            On the Hoover Moratorium, see Robert W. D. Boyce, The Great Interwar Crisis and the Collapse of
Globalization (Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009), 305.
         68
            Adam Tooze, The Wages of Destruction: The Making and Breaking of the Nazi Economy (New York:
Penguin, 2006).
         69
            Albrecht O. Ritschl, "Nazi Economic Imperialism and the Exploitation of the Small: Evidence from
Germany's Secret Foreign Exchange Balances, 1938-1940," The Economic History Review 54, no. 2 (May 2001):
324­45.
         70
            Alan S. Milward, "The Reichsmark Bloc and the International Economy," in The Führer State, Myth and
Reality: Studies on the Structure and Politics of the Third Reich, ed. Gerhard Hirschfeld and Lothar Kettenacker
(Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta, 1981), 377­413; Adam Tooze and Martin Ivanov, "Disciplining the `Black Sheep of the
                                                                                                                 30


prices, and--what scholars have completely overlooked--access to high-value capital goods,

frequently on credit terms that represented a complete circumvention of effective credit boycotts

in France, Britain and the U.S. In other words, German heavy industry and the German

government forged an alliance of convenience with nationalist governments which, under the

conditions of the Depression and growing international tensions, sought industrialization as a

way to fortify national sovereignty.

        Germany's new export offensive saw German firms building railways, ports, factories,

power plants, and steel mills in many parts of the world. Some of these were alarming enough--

on commercial and strategic grounds--to businessmen and government officials in rival

countries to bring about a reversal of past policy. In Kemal's Turkey, for example, within two

years of the signing of a 1933 clearing agreement, fully half of the Republic of Turkey's foreign

trade was being done with Germany. Jamming up so much of its foreign trade in blocked

currencies allowed Turkey to plead foreign exchange poverty to the holders of the old Ottoman

Debt--a financial albatross inherited from a state that no longer existed--resulting in dramatic

reductions in debt payments. British engineering firms were furious that all of the best Turkish

business was going to German firms. British cotton textile firms were furious that Turkish import

substitution was destroying one of the "imperialism of free trade's" great markets (thanks to the

infamous "Capitulations," Ottoman Turkey had effectively no tariff sovereignty). British

diplomats feared that Germany's economic and financial accommodations to Turkey were

inclining its statesmen towards a pro-German orientation in their foreign policy. With the

prospect of a £2 (later £3) million integrated iron and steel works dangled before them, British

officials overruled the bondholders' and textile manufacturers' lobbies and the Bank of England


Balkans': Financial Supervision and Sovereignty in Bulgaria, 1902-38," Economic History Review 64, no. 1 (Feb.
2011): 30­51.
                                                                                                   31


in favor of machinery builders and friendly relations with an increasingly autonomous,

nationalist government in Ankara. Not only that, the British government guaranteed the entirety

of the sum, secured only by the surplus earnings of a minerals monopoly that the Turkish state

owned and which amounted to nothing more, as British officials acknowledged, than "a promise

to pay." Schacht himself traveled to Turkey in November 1936 to try to prevent the contract

from going to Britain, only to find that the Turks were fully satisfied with their negotiations and

with their success in using growing German economic penetration as a wedge to pry loose

concessions from Britain. The contract furthermore solidified Turkey's preferred position of

strict neutrality in the impending global great power conflict. In this way a combination of

economic and strategic rationales brought about a pronounced shift in business-government

relations in Britain. 71

        Something similar happened in Brazil. The nationalist government of Getulio Vargas had

spent the first years of the Depression attempting to make small shifts towards a more

developmentalist model of economic governance, while remaining broadly within the rules and

norms of the old, export and sovereign debt-based regime. Starting in the mid-1930s, barter trade

with Germany, in which Brazil largely exchanged a booming cotton crop for investment goods,

and favorable deals with British heavy equipment manufacturers for projects like railway

electrification, led to the U.S. government hearing a growing chorus of complaints from

American capital goods producers. Before 1938, the U.S. government interpreted these

complaints exclusively through the lens of export promotion. But in November 1937 Vargas

declared himself dictator, in a coup that elevated the power of the top brass of the Brazilian

military, where fascist sympathizers were a vocal minority. In April 1938 Brazil's fascist party



        71
             This episode is recounted in detail in Fertik, "Steel and Sovereignty," chapter 3.
                                                                                                   32


itself attempted a coup. With the alarming events in Europe of that year, American policymakers

increasingly feared that a fascist fifth column in Brazil, buoyed by the perceived advantages of

German-Brazilian barter trade, could make Brazil the beachhead for a German military assault

on the western hemisphere. Already in 1938, Vargas was giving speeches indicating that the

"solution" of "our national steel problem" would be a crucial consideration in Brazil's foreign

relations. By 1939, all three of the major German builders of steel mill equipment were vying for

the contract to build a Brazilian national steel industry. Vargas, preferring ­ for geopolitical

reasons ­ an American solution, tried to interest U.S. Steel. Despite the enthusiasm of the

corporation's engineers, J. P. Morgan & Co. senior partner Thomas Lamont vetoed it in early

1940, on the grounds that a country in default to its bondholders was not a safe place in which to

sink substantial investment capital. With Brazilian diplomats openly threatening that a failure by

the U.S. to act would drive Brazil in to German arms, the U.S. government, through the Export-

Import Bank, agreed in September 1940 to finance the entire project, at 4 percent interest over 10

years, with essentially no security for the loan. U.S. equipment would be purchased, but other

than that, the American state would finance the keystone of Brazil's industrialization drive, over

the objections of bondholders, steel exporters, and protectionist politicians. 72



Epilogue


       It was only after the Second World War that businesses in Europe were transformed

along the lines of the American model, with U.S.-guaranteed military security, Marshall Plan

funds, the first steps towards European integration, and mass migration from the countryside to

the cities combining finally to overcome European doubts about mass production and mass


       72
            This sequence is covered in Fertik, "Steel and Sovereignty," Chapters 5 and 6.
                                                                                                     33


markets. How much one can attribute this post-1945 transformation to the First World War is

partly a question of definition. If one views the disruptions of the middle third of the twentieth

century as a consequence of the First World War--that as, as the workings out of a Thirty-Years

War touched off in 1914--then in a certain deep sense World War I was ultimately the catalyst

for the Americanization of European big business. But if one limits the war's duration to the

conflagration of 1914-1918 proper, then it is hard to see it as having a transformative effect on

Second Industrial Revolution businesses.

       That was not the case for the spread of these businesses to developing countries. Here the

direct economic experience of the First World War, as well as the wider nationalist explosion to

which it gave rise, occasioned a worldwide restructuring of economic relations between

advanced and developing countries, and industrialization emerged as a leading aspiration from

South America to Eastern Europe to China. These changes created opportunities for some firms

in the core Second Industrial Revolution countries, but challenges for others, and set up potential

conflicts of interest between exporters and bondholders. Though muted in the 1920s, these

conflicts became acute after the global wave of sovereign defaults set off by the Great

Depression. Germany, where the machinery industry was dominant and overseas financial claims

smallest, had the freest hand in developing means of government-industry cooperation to

facilitate industrialization in places like Brazil, Turkey and China. The alarming success of

German policy, which took on an increasingly geostrategic cast as Hitler's expansionist

ambitions became clearer, forced Britain and the U.S. to compete with similar initiatives of their

own. The result was, in effect, a global credit regime for facilitating, on a bilateral basis, import-

substituting industrialization in developing countries--well before the mid-twentieth century,

when the beginning of the era of "international development" is usually dated. Although the
                                                                                              34


diffusion of Second Industrial Revolution technologies beyond their homelands in northwest

Europe and the U.S. had to happen at some point, World War I both accelerated the process and

altered the terms on which it was done, giving the new emerging nations more power to shape

their own development than would probably otherwise have been the case.
