                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       THE STORY OF THE REAL EXCHANGE RATE

                                          Oleg Itskhoki

                                       Working Paper 28225
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28225


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020




When citing this paper, please use the following: Itskhoki O. 2021. The Story of the Real
Exchange Rate. Annu. Rev. Econ. 13. DOI: 10.1146/annurev-economics-080218-025532. Based
on my graduate lectures that I taught at Princeton in 2009-2019. I am grateful to Ken Rogoff for
introducing me to this topic in his Ph.D. class at Harvard in 2005, as well as to my coauthors Gita
Gopinath, Roberto Rigobon, Emmanuel Farhi, Brent Neiman, Mary Amiti, Joep Konings and
Dmitry Mukhin, with whom I worked in this area and who shaped my understanding of the topic.
I also benefited from conversations with Mark Aguiar, Andy Atkeson, Ariel Burstein, Charles
Engel, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Jon Steinsson and many others. All errors are, of course, my
own. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Oleg Itskhoki. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Story of the Real Exchange Rate
Oleg Itskhoki
NBER Working Paper No. 28225
December 2020
JEL No. E31,F31,F41,G15

                                         ABSTRACT

The real exchange rate (RER) measures relative price levels across countries, capturing
deviations from purchasing power parity (PPP). RER is a key variable in international
macroeconomic models as it is central to equilibrium conditions in both goods and asset markets.
It is also one of the most starkly-behaved variables empirically, tightly co-moving with the
nominal exchange rate and virtually uncorrelated with most other macroeconomic variables,
nominal or real. This survey lays out an equilibrium framework of RER determination, focusing
separately on each building block and discussing corresponding empirical evidence. We
emphasize home bias and incomplete pass-through into prices with expenditure switching and
goods market clearing, imperfect international risk sharing, country budget constraint and
monetary policy regime. We show that RER is inherently a general-equilibrium variable, which
depends on the full model structure and policy regime, and therefore partial theories like PPP are
insufficient to explain it. We also discuss issues of stationarity and predictability of exchange
rates.


Oleg Itskhoki
Department of Economics
University of California, Los Angeles
Bunche Hall, 315 Portola Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
itskhoki@econ.ucla.edu
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                                                            1

2 De nitions and Facts                                                                                                    3

3 Real Exchange Rate and International Relative Prices                                                                    6
  3.1 The PPP hypothesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    6
  3.2 Non-tradables and home bias . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    8
  3.3 Variable markups and pricing to market . . . . . . . .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   12
  3.4 Foreign-currency price stickiness . . . . . . . . . . .    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   17

4 Real Exchange Rate and Expenditure Switching                                                                           22
  4.1 Import demand and net exports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                  22
  4.2 Market clearing and aggregate consumption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                    24

5 Real Exchange Rate and International Risk Sharing                                                                      26
  5.1 Complete markets and nancial autarky . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                     27
  5.2 General incomplete markets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                 29

6 Real Exchange Rate in General Equilibrium                                                                              31
  6.1 Country budget constraint . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                31
  6.2 Monetary policy and exchange rate regimes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                    33

7 Conclusion                                                                                                             35
1    Introduction
The real exchange rate (RER) measures relative price levels across countries. In other words,
RER captures deviations from purchasing power parity (PPP), according to which price levels
should be equalized across space (countries). A country with a higher consumer price level is
said to have an appreciated real exchange rate. Movements in RER re ect gaps between rel-
ative in ation rates across countries and nominal exchange rate depreciation: when nominal
depreciation is not met with more price in ation at home, a real depreciation occurs.
    Why should economists care about RER, and in particular about its short-to-medium run
dynamics? Indeed, it is an arti cial construct: while it looks like a relative price, in fact there
is no market in which it acts like one, since we cannot exchange consumer baskets across
countries. This contrasts with the terms of trade (ToT), a closely related concept, which is in
fact a relative price in the export-import market. Nonetheless, RER often plays a more central
role than ToT in academic and policy discussions. In part, it is perhaps because popular dis-
cussion sometimes con ates RER and ToT. Still, the focus on RER is justi ed from a theoretical
perspective: RER deserves its central place in international macroeconomics as a crucial di-
agnostic variable for our modeling frameworks -- both in the goods market and in the asset
market -- as we explore in this manuscript.
    Furthermore, RER is one of the most starkly-behaved variables. It co-moves tightly with
the nominal exchange rate (NER) and is virtually uncorrelated with most other macroeconomic
fundamentals, real or nominal. These facts provide sharp testable implications for models,
which often have a hard time matching the empirical properties of exchange rates, resulting in
numerous puzzles. Historically, the behavior of RER was viewed as prime evidence of nominal
non-neutralities (the Mussa puzzle) and nominal rigidities (the PPP Puzzle). We argue here that
the focus on nominal rigidities, and more speci cally models in which monetary shocks are
the driving force of RER, sidetracked the literature from focusing on alternative mechanisms,
which are more successful at explaining the behavior of exchange rates.
    We further argue that RER is inherently a general-equilibrium object, which depends on the
full model structure and policy regime. As a result, partial theories like PPP or non-tradables,
which were often the focus of the literature, are insu cient to explain RER. As we will show,
PPP deviations, while necessary for RER to move, shed little light on the nature of RER volatil-
ity and persistence, which are shaped by general-equilibrium forces -- both in the asset and
in the goods markets.
    In Section 2, we start with basic de nitions and empirical facts about exchange rates that
we address in the remainder of the manuscript. Section 3 focuses on PPP and the nature of PPP
deviations: non-tradables and home bias in tradables, and various forms of the law of one price
(LOP) violations -- pricing to market and foreign-currency price stickiness. We review both

                                                1
theory and empirical evidence supporting or falsifying it. While some form of PPP deviations
is necessary for a theory of RER, no partial theory of PPP deviations is su cient to explain
its equilibrium properties. A combination of aggregate home bias with incomplete exchange
rate pass-through into prices is essential for a successful quantitative theory of RER. Yet, this
o ers only an entry point into the full equilibrium analysis of RER.
    The following three sections study various general equilibrium aspects of RER determi-
nation. In Section 4, we explore the second step of international transmission -- expenditure
switching from movements in international relative prices into import quantities and net ex-
ports. This section also discusses goods market clearing in an open economy and the implied
equilibrium relationship between RER and aggregate consumption. For the goods market to
clear, a decline in home aggregate consumption requires a RER depreciation to shift global
expenditure towards domestically produced goods in order to balance out their excess supply.
We show that expenditure switching in the goods market is at the core of general equilibrium
comovement between RER and macroeconomic quantities, or lack thereof, as emphasized em-
pirically by the Backus-Smith correlation (puzzle).
    Section 5 switches focus to the asset market, exploring the role of exchange rates in inter-
national risk sharing. We begin with two limiting cases -- complete asset markets and nancial
autarky. Surprisingly, these two opposite extremes result in qualitatively equivalent implica-
tions of strong counterfactual comovement between aggregate consumption and RER, as they
both turn a generally dynamic risk sharing condition into a static equilibrium relationship --
the Backus-Smith risk sharing condition in the former case and the balanced trade condition
in the latter case. We then consider the general case of incomplete asset markets, both without
additional frictions and under nancial constraints or market segmentation. This relaxes the
tight state-by-state relationship between RER and macroeconomic aggregates, and instead re-
sults in a martingale condition for RER with possible sources of departure from a pure random
walk. We show that the asset market equilibrium shapes the expected future changes in RER
without pinning down the equilibrium level of RER or its unexpected level jumps.
    Finally, in Section 6, we explore the remaining general-equilibrium determinants of RER
-- the country budget constraint and monetary policy regime. While equilibrium in the nan-
cial market shapes the future expected changes in exchange rates, the intertemporal budget
constraint provides an integral condition on the equilibrium level of RER. This provides the
remaining condition required to determine the unexpected level jumps in RER which are nec-
essary to balance a country's intertemporal budget constraint. Together with the martingale
risk sharing property, this establishes equilibrium discipline on the long-run behavior of RER.
In general, RER follows an integrated non-stationary process that exhibits partial mean rever-
sion, implying very long measured half lives consistent with the empirical evidence on PPP.


                                               2
Therefore, it is the general equilibrium determinants of RER -- in the goods and asset mar-
kets -- that shape the dynamic properties of RER, independently of the speci c nature of PPP
deviations at the micro level. In ation-stabilizing monetary policy then ensures the tight re-
lationship between nominal and real exchange rates observed in the data.
    To summarize, this survey emphasizes a general equilibrium framework that combinines
home bias and incomplete pass-through into prices with expenditure switching and goods
market clearing, imperfect international risk sharing, intertemporal budget constraint and
monetary policy. These elements jointly determine the equilibrium behavior of exchange rates
and their comovement with macroeconomic variables that is consistent with empirical evi-
dence. This analysis builds on excellent previous surveys, including Rogo (1996), Goldberg
and Knetter (1997), Burstein and Gopinath (2012), Engel (2014), with a focus on the general
equilibrium nature of exchange rates and the recent theoretical and empirical work in this area.

Overview of the equilibrium system Sections 3­6 analyze sequentially the various equi-
librium blocks of RER determination. We identify here the key equilibrium equations to make
it easier for the reader to navigate the resulting equilibrium system. Section 3 starts with a
general RER decomposition (4) to outline all possible sources of PPP deviations in Lemma 1.
It then proceeds to characterize relationships between RER and international relative prices
and wages in (10), (16) and (17). The outcome of the expenditure switching mechanism in
Section 4 is the goods market clearing condition (20). The key result of Section 5 is the inter-
national risk sharing condition (28), with special case solutions given by (23) for complete mar-
kets and (25) for autarky. The country budget constraint (30) is the main result of Section 6.
The dynamic equilibrium system consists of (20), (28) and (30), resulting in the equilibrium
characterization of RER in (31).


2       De nitions and Facts
The nominal exchange rate (NER, or simply exchange rate) is the relative price of cur-
rencies. We denote it with Et , de ned as the price of foreign currency in units of the home
currency. Therefore, an increase in Et corresponds to a nominal depreciation of the home
currency, as more units of home currency need to be paid for one unit of foreign currency.1
We use small letters to denote logs, e.g. et  log Et is the log exchange rate and et  et - et-1
corresponds to an exchange rate depreciation (appreciation, if negative) in log points.
    1
     This de nition where an increases in the exchange rate corresponds to a depreciation is conventional in the
international macro literature, in particular in monetary models where all nominal quantities are cointegrated
and Et increases together with the quantity of money Mt and the nominal price level Pt , at least in the long run.
NER is typically de ned as a bilateral exchange rate between a pair of currencies; occasionally, it is de ned as a
trade-weighted exchange rate of the home country's currency against the rest of the world.



                                                        3
    In the data, under oating exchange rate regimes, bilateral log exchange rates follow a
process nearly indistinguishable from a random walk. In other words, exchange rate depre-
ciations are nearly unpredictable, Et et+1  0, and the current level of the exchange rate
o ers nearly the best forecast for the future exchange rates, Et et+h  et for any h > 0. Fur-
thermore, exchange rate changes et+1 exhibit no robust contemporaneous correlation with
almost any macro variable. As a result, it is very di cult to improve the out-of-sample fore-
casts of the exchange rates over a random-walk forecast, even using macro information from
future periods. This property of exchange rates is often called the Meese and Rogo puzzle,
after their seminal 1983 paper, and is sometimes referred to as the exchange rate disconnect in a
narrow sense, emphasizing the lack of contemporaneous correlation between exchange rates
and macroeconomic fundamentals.2
    Macroeconomists view exchange rates as "excessively" volatile. Indeed, oating exchange
rate changes have annualized standard deviation of around 10-12 percentage points -- an order
of magnitude larger than that for in ation, consumption and output growth. In contrast, -
nance economists view exchange rates as "insu ciently" volatile, as they are about a third less
volatile than the stock market (Brandt, Cochrane, and Santa-Clara 2006, Lustig and Verdelhan
2019). Indeed, exchange rates can be viewed as assets, and hence should inherit the properties
of the same stochastic discount factor that prices stocks and bonds (see Section 5).

The real exchange rate (RER) is the relative price of consumption baskets across countries.
We denote it with Qt , which is de ned as the ratio of price levels denominated in a common
currency:
                               Et Pt
                         Qt          ,    or in logs qt  et + p   t - pt ,                    (1)
                                 Pt
where Pt and Pt are consumer price levels at home and abroad, respectively ( denotes foreign
variables and/or variables denominated in foreign currency, where it causes no confusion).
Therefore, Qt measures the number of home consumption baskets one needs to sell at home
(each valued at Pt ) in order to buy one foreign consumption basket abroad (valued at Pt and
converted to home currency using Et ). This is, of course, an imaginary transaction as consump-
tions baskets are generally non-tradable and RER is not an actual price in any existing market.
    An increase in Qt corresponds to a real depreciation -- a decline in the relative purchasing
    2
      There are a number of documented departures from a purely unpredictable random walk process for ex-
change rates (see surveys by Rossi 2013, Rogo and Stavrakeva 2008). For example, there exists predictability at
high frequencies using order ows (Evans and Lyons 2002), for "commodity currencies" (Chen and Rogo 2003),
with past trade de cits (Gourinchas and Rey 2007), RER deviations (Eichenbaum, Johannsen, and Rebelo 2020),
interest rates (Stavrakeva and Tang 2015), portfolio ows (Lilley, Maggiori, Neiman, and Schreger 2020) and risk
premia (Jiang, Krishnamurthy, and Lustig 2018). Engel, Mark, and West (2008) study the reverse predictability
of future macroeconomic fundamentals by current exchange rate movements. In many case, predictability exists
only for speci c currencies (e.g., the US dollar) or during speci c time periods (e.g., amid and after the global
  nancial crisis).


                                                       4
power of one unit of currency (e.g., dollar) abroad. International macroeconomics focuses on
the dynamics of RER, rather than on its level, namely:

                                                    
                                          qt = et + t - t ,                                                 (2)

where qt = qt - qt-1 is the real depreciation, t = log Pt - log Pt-1 is the home CPI in ation
                       
rate (analogously, t     is the CPI in ation abroad), with the length of the period typically taken
as a month, a quarter, or a year.3
     Since there are di erent goods baskets and di erent corresponding price levels, we can
de ne di erent concepts of RER. In addition to CPI-based RER, we often consider three alter-
                                                                                              
native measures. One corresponds to the RER for tradable goods, denoted QT           t  Et PT t /PT t ,
where PT t is the home price of the tradable basket. The second is the RER for the locally
                                                   
produced goods, or PPI-based RER, QP       t  Et PP t /PP t , where PP t is the producer price index,
i.e. the price level of goods produced and distributed domestically. Lastly, we measure RER for
                                                                       
the basket of labor inputs, or the wage-based RER, QW        t  Et Wt /Wt , where Wt is the wage
rate (index) at home; QW    t measures the relative cost of foreign labor in units of home labor.
     We outline the main empirical facts about RER, focusing on unconditional moments at
business cycle frequencies broadly de ned. First, RER is nearly indistinguishable from NER at
most horizons, from days to years, and thus also follows a volatile near-random-walk process.
The half life of RER's mean reversion is estimated to be very long, on the order of 3-to-5 years,
resulting in the famous PPP Puzzle (Rogo 1996). The literature conventionally assumes RER
to be long-run stationary, however, there is no conclusive empirical evidence to support this
(see e.g. Burstein and Gopinath 2012, Müller and Watson 2018, 2019).
     Second, all types of RERs (CPI, PPI, tradable, and wage-based) comove closely, with similar
volatility and persistence, and all nearly perfectly correlate with NER (see Itskhoki and Mukhin
2017). RER is almost an order of magnitude more volatile than various in ation rates (which
have annualized standard deviations of 1­2%). RER is also nearly uncorrelated with in ation
rates. Furthermore, while RER in log changes (qt ) is close to iid, in ation rates are persistent
and sometimes considered integrated (see Stock and Watson 2007).
     Third, RER is an order of magnitude more volatile and nearly uncorrelated with real macro
variables, such as output, employment, consumption, or productivity. There is a mild nega-
tive (yet unstable sample-to-sample) correlation with the relative consumption growth across
countries -- a pattern often referred to as the Backus and Smith (1993) puzzle.
     Finally, RER comoves closely with NER not only under a oating exchange rate, but also
changes its equilibrium properties when the policy regime is switched to an exchange rate peg,
   3
    The level of RER, or the relative PPP violation, is important for cross-country income comparisons (see e.g.
Deaton and Aten 2017, and the Penn World Tables).


                                                       5
in which case the volatility of RER discontinuously drops by an order of magnitude together
with that of NER -- the Mussa (1986) puzzle.

The terms of trade (ToT) measure the relative price of imports and exports of a country:
                                                    PF t
                                            St =    
                                                          ,                                       (3)
                                                   PHt Et
                   
where PF t and PHt   are home and foreign import price indexes in local currency. Therefore,
ToT measures the relative price of the import basket in units of export baskets. An increase
in St corresponds to a ToT deterioration, when a country needs to export more in order to
a ord the same quantity of imports.
    ToT and RER -- and in particular ToT deterioration and real depreciation -- are often con-
fused. Indeed, in many models the two variables are closely linked. This is not, however, the
case in practice, and large RER depreciations are not always accompanied by signi cant ToT
deteriorations. On average, ToT is about 2-3 times less volatile than RER and the two are only
weakly positively correlated over short-to-medium horizons (see Atkeson and Burstein 2008,
Gopinath, Boz, Casas, Díez, Gourinchas, and Plagborg-Møller 2020).


3     Real Exchange Rate and International Relative Prices
We start our analysis in the goods market and rst study the relationship between exchange
rates and international relative prices -- the rst stage of the transmission mechanism to
macroeconomic quantities -- which gives rise to the most popular partial theories of RER.
For simplicity, throughout the analysis we focus on the case of two large symmetric countries
-- home and foreign. The results generalize to the more involved case of asymmetric home
and the rest of the world or to the case of home-biased small open economies (as in Galí and
Monacelli 2005).


3.1    The PPP hypothesis
A foundational concept in international macroeconomics is the Purchasing Power Parity (PPP)
hypothesis (see Rogo 1996). Narrowly interpreted, the PPP hypothesis states that one dollar
should buy the same amount of goods in all countries, implying convergence of price levels in
space. More generally, there are three forms of PPP:
    1. Absolute PPP is the strongest form and requires the equality of the price levels, Pt = Pt Et ,
       which in turn implies that RER in (1) always equals 1, Qt  1, or in logs qt  0. In other
       words, RER equals PPP deviations.


                                                   6
   2. Relative PPP is a weaker form that allows price levels to di er, but the relative prices must
      be stable over time, implying that the nominal depreciation equals the relative in ation
                          
      rate, et = t - t     . This links together the key domestic and international monetary
      quantities, requiring that in ation and nominal depreciation move in lockstep. RER is
      then constant over time, qt  0.
   3. Weak relative PPP only requires mean reversion in the relative price levels, or equiva-
                                                                                       
      lently (mean) stationarity of the real exchange, qt . In other words, et = t - t   may
      be violated period-by-period, but it must hold over long time intervals.

Clearly, both absolute and relative PPP are strongly violated in the data, as RER is highly
volatile at all horizons and its deviations are persistent if not permanent.
    We now dig deeper into what the PPP hypothesis implies. Consider the (empirical) def-
inition of the CPI in ation rate, t = pt =           it it pit , which we sometimes write in
log-deviation terms as pt = it it pit . We denote with t the set of products available for
consumption and it are expenditure weights. For now we do not specify the granularity of
the set t , which may be as detailed as individual barcodes or as crude as {T, N } for tradables
and non-tradables respectively.4 With this de nition of CPI in ation, the change in RER (2)
can be expanded as:

                                                   
                         qt = et +                 it pit -            it pit .                         (4)
                                             it                   it


This expression implies the following conditions for the relative PPP, qt = 0:

Lemma 1 The relative PPP holds if the following three conditions are simultaneously satis ed:
  (i) all goods are traded, t = t;
                                                             
  (ii) there is no home bias in the expenditure shares, it = it for all i  t = t;

 (iii) the law of one price holds, at least in changes, pit = p                       
                                                               it + et for all i  t = t .


    Three remarks are in order. First, Lemma 1 o ers only a set of su cient requirements, and
qt = 0 could be the case even when none of the conditions in the lemma hold. However, this
would be a knife-edge coincidence, and one should not expect the relative PPP to hold when
either of the conditions in Lemma 1 is systematically violated. Therefore, Lemma 1 should
be rather viewed as describing alternative necessary conditions for PPP violations -- at least
one of the conditions must fail for qt = 0. Viewed this way, Lemma 1 provides guidance for
both theory and empirics. Speci cally, in order to have a model with non-constant RER, as
   4
    The ner is the granularity of t , the more important become questions of churning, extensive margin and
quality adjustment (see Feenstra 1994, Broda and Weinstein 2006, 2008, Nakamura and Steinsson 2012).



                                                    7
is the case in the data, it needs to feature either non-tradables/home bias or law of one price
deviations for traded goods, or some combination of both, as we explore in Sections 3.2­3.4.
     Second, the macroeconomic concept of PPP is often motivated with a microeconomic con-
cept of the law of one price (LOP). Indeed, LOP is one of the conditions in Lemma 1. However,
it is easy to see that LOP does not ensure that PPP holds. In fact, if the main reason for PPP
violations are non-tradables and/or home bias in tradables, LOP violations are not necessary to
explain the behavior of RER. What is less obvious, but perhaps more important, is the converse
statement: even vast LOP violations in the micro data are not su cient for PPP violations at
the macro level. If pit = p     it + et holds on average across goods, neither permanent nor
idiosyncratic violations in LOP would cause deviations from PPP.5
     Third, Lemma 1 clearly illustrates why PPP hypothesis is a very tall order, and should
not be expected to hold in general. Even if LOP held in the data, the world is characterized by
abundance of non-tradables and strong home bias in tradable expenditure (Obstfeld and Rogo
2001, Anderson and van Wincoop 2004). Given this, one may wonder why PPP hypothesis
plays such a prominent role in international macroeconomics, and furthermore why the idea
of a stationary RER is so profoundly rooted in the literature. My conjecture is that this is
not merely an intellectual path-dependence, but rather a deeply-rooted implicit assumption
that the main drivers of NER are monetary shocks, which should not have lasting real e ects
including on RER (see Section 3.4).


3.2     Non-tradables and home bias
The most popular theoretical approach to modeling RER is using non-tradable goods and as-
suming that LOP holds for tradables. This is why RER is often viewed as the international
relative price of non-tradables (see Obstfeld and Rogo 1996, Ch.4). Using the general expan-
sion of the real exchange rate in (4), consider the case with  = {T, N }, and denote with
 = N = 1 - T the expenditure share on non-tradables in both countries. Following Engel
(1999), we decompose RER in log-deviation terms (thus dropping ) as:
                                     T
                                    qt                                  N
                                                                       vt

                      qt = (p                                
                             T t + et - pT t ) +  [ (pN t - pT t ) - (pN t - pT t ) ],                        (5)

       T                          N
where qt is the tradable RER and vt is the international relative price of non-tradables.
   5
    For example, trade costs i result in LOP violations at the micro level, yet may lead to no relative PPP viola-
tions at the aggregate, with qt = 0 (and even no absolute PPP violations, Qt = 1, in a symmetric equilibrium).
Similarly, Balassa-Samuelson forces (discussed in Section 3.2), may lead to LOP violations in levels for certain
goods and services, yet no dynamic PPP violations. Even dynamic micro-level LOP violations, if idiosyncratic,
can wash out in the aggregate and cause no PPP violations (along the lines of Caplin and Spulber 1987).




                                                        8
Balassa-Samuelson hypothesis We begin with a neoclassical Balassa-Samuelson model in
which countries produce a homogenous tradable good with its prices equalized internationally,
         T                                                                                  N
so that qt = 0 in (5) and RER is proportional to the relative price of non-tradables, qt = vt .
Assuming a linear production technology, perfect competition implies unit-labor-cost pricing:

                                pit = wt - ait          and        p           
                                                                    jt = wt - ajt                                 (6)

for i   = {T, N } and j   = {T, N  }, where wt denotes the log nominal wage rate
at home and (aT t , aN t ) are log domestic productivities in tradables and non-tradables respec-
tively, and similarly in the foreign country (denoted with a ).6
    Combining competitive pricing (6) with LOP for tradables, pT t = p       T t + et , relative wages
must equal relative tradable productivity across countries and thus the wage-based RER,
          
qtW
      wt    + et - wt = a      T t - aT t . In turn, the relative price of non-tradables equals the
relative tradable productivity within a country, e.g. pN t - pT t = aT t - aN t . Countries that
are relatively more productive in the tradable sector have higher wage rates and, as a result,
higher prices of non-tradables. From (5), this results in an appreciated real exchange rate (i.e.,
lower qt when aT t - aN t is higher at home):

                      qt = tN            with        tN  (a       
                                                           T t - aN t ) - (aT t - aN t ),                         (7)

       N
thus vt   = tN equals the relative tradable productivity abroad. According to the Balassa-
Samuelson hypothesis, richer countries have higher average productivity in particular in the
tradable sector, resulting in higher wages and higher non-tradable prices and thus an appre-
ciated RER. Hence, the main driver of RER in this case is the relative tradable productivity.

Empirical evidence The Balassa-Samuelson hypothesis accurately captures the persistent
di erences in price levels (and RER) between very rich and very poor countries, as well as over
time for countries experiencing growth miracles, such as post-war Japan. At the same time, its
explanatory power in the general cross-section of countries and in particular over short and
medium horizons is low, as discussed in Rogo (1996). Neither relative tradable productivity
tN in (7), nor more generally the relative price of non-tradables vt    N
                                                                          in (5), appears to be the
principal driver of RER. Engel (1999) develops a sharp empirical test and shows that the non-
                        N
tradable component vt      in (5) contributes very little to the overall volatility of RER qt , at all
practical horizons (i.e., up to 10 years).7
   6
      Obstfeld and Rogo (1996, Ch.4.2) provide a comprehensive treatment with multiple factors of production
and decreasing returns in the labor input.
    7
      In the original paper, Engel (1999) considered the bilateral price data between the US and other rich countries,
and only 19 categories of goods, split into tradable and non-tradable categories. The follow-up studies have
improved on both the set of country pairs and the granularity of good categories and found consistent results,
as discussed in Burstein and Gopinath (2012). Betts and Kehoe (2008) show that the contribution of the tradable


                                                          9
                                                  T
    In other words, it is the tradable RER, qt      , that accounts for the bulk of RER volatility.
                T
Heuristically, qt is the term in (5) that contains NER et , and thus is the "wild" one in compari-
                                                   N
son with the much tamer non-tradable term vt          containing relative local prices. Indeed, under
 oating exchange rate regimes, changes in NER are an order of magnitude more volatile than
changes in productivity, wages and prices.8 It may be tempting to conclude that this o ers
strong evidence against the role of non-tradables in the dynamics of RER, which is largely
                                       T
driven by the tradable component qt      . This is not quite the case, as we explore next.

Home bias in tradables We extend now decomposition (5) to allow the tradable good to be
an aggregator of home and foreign value added, which features imperfect substitutability and
home bias. Speci cally, we assume that the log of the home tradable price index is given by:

                                         pT = (1 - ~ )pH + ~ pF ,                                          (8)

where pH and pF are prices of the home- and foreign-produced value added (whether nal
goods or intermediate inputs) and   ~  [0, 1) is the measure of openness. Correspondingly,
1-   ~ is a measure of home bias, provided it exceeds the country's share in the world GDP.
    For simplicity, we assume a world of two symmetric countries, so that the foreign tradable
price index is given analogously by p  T = (1 -    ~ )pF +  ~ pH , and it is also biased towards
the locally-produced value added. With two symmetric countries, home bias occurs when
~ < 1/2, which we assume is the case. In terms of the general expansion (4), we now have
 = {H, F, N } and  = {H, F, N  }, so that  =  if the non-tradable share is positive,
N =  > 0. Furthermore, individual tradable shares are di erent across countries due to
                                                       
home bias, e.g. H = (1 -   ~ )(1 -  ) =  ~ (1 -  ) = H  . Therefore, both conditions (i) and (ii)
of Lemma 1 are generally violated in this case.
    Still assuming LOP holds for individual tradable goods, that is pit = p it + et for i  {H, F },
we use the tradable price index (8) and its foreign counterpart to rewrite the tradable RER as:

           T
          qt = (1 - 2~  P
                      )qt ,          where         P
                                                  qt  p                  W     
                                                       F t + et - pHt = qt - (aT t - aT t ).               (9)

                                                             P                              W
Due to the marginal cost pricing (6), producer-price RER qt    re ects wage-based RER qt      ad-
                                                                                          9
justed for relative tradable productivity. Using (9), we characterize the overall RER in:
component to RER volatility is somewhat smaller for country pairs that extensively trade with each other, and
also if import price indexes are used to construct the tradable RER component (Burstein and Gopinath 2012).
    8
      In contrast, under a xed exchange rate, in the European monetary union, Berka, Devereux, and Engel (2012,
2018) nd a considerably larger contribution of productivity shocks to the dynamics of RER, which is in turn a
lot less volatile under the peg.
    9                                                                                     N     N       P
      To complete the proof, note that the non-tradable component in (5) is now given by vt  = t  + 2~ qt , and
                                                          T             P
thus it partially comoves with the tradable component qt = (1 - 2~    )qt due to home bias (~ < 1/2).


                                                      10
Proposition 1 Under marginal cost pricing (6), the general expression for RER in the presence
of home bias ~  1/2 and non-tradables   0 is given by:
                                              W
                               qt = (1 - 2 ) qt - (a               N
                                                    T t - aT t ) + t ,                                     (10)

where      ~ (1 -  ) is aggregate foreign share and tN is the relative non-tradable productivity
de ned in (7).

     We emphasize two key implications of this result. First, the model with home bias links
                                                                                                     P
together domestic consumer and producer prices, and hence CPI and PPI-based RER, qt and qt             ,
                                                    W
which both comove with the wage-based RER qt . In contrast, without non-tradables and home
                                                                    P
bias ( = 0,  ~ = 1/2), the volatility in relative producer prices qt  does not transmit to relative
consumer prices qt . Furthermore, home bias in tradables (small        ~ ) and the presence of non-
                                                                                        W
tradables ( > 0) act in the exact same way from the point of transmission from qt          to qt : what
matters is the overall share of expenditure on foreign value added,            ~ (1 -  ).
                                          T
     Second, the tradable component qt      can exhibit considerable volatility together with NER et
and closely comove with the overall RER qt , even when LOP holds at the micro level. In other
words, the model can reproduce the empirical patterns documented by Engel (1999) without
relying on micro-level LOP deviations.10 This, however, requires two conditions: (a) signi cant
                                                                           W
home bias in tradables,    ~     1/2, and (b) volatile wage-based RER qt     relative to productivity
shocks. In this sense, it is a partial equilibrium theory of RER, which leaves out the explanation
of the equilibrium properties of the wage-based RER. As we will see, a variant of equation (10)
is a focal point for a variety of partial theories of RER, whether they rely on home bias or LOP
deviations, and further progress can only be made in general equilibrium (see Sections 4­6).

Trade costs, distribution margin and intermediate inputs What is the economic nature
of home bias in tradables? It can emerge directly from home bias in preferences, which always
acts as a residual explanation. A largely equivalent mechanism that gives rise to home bias
in expenditure is due to trade costs.11 Furthermore, there are two additional mechanisms that
result in e ective home bias -- local distribution margin and imported intermediate inputs.
    In order to reach the domestic consumer, a foreign-produced good needs to incur a consid-
erable local distribution cost, which contributes to the overall cost of the good and constitutes
domestic value added. As a result, there are few purely tradable goods with the entirety of
  10
     To be sure, this is not to say that micro-level LOP deviations are unimportant in the data, but rather to
emphasize that they are not conceptually necessary to rationalize the evidence in Engel (1999).
  11
     See Obstfeld and Rogo (2001) for a discussion of the role of trade costs and home bias in international
macroeconomics (see also recent quantitative work by Eaton, Kortum, and Neiman 2016, Reyes-Heroles 2016).
See Anderson and van Wincoop (2004) for a survey of trade costs in international trade literature. A recent work
by Coçar, Grieco, Li, and Tintelnot (2018) attempts to identify empirically the di erential role played by trade
costs and home bias in preferences in explaining home bias in expenditure on cars.

                                                      11
value added accrued abroad.12 Empirically, the local distribution share is sizable even for typ-
ical tradable goods: Burstein, Neves, and Rebelo (2003) measure it to be over 40% in the US
market and even higher in smaller developing countries. The distribution margin mutes the
di erence between tradable and non-tradable goods, contributing to the stark patterns doc-
umented by Engel (1999). Nonetheless, from the aggregate perspective, what matters is the
overall share of foreign value added in domestic absorption,  . It can be quanti ed directly
from the aggregate trade-to-GDP ratio without delving into details of its particular decomposi-
tion into non-tradables, home bias and distribution costs -- an implication of Hulten's theorem
in an open economy (see Burstein and Cravino 2015, Baqaee and Farhi 2019).
    Finally, we consider brie y imported intermediate inputs. If they are used uniformly by
all rms (e.g., in a round-about fashion, as in Basu 1995, Eaton and Kortum 2002), they reduce
the foreign value-added content of imports, which increases e ective home bias. In the data,
however, the use of imported intermediate inputs is highly heterogenous across rms, with
large exporting rms relying a lot more intensively on imported inputs (see Amiti, Itskhoki,
and Konings 2014). Combined with the Melitz (2003) selection force in international trade,
the average good shipped abroad has a considerably lower domestic value added component
relative to the average good shipped domestically. While this does not lead to LOP violations
at the individual product level, it has consequences for the tradable RER, as in (9). More im-
portantly, such input-ouput structure biases the inference on home bias from the aggregate
trade-to-GDP ratio downwards, and particularly so for small and open economies.13


3.3     Variable markups and pricing to market
Relaxing the assumption of competitive marginal cost pricing, we consider two fundamental
reasons for LOP deviations at the micro-level -- short-run LOP deviations due to sticky prices
in the following section and long-run LOP deviations due to markup pricing in this section.14
  12
      Local distribution costs include transportation, insurance, storage, wholesale, retail, advertising and market-
ing, warranty and service (for a prominent application see Burstein, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo 2005). In addition,
the home distribution sector, if not perfectly competitive, may add on a considerable markup for its services,
which is also part of domestic value added (see also Corsetti and Dedola 2005). The distribution cost can be
captured by an analog of (8), which applies at the individual product level, pt (i) = (1 -     ~i )pHt + ~i pF t , where
pHt and pF t are prices of one unit of home and foreign value added respectively and        ~i is the share of foreign
value added in the cost structure of a given product i delivered to the home consumer. Crucini and Landry (2019)
argue that accounting for the distribution margin at the product-level reconciles the data with LOP that holds
for the foreign value-added component of the costs, even as LOP fails for individual tradable goods.
   13
      Consider an extreme case of a `maquiladora' assembly plant, which adds marginally to the overall value of a
product, yet in the trade data the full value of the product is re ected twice -- rst in imports and then in exports.
   14
      In both cases we omit considerations of entry and exit of products, which may play an important role in the
aggregate adjustment to exchange rate shocks over the long run; the empirical literature, however, has yet to
establish such patterns if they are present (e.g. see discussion in Fitzgerald and Haller 2018).




                                                          12
Markup identity Prices of a home product i in the home and foreign markets (expressed
in the destination currency) can be decomposed respectively as:

                  pHt (i) = µit + mcit          and          p          
                                                              Ht (i) = µit + mcit - et + i ,                  (11)

where µit and µ  it are log markups in the home and foreign markets, mcit is the marginal cost of
production, and i is the iceberg trade cost assumed to be constant over time. The expressions
in (11) de ne the realized markups. In this subsection we assume that prices are set exibly,
and thus µit and µ   it are also the optimal (desired) markups.
    Taking the di erence between the foreign and home market prices for the same product,
we arrive at the LOP deviation, qHt (i)  p                              
                                               Ht (i) + et - pHt (i) = µit - µit + i . Thus, as long
as a rm nds it optimal to set di erent markups in the two markets, that is price to market,
one should not expect LOP to hold even at the very micro product level. Our analysis focuses
on the dynamic response of markups, rather than their levels (see Simonovska 2015, Cavallo,
Neiman, and Rigobon 2014), and hence we take the rst di erence, qHt (i) = µ               it - µit .
While direct assumption-free measurement of markups is not possible (see the discussion in
De Loecker and Goldberg 2014), this cross-market transformation of the data allows one to
obtain a direct measure of the relative markup. This insight has been leveraged in empirical
work, for example in Fitzgerald and Haller (2013), who use it to provide a direct model-free
test of pricing to market (PTM) by projecting qHt (i) on et .15

A model of markups To further study the implications of PTM, we adopt a structural
model of markups. Under monopolistic competition with CES demand, the optimal markup
is constant, and therefore µit  0 for all rms in every market, resulting in an empirically-
counterfactual prediction of no pricing to market and complete pass-through of cost shocks.
    In contrast, models that relax either the CES assumption (following Dornbusch 1987) or
the monopolistic competition assumption (that is, study oligopolistic competition, following
Krugman 1987), generally predict variable markups, PTM and incomplete exchange rate pass-
through (ERPT) into prices.16 Both classes of models share the same general predictions for
the dynamics of the destination-speci c markups. In particular, the optimal markup of the
  rm decreases with its price relative to prices of its competitors in a given destination market,
  15
      The null hypothesis of no PTM implies that qHt (i) should not move with et , while in the data qHt (i)
closely tracks et over time. An additional complication in testing this hypothesis is that rms have sticky
prices, and hence the test needs to be carried out conditional on a price adjustment (as in Gopinath, Itskhoki, and
Rigobon 2010, Fitzgerald and Haller 2013).
   16
      Alternatively, CES monopolistic competition models with exible prices also result in variable markups and
incomplete pass-through under dynamic pricing due, for example, to consumption habits (Ravn, Schmitt-Grohé,
and Uribe 2006), inventory management (Alessandria, Kaboski, and Midrigan 2010) or durable/storable goods
(Fabinger, Gopinath, and Itskhoki 2011).


                                                        13
that is µit = M(pHt (i) - pt ) with M (·) < 0, where pt is the local competitor price index.
Amiti, Itskhoki, and Konings (2019) show that this characterization applies across various
classes of models, including models of oligopolistic competition as in Atkeson and Burstein
(2008) and models with non-CES demand as in Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010).
    Using this model of markups with (11), the rst order approximation to the rm's prices
in the two markets is given in log deviations by:

            pHt (i) = (1 - )mcit + pt             and     p                               
                                                           Ht (i) = (1 - )(mcit - et ) + pt ,                 (12)

where   1-M       (pHt (i)-pt )
              -M (pHt (i)-pt )
                                 [0, 1), and  depends in general on the characteristics of the rm
and the market it serves. Elasticity  measures the extent of strategic complementarities in
price setting. In other words, rms nd it optimal to increase their prices not only when their
costs increase, but also when their competitors' prices go up. The complementary quantity
(1 - ) is the cost pass-through elasticity, which is in general incomplete. Amiti, Itskhoki, and
Konings (2019) estimate  to be around 0.4­0.5 on average across manufacturing rms: that
is, rms put roughly equal weight on their marginal costs and the prices of their competitors
in determining their own optimal price.
    Combining price setting in the two markets in (12), we evaluate the LOP deviation:

                                  qHt (i) = pHt (i) + et - pHt (i) = qt ,                                     (13)

with qHt (i) = 0 whenever qt = 0 and  > 0. As rms are responsive to the prices of their
competitors, they optimally choose di erent markups in markets with di erent competitive
pressures, as well as adjust markups di erentially in response to shocks. What is essential for
this latter prediction is that rms face a di erent mix of competitors in di erent markets with
local bias due to xed and/or variable trade costs (see Atkeson and Burstein 2008).
    When  is common across the rms, LOP deviations are the same for all home rms,
qHt = qt . Similarly, for foreign rms, qF t = p     F t (i) + et - pF t (i) = qt . Therefore all
micro-level LOP deviations move in concert with RER qt , as is the case in the data.17

Real exchange rate and terms of trade We now combine this model of price setting with
the de nitions of the aggregate price index, pt = (1 -  )pHt + pF t , where  represents the
overall home bias whether due to non-tradables or home bias in tradables. In addition to CPI-
  17
     Micro-level LOP deviations are hugely dispersed in the cross-section: Broda and Weinstein (2008) document,
at the barcode level, a standard deviation from LOP of 50 log points across US cities, which is 5 times larger than
the annual standard deviation of the exchange rate. Yet, this dispersion is largely idiosyncratic and washes out in
the aggregate. In contrast, in the time series, LOP deviations tend to move in concert with NER for all products
(see Crucini and Telmer 2012, Gopinath, Gourinchas, Hsieh, and Li 2011, Burstein and Jaimovich 2012).



                                                        14
based RER qt , we also consider PPI-based RER, qt P
                                                     p                                        
                                                       F t + et - pHt , and ToT, st = pF t - pHt - et .
Note how, in the presence of LOP deviations, the two di er from each other, as PPI-based RER
re ects producer prices set for the local market, while ToT re ects export prices.
    Following Itskhoki and Mukhin (2017), we use the de nitions of RER and ToT to write two
relationships that tie them together. First, PPI-RER and ToT di er only by LOP deviation terms:

                                    P
                                   qt = st + (qHt + qF t ) = st + 2qt ,                                      (14)

where the rst equality is general accounting, while the second equality substitutes the ex-
pressions for LOP deviations (13). Second, CPI-RER equals PPI-RER adjusted for prices of
imported and exported goods, namely ToT:

                                                        P
                                           qt = (1 -  )qt - st ,                                             (15)

which is a general accounting identity. Combining (14) and (15), we have:
Proposition 2 In the PTM model, the equilibrium relationships between ToT and RERs are:

                               1 - 2(1 -  )                          P     1 - 2
                        st =                qt           and        qt =          qt .                       (16)
                                  1 - 2                                     1 - 2

    Note that this relationship depends only on two parameters,  and  . In the absence of PTM
                                 P
( = 0), it reduces to st = qt        = qt /(1 - 2 ), implying that ToT are more volatile than
     18
RER. This is, of course, counterfactual, as ToT are considerably more stable than RER. PTM
with  > 0 improves the t of the data by reducing the volatility of ToT relative to RER and
increasing the volatility of CPI-RER towards that of PPI-RER. Atkeson and Burstein (2008),
using a quantitative model of oligopolistic competition under CES demand, show how the
PTM mechanism, when combined with variable and xed trade costs, can be simultaneously
consistent with the empirical behavior of the main international relative prices.19
    Beyond Proposition 2, can PTM explain the volatility and persistence of the aggregate
RER? For concreteness, assume that marginal cost in (12) is mct = wt - at . Together with
the foreign counterpart of (12), we can solve for the domestic price level using its de nition,
                              
pt = (1 -  )(wt - at ) +  (wt  - a t + et ). Therefore, despite markup pricing, pt still re ects the
expenditure-weighted average marginal cost of the products served in the market (note that
  18
      Intuitively, without LOP deviations, relative consumer prices are necessarily more stable than relative pro-
ducer prices and ToT, as a mixed consumption basket o ers a "diversi cation" bene t, which in the limit of no
home bias ( = 1/2) results in a perfectly stable RER (qt  0) independently of the producer-price RER.
   19
      While PTM mechanism can reproduce the empirical patterns of relative volatility of ToT and RER, it fails
on their correlation, which in the data is positive but small and far from perfect. Only LOP deviation shocks
in (14) can break the tight comovement between ToT and RER in the model. A natural source of such shocks is
foreign-currency stickiness of border prices, as we discuss in the following subsection.

                                                       15
the mean markup wedge drops out from the expressions in log deviations). Using a parallel
expression for the foreign price level p                                            W     
                                         t , we can solve for RER, qt = (1 - 2 ) qt - (at - at ) ,
which is a special case of the expression in Proposition 1. Therefore, PTM with a common
 > 0 does not a ect the equilibrium behavior of RER relative to the competitive no-markup
case (or  = 0), as was noted by Atkeson and Burstein (2007). This is despite incomplete
ERPT and possibly large LOP deviations at the micro level, which end up not mattering for
PPP deviations at the macro level.
    How can this be? It turns out that strategic complementarities work both ways -- reducing
exchange rate pass-through for foreign rms, yet resulting in markup adjustment by domes-
tic rms, with the two exactly o setting each other when  is common across all rms. In
other words, the average markup in a market stays unchanged, even though importers re-
duce markups and local rms increase markups in response to a home currency depreciation.
Put di erently, in the language of international trade, RER movements are neither pro- nor
anti-competitive (see Amiti, Itskhoki, and Konings 2019, Arkolakis, Costinot, Donaldson, and
Rodríguez-Clare 2019). While PTM is useful for explaining LOP deviations, incomplete ERPT,
and low volatility of ToT, its implications are limited for aggregate price levels and RER. This is
an example of how micro-level LOP deviations may have little consequence for aggregate RER.

Heterogeneity The data suggest substantial heterogeneity in the extent of strategic com-
plementarities and ERPT across rms as rst pointed out by Berman, Martin, and Mayer (2012).
Amiti, Itskhoki, and Konings (2019) document that small rms exhibit complete pass-through
and no strategic complementarities ( = 0), just like constant-markup monopolistic competi-
tors under CES demand. In contrast, large rms exhibit very strong strategic complemen-
tarities with   0.5, putting at least as much weight on prices of their competitors as on
their own marginal cost. Given that it is large rms that account for the majority of exports
and imports, the average strategic complementarities among local and foreign rms are not
symmetric. As a result, we expect a larger reduction in markups of foreign rms than an in-
crease in markups of domestic rms in response to a home currency depreciation. This leads
to incomplete pass-through into the aggregate price level, and hence results in PTM having
aggregate RER consequences. In particular, the price levels pt and p  t respond less to exchange
rate uctuations, and thus RER qt tracks more closely NER et .20
    Finally, following Amiti, Itskhoki, and Konings (2014, 2019), we brie y consider the marginal
cost channel of international transmission, and in particular heterogeneous exposure to im-
  20
     Formally, consider a generalization of (12) to feature rm-speci c i increasing in rm size (see Amiti,
Itskhoki, and Konings 2019, for details). Selection into exporting suggests that  ¯X >   ¯ , which are sales-weighted
strategic complementarity elasticities among exporters only and all rms serving the market respectively. One
                                  -
can then show that qt = 1 - 2 11   -
                                    ¯X
                                     ¯
                                            W
                                           qt  - (a t - at ) , with heterogeneity in pass-through (1 -   ¯X < 1 -  ¯)
reinforcing the e ect of home bias (small  ).


                                                         16
                                                                      
ported intermediate inputs captured by mcit = (1 - i )wt + i (wt       + et ) - ait . Such a cost
structure is both empirically relevant, with small local rms having i = 0 and large exporting
  rms signi cantly exposed to foreign intermediates i > 0, and has a number of aggregate
implications.21 Large exporting rms exhibit simultaneously high import intensity i and high
strategic complementarities i . Due to home bias, these rms mostly compete with other do-
mestic rms at home and with foreign rms abroad. A home currency depreciation, thus,
makes them simultaneously lose competitiveness at home (due to exposure to foreign inputs)
and gain competitiveness abroad (as they still rely on domestic inputs). Due to their high i ,
such rms signi cantly reduce their markups at home and raise them abroad, limiting ERPT
in both markets and further muting the response of local price levels pt and p     t to exchange
rates. Finally, from the point of view of a country's trade balance, this limits the competitive
e ects of a devaluation, making it uncompetitive in the short run. Indeed, the largest exporters
that are expected to expand their foreign sales in response to a home currency devaluation are
simultaneously adversely a ected by the increasing costs of their foreign inputs, making it
harder for them to expand production (see Rodnyansky 2018, Blaum 2018).


3.4    Foreign-currency price stickiness
The other key source of LOP deviations is price stickiness in local currency, which drives a
short-run wedge between home and foreign prices of a product good, even if desired prices are
the same in both locations. Before prices adjust, there is an induced markup wedge equal in size
to the accumulated exchange rate change, making such models promising in explaining large
LOP and PPP deviations observed in the data. We consider here a baseline sticky-price model
of RER, as analyzed in Kehoe and Midrigan (2008), Carvalho and Nechio (2011) and Blanco and
Cravino (2020). Despite its simplicity, this model delivers the main insights and showcases the
limitations of the sticky price mechanism more generally, and in particular its shortcoming
in explaining RER persistence -- the celebrated PPP Puzzle (Rogo 1996, Chari, Kehoe, and
McGrattan 2002, Itskhoki and Mukhin 2017). In contrast with the earlier PTM analysis, this
                                                                                        W
model provides a full general-equilibrium framework, in particular endogenizing qt        .
     The model features a combination of the following three assumptions, which make it im-
mediately tractable: (i) cash-in-advance, Pt Ct = Mt , instead of dynamic money demand;
(ii) log-linear utility, ut = log Ct - Lt , which implies perfectly elastic labor supply at a wage
rate Wt /Pt = Ct (real neutrality, in the terminology of Ball and Romer 1990); and (iii) com-
plete asset markets resulting in the Backus-Smith condition, Ct /Ct = Qt (see Section 5).
  21
    Halpern, Koren, and Szeidl (2015) provide a microfoundation for such a cost structure with endogenous
expenditure share i based on the Melitz (2003) selection mechanism applied to sourcing of intermediate inputs.
Dhyne, Kikkawa, Mogstad, and Tintelnot (2020) study the full exposure of domestic rms to foreign value added
using the detailed input-output structure of the Belgian rms.


                                                     17
These assumptions together result in a simple equilibrium solution for wages and NER:22

                                           
                        wt = mt ,         wt = mt,          and        et = mt - mt,


                                W        
which in particular implies qt      = wt    + et - wt = 0. For concreteness, the only source of
shocks is to money supply, mt and m      t , which follow random walks (in logs).
    Lastly, we assume Calvo sticky prices in local currency, so that the home-market price of
product i (home or foreign) remains unchanged, pit = pit-1 , with probability  and is adjusted
   ¯t with probability 1 - . The desired prices (in log deviations) are given by p
to p                                                                                ~Ht = wt = mt
and p~               
      F t = wt = mt in producer currency, tracing the costs. In the absence of PTM, desired
prices satisfy LOP, and thus desired export prices are p  ~                                
                                                            Ht = wt -et = mt and pF t = wt +et = mt .
An interesting property of this monetary model is that local currency desired prices are the
same for both home and foreign rms, both uctuating with the local money supply. With
money supply following random walk, the optimal reset price is p        ¯t = mt for all rms (home
                                                        
and foreign) serving the home market and p      ¯t = mt for all rms serving the foreign market.23
Calvo pricing implies that the aggregate price level evolves as pt = pt-1 +(1-)¯      pt . Combined
with a similar equation abroad, the dynamics of RER are given by qt = qt-1 + et +(1 - )¯         qt ,
where q ¯t  p¯t + et - p
                       ¯t is the reset-price RER (see Bils, Klenow, and Malin 2012, Gopinath and
Itskhoki 2011, Blanco and Cravino 2020). Using the solutions for reset prices and NER, the
reset-price RER is zero, q¯t  0; in other words, LOP (or PPP) holds for reset prices. PPP does
not hold, however, for the regular consumer prices, as not all prices adjust.

Proposition 3 Under local currency price stickiness, RER follows an AR(1) process:

                                             qt = qt-1 + et ,                                                (17)

with an iid innovation et and persistence , a parameter governing the duration of sticky prices.

Note that NER, et = mt - m  t , indeed follows a random walk. Crucially, the standard deviation
of RER (relative to NER) and the persistence of RER are both given by the Calvo parameter .
Intuitively, a fraction  of rms do not adjust on impact, resulting in a proportional PPP vio-
lation. This fraction decreases as t over time, and thus  also represents the autoregressive
coe cient. The stickier are the prices, the more persistent and volatile is RER, and the closer
it tracks the random walk in NER.
  22                                           Mt   Pt Ct    Qt Pt
     Using cash-in-advance and risk-sharing M    = P  C  = P  = Et and using labor supply Wt = Pt Ct = Mt .
                                                t     t  t     t
  23
     Consider, for example, a domestic rm setting prices for the foreign market with a desired price p  ~      
                                                                                                         Ht = mt .
                                                                   j              
                                       ¯Ht = (1 - ) j =0 () Et p
The log-linearized reset price is then p                              ~H,t+j = mt , a weighted-average of future
desired prices, where  is the discount factor. Similar logic establishes reset prices for other rms in di erent
markets. For further details and derivations, see Galí (2008) and Farhi, Gopinath, and Itskhoki (2014).


                                                       18
    Proposition 3 suggests a qualitative success for the sticky-price model, as it reproduces a
random walk in NER and a closely comoving (yet mean-reverting) RER, at least when   1.
The di culty, however, is quantitative, as in the data  is not nearly large enough. Micro data
on price stickiness suggests that consumer and producer prices adjust at least once a year on
average, implying   0.75 quarterly (see Bils and Klenow 2004, Nakamura and Steinsson
2008, Gopinath and Rigobon 2008). This is insu cient to generate a persistent enough RER, as
its half life in such models is around log(0.5)/log   2.4 quarters, while in the data it is over
3 years (or 12 quarters), as forcefully argued in Rogo (1996), giving rise to the PPP Puzzle.
Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2002) further show the robustness of this failure in a more gen-
eral class of sticky-price models, and Itskhoki and Mukhin (2017, 2019) argue that such models
necessarily result in a range of additional exchange rate puzzles (including the Meese and Ro-
go disconnect puzzle, the Backus and Smith risk-sharing puzzle and the Mussa puzzle).24

Further empirical falsi cation Kehoe and Midrigan (2008) apply this sticky price model
in the cross section of sectors, generalizing (17) to sectoral RER, qzt = p  zt + et - pzt , where
pzt is sectoral price index. Consequently, qt = zZ z qzt is the overall RER, where z are
sectoral expenditure weights. Instead of studying the properties of qt upon aggregation, as
originally proposed by Imbs, Mumtaz, Ravn, and Rey (2005), they focus on the comparative
behavior of sectoral RERs qzt , both their volatility and persistence, which are starkly captured
in a simple model by z -- the sectoral Calvo price stickiness parameter. In the data, however,
both volatility and persistence of qzt are uniformly large across sectors and almost unrelated
to sectoral price durations z , in sharp violation of the theory.25
    Blanco and Cravino (2020) adopt instead a time-series approach, focusing on the reset-price
RER q ¯t de ned above. The simple model here predicts sharply that q    ¯t  0, that is PPP is sat-
is ed for reset prices. Intuitively, reset RER uses prices that are ltered of nominal stickiness,
and if nominal rigidities are the main source of PPP violations, the reset RER would be im-
mune to them, and thus should exhibit starkly di erent properties. However, in the data, this
is not the case, and the reset RER tracks closely the conventional RER, and we observe nearly
as large and persistent PPP violations for reset prices as for regular price levels. This empha-
  24
      The core counterfactual prediction of the monetary model is that E = (P C )/(P  C  ), and thus NER must
be cointegrated with a combination of relative price and relative consumption levels, which in the data are both
an order of magnitude less volatile and virtually uncorrelated with the nominal exchange rate. This argument
extends beyond a simple complete-markets cash-in-advance model presented here.
   25
      Carvalho and Nechio (2011) generalize Kehoe and Midrigan (2008) to study aggregate RER, clarifying the
earlier results of Imbs, Mumtaz, Ravn, and Rey (2005). If there are N sectors, and sectoral RER qzt follow AR(1)
with heterogeneous persistence z , the overall RER qt follows an ARM A(N, N - 1), which generally has a
greater persistence than the average persistence of sectoral RERs. Persistent shocks to money growth mt can
increase arbitrarily the persistence of qt , yet at the cost of making et counterfactually positively autocorrelated
(see Gopinath and Itskhoki 2011). Steinsson (2008) considers alternative macroeconomic shocks which give rise
to a higher-order AR(2) process for RER with a considerably longer half life.


                                                        19
sizes that it is not the lack of price adjustment that cause the PPP puzzle. These two pieces of
evidence reinforce considerably the original PPP puzzle argument about lacking persistence,
and suggest that sticky prices alone cannot succeed in explaining the behavior of RER.

Generalizations The model studied above is extremely simple and makes a number of
strong assumptions: (i) Calvo price stickiness (as opposed to menu costs) allows for no se-
lection in price adjustment, which tends to increase the persistence of RER; (ii) money supply
rule instead of interest rate rule, which tends to also increase the persistence (see Engel 2019);
(iii) no strategic complementarities or input-output linkages across products/sectors, which
reduces the persistence; (iv) exible wages, which also reduces the persistence. Many of these
assumptions are relaxed in the literature, and the main results carry through quantitatively.
     One obvious issues with the baseline model is that wage-based RER under exible wages is
  W
qt = 0, and this is why reset RER is also zero, since more generally q    ¯t = (1-2 ) qtW
                                                                                          -(at -at ) .
                                       W
When wages are slow to adjust, qt          itself tracks NER, introducing additional persistence in
all subsequent measures of relative prices, including q     ¯t and qt .26 In this case, however, the
properties of RER, including sectoral RER and reset RER, rely mostly on wage stickiness w and
home bias  , and could be reconciled assuming an extreme extent of wage stickiness (w  1).
This does not, however, relieve the model from producing a variety of other major exchange
rate puzzles (see Itskhoki and Mukhin 2019, and the discussion above).
     Why does the sticky price model fail? The issue is not in the structure of the model or in the
nominal rigidities per se; instead, it is the premise that monetary shocks are the main drivers of
exchange rates. The appropriate conclusion is not that sticky prices are unimportant, or absent
in the data -- we observe their presence and, arguably, importance for understanding exchange
rates. Rather the conclusion is that sticky prices with monetary shocks are not su cient to
explain the behavior of exchange rates, thus refuting a long-standing workhorse model for
thinking about exchange rates in general equilibrium (see Itskhoki and Mukhin 2017).

Currency of pricing We brie y consider here the implications of currency of pricing for the
equilibrium behavior of RER and ToT, and refer the reader for further details to the forthcoming
handbook chapter by Gopinath and Itskhoki (2021). Historically, the conventional assumption
has been producer currency pricing (PCP), whereby the exporter simply converts the producer
price into the destination currency using the spot exchange rate, with LOP thus maintained
(see Obstfeld and Rogo 1995a). More recently, evidence of incomplete pass-through and LOP
deviations has shifted the literature towards the assumption of local currency pricing (LCP; see
Betts and Devereux 2000), as we adopted in the model above. While these assumptions have
  26                                                                     W      W
     Speci cally, with Calvo wage stickiness with parameter w , we have qt = w qt-1 + w et . Then, RER qt
                                                               1-            W
follows an ARMA(2,1) given by qt = qt-1 + et + (1 - ) 1-w (1 - 2 )qt .


                                                   20
qualitatively di erent, and often opposite, implications for the patterns of international trans-
mission and cross-country spillovers (see Lane 2001), quantitatively they result in very similar
implications for macroeconomic aggregates and RER, provided su ciently strong home bias.27
                                                           W
Conditional on the behavior of the wage-based RER qt         , the currency of export price stickiness
plays only a limited role for the behavior of the aggregate RER qt .
    Nonetheless, the currency of price stickiness is central for the comovement of exchange
rates with ToT, and therefore the transmission into import quantities and net exports. Since
ToT is the ratio of import and export prices, st = pF t - p         Ht - et , LCP implies a short-run
negative correlation between exchange rate and ToT, as it is the export prices that increase in
the home currency when it depreciates. In contrast, PCP implies a positive correlation, as in
this situation it is the import prices that increase (due to LOP, which holds under PCP and not
under LCP, st = p     F t + et - pHt in this case). This sharp theoretical distinction led to a lively
debate in the literature (see Obstfeld and Rogo 2000, Engel 2003).
    What both LCP and PCP fail to capture, though, is not as much the sign of the corre-
lation, but the fact that in the data this correlation is very weak (if positive), and ToT does
not move in concert with RER in the short run. The novel dominant currency paradigm cap-
tures this empirical pattern by postulating that both export and import prices are sticky in the
same dominant currency (DCP), currently the US dollar. This allows the model to match the
muted movements in ToT in response to large exchange rate uctuations (see Gopinath 2016,
Gopinath, Boz, Casas, Díez, Gourinchas, and Plagborg-Møller 2020). Muted ToT response,
however, does not imply muted response of net exports, as we discuss in the next section.
    Crucially, currency choice is an active rm-level decision with substantial variation in
currency use across exporters even within destination countries and narrowly de ned indus-
tries. At the same time, currency choice is persistent over time, driven in part by strategic
complementarities in price setting across rms and other macroeconomic complementarities
(e.g., currency of nancing, monetary anchors; see Gourinchas 2019). The key theoretical in-
sight, developed in Engel (2006) and Gopinath, Itskhoki, and Rigobon (2010), is that currency
choice is shaped by desired ERPT prior to price adjustment, which in turn re ects properties
of the rm's marginal cost and desired markup, as we discussed in Section 3.3. In particular,
constant-markup rms with marginal costs stable in producer currency (i = i = 0) favor
PCP, while rms with strong strategic complementarities with their local competitors (i > 0)
favor LCP, and nally rms that source intermediate inputs in dollars (i > 0) favor DCP (see
Mukhin 2017, Amiti, Itskhoki, and Konings 2020). The more rms adopt local currency price
stability, the lower is the desired ERPT into local prices due to strategic complementarities and
the smaller is the incentive to adjust prices for any individual rm (see Gopinath and Itskhoki
  27
       Under PCP, equilibrium RER is qt = qt-1 + (1 - 2 )et , instead of (17), a di erence by a factor of (1 - 2 ).


                                                         21
2010). This is the mechanism by which endogenous foreign-currency price stickiness, just like
PTM and imported inputs, propagates incomplete ERPT into destination prices, tying closer
                               W
together the dynamics of et , qt and qt .

Summary The mechanisms of LOP deviations discussed in Sections 3.3­3.4, while altering
in important ways the dynamics of individual prices, do not change the qualitative relationship
between nominal and real exchange rates. Over a one-to- ve-year horizon, the exible-price
relationship in Proposition 1 o ers a useful benchmark for thinking about RER qt , with home
                                                                       W
bias  and general equilibrium behavior of the wage-based RER qt           being the two crucial
determinants. At the same time, variable markups, imported intermediate inputs, rm hetero-
geneity and foreign-currency price stickiness are important additional forces which further
mute pass-through of NER, reinforcing the e ect of home bias  , and are necessary for a com-
plete quantitative model of RER and international transmission of shocks. The rest of the
                                                                            W
manuscript focuses on the general equilibrium determination of qt (and qt     ), for concreteness
making use of Propositions 1 and 2; it illustrates the overall limited role of a speci c mecha-
nism of transmission via prices beyond some form of a PPP violation identi ed in Lemma 1.


4     Real Exchange Rate and Expenditure Switching
This section studies the next step of international transmission, going from border prices to im-
port quantities and trade balance, emphasizing empirical implications which pose challenges
for current international models. We also study goods market clearing in an open economy,
and its implications for the relationship between RER and aggregate consumption, and the as-
sociated Backus-Smith puzzle. This provides an important segue into the general equilibrium
analysis in the remaining two sections.


4.1    Import demand and net exports
                                                                           
Net exports, or exports minus imports, are given by N Xt = Et PHt        CHt  - PF t CF t , where
                                                                                     
CF t and CHt   are aggregate import quantities at home and abroad, and PF t and PHt    are local-
currency import price indexes, de ning ToT in (3). For simplicity, we log-linearize net exports
around a symmetric equilibrium with N¯    X = 0, which results in nxt =  [cHt - cF t - st ], where
st is ToT, nxt  N Xt /Y ¯ , and  is the steady-state trade share (imports or exports) in GDP.
    Import demand can be written in log deviations as cF t = -(pF t - pt ) + ct , where  is the
elasticity of the import demand schedule, which in addition shifts out with the overall con-
sumption level, ct at home and c  t abroad. A parallel expression characterizes foreign import
           
demand cHt . These expressions are exact under CES and emerge more generally as a rst-order


                                               22
approximation to an aggregate demand system. Conventional models of trade rely on  > 1,
and often considerably so (see cross-sectional estimates in e.g. Broda and Weinstein 2006). In
the time series, however, the response of import quantities to the exchange rate is muted and
often characterized by   1 (see e.g. Feenstra, Luck, Obstfeld, and Russ 2018, Amiti, Itskhoki,
and Konings 2020), which is sometimes referred to as the international elasticity puzzle (Ruhl
2008, Fontagné, Martin, and Ore ce 2018). Furthermore, import quantities, while varying a lot
in the cross-section of products, are relatively stable in the time series, and in particular are
considerably less volatile than the exchange rate.
     The relative price of imports can be expressed as pF t - pt = (1 -  )(pF t - pHt ) and
pF t - pHt = (st + qHt ), thus re ecting simultaneously ToT and LOP deviation for domestic
tradables. Therefore, the response of import quantities is muted if either the responses of both
ToT and LOP deviations are small, or alternatively if the two move in o setting directions.
Models that mute ToT uctuations typically do so by creating large LOP deviations, resulting
in an inconvenient tradeo for import quantities,28 which also persists for net exports.
     Using import demand schedules, we obtain a rather general expression for net exports
which holds independently of the nature of price setting and price stickiness:

                                   nxt =  [qt + ( - 1)st - (ct - ct )].                                         (18)

Both RER and ToT are important for net exports, as ToT characterizes the relative import-
export prices, while RER additionally captures their movement relative to local prices, which
shapes import demand. A consumption boom at home leads to an increase in imports and
hence a deterioration of trade balance. The expenditure switching mechanism characterizes
the properties of comovement between RER and net exports. A classical question in interna-
tional economics is under which circumstances does trade balance improve in response to an
exchange rate devaluation. The seminal Marshall-Lerner condition requires that the sum of
the export and import elasticities is greater than one, or in our case 2 > 1, which is equivalent
to  + ( - 1) > 0. From (18), this could be the case if qt and st moved proportionally with the
exchange rate, which is not typically the case when prices are determined in equilibrium.
  28
     Competitive pricing models and PCP sticky-prices feature no LOP deviations, yet imply ToT that are more
volatile than RER, thus resulting in highly volatile import quantities. PTM models limit the volatility of ToT
                                                                                             1-
by means of LOP deviations (recall (13) and (16)), yet still in this model st + qHt = 1       -2 qt decreases with
incomplete pass-through (1-), which thus also mutes the quantity response. The DCP sticky-price model mutes
ToT volatility, consistent with the data, yet implies very large LOP deviations for imports and volatile import
quantities (as relative import prices move with the dominant exchange rate). LCP, while implying counterfactual
negative correlation of ToT and RER, is in contrast successful at stabilizing import quantities (as import prices are
stable relative to domestic prices). For further discussion of tradeo s in matching the volatility of international
prices and quantities across models in general equilibrium see Itskhoki and Mukhin (2017).




                                                         23
       Using Proposition 2, we simplify (18) as:

                                                                          1-     1 - 2(1 -  )
        nxt =  qt - (ct - ct) ,            where        2(1 - )                -              .                 (19)
                                                                         1 - 2      1 - 2

The required condition for trade balance to improve with a real devaluation is then  > 0.29
The two terms of  summarize the e ects of RER on trade quantities and trade prices respec-
tively, and under competitive or constant-markup pricing ( = 0) the expression simpli es to
          - )-1
 = 2(1   1-2
                . The requirement 2 > 1 is su cient for  > 0 in the closed economy limit
(  0), and a general su cient condition is   1, which works even in the absence of home
bias (  1/2). The reason is that exchange rate shocks a ect not only export and import
prices, but also domestic price levels, and the more so in more open economies. For a given  ,
strategic complementarities ( > 0) relax the necessary requirement.30
    In the data, net exports are both weakly correlated with qt in the short and medium run, and
also signi cantly less volatile than what is suggested by (18), even for conservative values of .
Over long horizons (10 years), net exports track RER with a lag, as Alessandria and Choi (2019)
show for the United States. A successful model of both trade prices and trade quantities must,
therefore, include multiple ingredients: for example, a combination of DCP pricing at the
border with local distribution margin and LCP pricing to consumers (see e.g. Auer, Burstein,
and Lein 2020) and/or predetermined import quantities along with sticky import prices (see
e.g. Alessandria, Kaboski, and Midrigan 2010, Fitzgerald, Yedid-Levi, and Haller 2019, Amiti,
Itskhoki, and Konings 2020), resulting in a J -curve pattern of net export response.


4.2       Market clearing and aggregate consumption
                                                                                   
Domestically-produced output Yt is used for domestic consumption CHt and exports CHt , with
the log-linearized market clearing for the domestic good given by yt = (1 -  )cHt + c    Ht ,
                                                             
re ecting home bias. Using the import demand schedule for cHt and a corresponding expres-
sion for domestic demand cHt , and taking the di erence with their foreign counterparts, we
arrive at the equilibrium relationship between relative consumption and RER:

                          1                                                   2(1 - )(1 -  )
           ct - ct =
                                    
                             (yt - yt ) - 2  qt ,             where                          > 0,               (20)
                       1 - 2                                                      1 - 2
  29
      This condition is still partial equilibrium as it holds aggregate consumption constant, while it generally also
comoves with RER (see (20)), and the full GE condition must account for this (see Itskhoki and Mukhin 2017).
   30
      Matters are further involved with sticky prices: the patterns of short-run expenditure switching are di erent
under PCP, LCP and DCP, as discussed in detail in Gopinath, Boz, Casas, Díez, Gourinchas, and Plagborg-Møller
(2020) and Barbiero, Farhi, Gopinath, and Itskhoki (2019).




                                                         24
where for concreteness we adopt the exible-price case of Proposition 2.31 Equation (20) is the
result of goods market clearing in an open economy: it summarizes how globally produced
output is allocated to its nal consumption use, mediated by the expenditure switching mech-
                           
anism. Output yt and yt      can be both exogenous endowment shaped by productivity shocks
alone or endogenous aggregate supply of goods shaped in part by the interaction of equilib-
rium labor supply, intermediate inputs, markups and nominal rigidities.
     Equilibrium relationship (20) has a number of implications. In a closed economy (  0),
it reduces to ct = yt , as all output must be consumed locally. In an open economy with home
                                                             
bias, 0 <  < 1/2, an increase in relative output yt - yt       must be accommodated by a more
                                                               
than proportional increase in relative consumption ct - ct , if international relative prices qt
remain unchanged. In other words, when  > 0, a 10% increase in ct - c             t requires a less
                              
than 10% increase in yt - yt , as home agents want to increase consumption of both home- and
                                                                                                  
foreign-produced goods. Of course, an increase in the relative supply of home goods, yt - yt       ,
                                                                     32
tends to also reduce their relative prices, that is depreciate RER.
                                                                                      
     Finally, RER depreciation (an increase in qt ), with a constant supply yt - yt    , requires a
                                            
reduction in relative consumption ct - ct . This e ect is easier to see in reverse: a reduction in
consumption ct - c                                      
                    t for a given level of output yt - yt must be accommodated by a reduction in
relative prices in order for expenditure switching towards domestic goods to clear the market,
a Keynes' transfer e ect. The more home-biased is the economy (smaller  ), the larger is the
required change in RER to accommodate a given movement in consumption, or equivalently
the smaller is the change in consumption (nil in the limit   0) for a given movement in RER.
     These implications of conventional goods market clearing in open economies are crucial
for understanding the equilibrium patterns of comovement, or the lack thereof, between RER
and macroeconomic aggregates, such as consumption and output. In particular, it illustrates
the challenges for the standard International RBC and New Keynesian Open Economy models
in explaining the empirical negative correlation between qt and ct - c       t , or the celebrated
Backus-Smith puzzle. Independently of asset market completeness, the driving force in such
models are product-market shocks -- namely, an increase in yt either driven by productivity or
reduction in markups (in response to expansionary monetary shocks under nominal rigidities)
-- which tend to simultaneously raise ct - c      t and qt (depreciate RER). In contrast, shocks
                                                                               2         qHt +qF t
  31
      The more general relationship is ct - c        1         
                                             t = 1-2 (yt - yt ) - 2 (1 -  ) 1-2 st +         2      , and (20) derives
                                                         1-
from it after we use qHt = qF t = qt and st + qt = 1      -2 tq implied  by Proposition 2. Under   sticky  prices, this
equation acts as an error correction target, with departures from it generalizing the closed-economy concept of
an output gap, which enters the international Phillips curve that governs the dynamic adjustment of RER towards
its long-run equilibrium (see Itskhoki and Mukhin 2019).
   32
      This is particularly transparent in the case of no home bias,   1/2, when goods market clearing (20)
                                    (1-)qt
implies ct - c  t = 0 and qt =
                               P
                                      1-2    =   1        
                                                   (yt - yt ). That is, an increase in relative supply results in a
                                                       P
proportional reduction in relative producer prices, qt de ned in (16), leaving relative consumption unchanged.


                                                          25
to RER arising outside the goods market, produce a negative comovement between ct - c    t
and qt , with a low relative consumption volatility when home bias is strong (small  ) and
pass-through (1 - ) is incomplete (see Itskhoki and Mukhin 2017).33


5        Real Exchange Rate and International Risk Sharing
We now shift our focus to the role of RER in nancial markets, and in particular in interna-
tional risk sharing. The analysis of international risk sharing builds on the fundamental asset
                                j
pricing equation, Et {Mh                               h
                           t+1 Rt+1 } = 1, where Mt+1 is the stochastic discount factor (SDF) of
agent/household h and Rj              j       j       j
                            t+1  (Pt+1 + Dt+1 )/Pt is the rate of return on asset j with price Pt
                                                                                                    j

                 j
and dividend Dt   +1 (see e.g. Cochrane 2001). The asset pricing equation holds for every asset j
and every household h that can freely purchase this asset.34 We focus on SDFs that arise from
                                                                                       t+1 - Pt
separable CRRA utility in consumption with relative risk aversion  , Mt=1 =  CC          t      Pt+1
                                                                                                     ,
for a representative domestic household facing consumption price level Pt . A foreign repre-
sentative household has a symmetric SDF, M                                      
                                                 t=1 . We denote with Jt and Jt the sets of assets j
                                                                                                  j
available at time t to home and foreign households, respectively. An asset j with return Rt        +1
                                             j  Et+1
in foreign currency has return Rj   t+1 =  R t+1 Et   when converted  to  home  currency,  adjusting
for its nominal depreciation.
                                                                                                   
    All assets traded by both foreign and home households yield a foreign-currency return Rj      t+1
                                              j                         j  Et+1
that simultaneously satis es Et M       t+1 Rt+1 = 1 and Et Mt+1 Rt+1 Et          = 1. Subtracting
one from the other and expressing out SDFs, the international risk sharing condition is:
                       -                        -           
               Ct+1        Qt+1         Ct+1            Rjt+1
         Et                     -                     ·               =0         for all j  Jt  Jt .          (21)
                Ct          Qt           Ct            Pt+1 /Pt

              Rj 
Note that P  t+1   is the realized real return in terms of foreign consumption basket, that is
            t+1 /Pt
nominal return adjusted for foreign in ation. The terms in the square brackets in (21) are
home and foreign household's real SDFs, with home SDF adjusted for real depreciation. Each
asset available to both home and foreign households brings the two SDFs closer together.35
    33
      Corsetti, Dedola, and Leduc (2008) and Colacito and Croce (2013) provide related explanations to the Backus-
Smith puzzle based on long-lasting shocks to yt+j for j  0, which have a relatively small e ect on contempora-
neous goods supply yt , yet trigger a large forward-looking response in qt that dominates the overall shifts on the
right-hand side of (20). Alternatively, the Backus-Smith puzzle can be resolved if RER appreciates with a positive
goods supply shock, either due to Balassa-Samuelson forces (Benigno and Thoenissen 2008) or a low elasticity
of substitution between home and foreign goods,  < 1 (the second case in Corsetti, Dedola, and Leduc 2008).
   34
      The asset pricing equation derives from the Euler equation of an investor, an asset demand condition taking
                j
asset prices Pt   and returns Rjt+1 as given. When an investor faces binding nancial or borrowing constraints,
similar conditions still hold, but with asset returns adjusted by the Lagrange multiplier on the constraint.
   35
      According to (21), the gap between home and foreign SDFs (adjusted for real depreciation) must be orthogo-
nal with real returns on every asset j they can trade. Note how (21) is akin to an IV GMM condition minimizing
the variance of the projection residuals (state-by-state SDF gaps) using asset returns as instruments.


                                                        26
The richer is the set (span) of available assets, the more perfect is the extent of international
risk sharing; in the limit, this makes the two SDFs equal up to a real depreciation term.


5.1     Complete markets and nancial autarky
We start by considering the two opposite limiting cases -- complete international asset markets
and nancial autarky -- which surprisingly yield qualitatively similar implications for RER.
The intuition is that in both of these cases, an inherently dynamic international risk sharing
condition turns into a static relationship between aggregate consumption and RER.

Complete markets Markets are complete when the set of assets j  Jt  Jt allows agents to
span every state of the world; that is, assets replicate a full set of Arrow securities which pay one
unit in a given state at t +1 conditional on state at t. In this case, the set of conditions (21) holds
                                                                                               
                                                                               t+1     Qt+1 Ct+1 
not just in expectation, but also state-by-state. That is, (21) becomes CC      t
                                                                                     =  Q t   C     , or
                                                                                               t
                 Ct 
equivalently C       = Qt across all periods and states for some constant factor   (0, ),
                  t
which is determined by the intertemporal budget constraint of the countries in the initial state
at t = 0.36 In log deviation terms, this further simpli es to the following static condition:

                                               (ct - ct ) = qt ,                                            (22)

and thus the constant factor  and the budget constraint are irrelevant for the dynamics of
the variables, as state-contingent transfers provide full insurance between the two countries.
Backus and Smith (1993) and Kollmann (1995) rst pointed out this stark state-by-state implica-
tion of complete international asset markets for the relationship between relative consumption
and RER. In particular, relative consumption growth must track real depreciations, or in other
words home consumption must be relatively high when home price level is relatively low.
    What is the logic behind (22)? If PPP holds (qt  0), then perfect risk sharing implies per-
fect comovement between home and foreign consumption, ct+1 = c             t+1 . However, when
relative prices uctuate, the relative cost of an extra unit of marginal utility is not constant,
and thus keeping relative consumption constant is no longer optimal. What is optimal is to
                                                                                           u (C  )
equalize the utility gains that can be obtained from an extra "dollar", that is u P(Ct )
                                                                                    t
                                                                                         = Et P t ,
                                                                                               t
which results in (22) under CRRA utility. Simply put, consumption must be temporarily higher
where the cost of delivering consumption is temporarily lower. This is the opposite of what is
observed in the data, giving rise to the Backus-Smith puzzle.
    The risk sharing condition (22) emphasizes the central role played by RER in complete
international asset markets. Any movement in RER has immediate and direct implications for
   Another implication of (21) under complete markets is that nominal depreciations must satisfy EE
  36                                                                                                t+1
                                                                                                      t
                                                                                                        =MM
                                                                                                            t+1
                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                            t+1
making NER volatility equal to that of the ratio of SDFs (see e.g. Brandt, Cochrane, and Santa-Clara 2006).


                                                       27
the key macroeconomic aggregates, independently of openness to trade. This is di erent from
the goods market clearing (20), where the e ect of RER on macro aggregates is indirect, via
expenditure switching, and is muted by home bias  and incomplete pass-through (1 - ).
Combining (22) with (20) allows us to immediately solve for both equilibrium RER and relative
consumption as a function of equilibrium output (given by the supply side of the economy):

                                                                          
                     qt =  · (yt - yt ),        where                            .                        (23)
                                                                   (1 - 2 ) + 2 

As a result, under complete nancial markets, the only source of volatility in RER emerges
from the supply of goods and results in strong counterfactual comovement between RER and
macroeconomics aggregates -- consumption and output -- with the relative volatility of RER
roughly proportional to the relative risk aversion  .37
    Finally, note from (23) the limited role played by the transmission via international relative
prices (the focus of Section 3) for equilibrium RER determination in this case, and in particular
if home bias is substantial ( premultiplies  which summarizes the e ects via prices).

Financial autarky At the other extreme is the case of nancial autarky, whereby home
and foreign households cannot share risk at all (Jt  Jt = ), which implies balanced trade
period-by-period and state-by-state, N Xt  0. Gross exports and imports, at the same time,
are in general non-zero, and countries exchange goods within each period-state. Surprisingly,
this case results in a similarly tight relationship between relative consumption and RER:

                                               ct - ct = qt ,                                             (24)

                                                                            -
which obtains directly from nxt = 0 in (19), where  = 1+2( -1)(1-) 11-       2
                                                                                > 0 corresponds
to the Marshall-Lerner condition discussed above. The logic in this case is, however, very
di erent from the risk-sharing logic behind the Backus-Smith condition (22). Balanced trade
requires price movements to o set shifts in import demand (aggregate consumption): when
demand is high, imports are high given prices, and in order to balance trade, home prices must
fall to encourage exports and discourage imports.
     Despite di erent logic, the implications for a positive consumption-RER comovement are
qualitatively the same, just with the goods-market elasticity  replacing risk aversion  . In fact,
autarky and complete-market allocations coincide under the celebrated Cole and Obstfeld
(1991) case with  =  = 1, which implies  = 1 independently of the values of  and  .38
  37
      The only way to break this tight relationship is by changing the utility function -- namely, by introduc-
ing marginal utility shocks as in Stockman and Tesar (1995), non-separable leisure with home production as in
Karabarbounis (2014), or non-time-separable Epstein-Zin preferences as in Colacito and Croce (2011).
   38
      Outside the exact Cole-Obstfeld case, this result applies as a rst-order approximation when  = 1.


                                                      28
In this case, movements in ToT provide perfect insurance without any need to trade nancial
assets, ensuring the complete-market allocation independently of the asset market structure.
    Regardless of the exact equivalence, the autarky case (24) is qualitatively similar with the
complete markets case (22), as they both imply direct and strong comovement of relative con-
sumption with RER, and in combination with the goods market clearing (20), pin both of them
down as a function of aggregate supply in the goods market:

                                                                               1
                      qt =  · (yt - yt ),          where                              ,                          (25)
                                                                        (1 - 2 ) + 2 

which parallels (23) with  replaced by 1/ (note that  =  when  = 1), and with the rela-
tive volatility of RER now decreasing in the product-market elasticity . This comovement is
again empirically counterfactual, and thus both extreme benchmarks -- autarky and complete
markets -- o er a poor approximation to the observed empirical patterns of RER.39


5.2     General incomplete markets
In between the two extremes of autarky and complete markets, the case of incomplete markets
is starkly di erent, implying a much weaker link between consumption and RER in expected
changes instead of state-by-state comovement. Thus, incomplete markets limit the centrality
of international risk sharing in shaping the equilibrium behavior of RER. We brie y explore
two cases: conventional incomplete markets and nancial frictions in risk sharing.

Conventional incomplete markets We consider rst the case when Jt  Jt contains at
least one bond that home and foreign households can trade without constraints. In this case, a
quantitatively accurate rst-order approximation to the risk-sharing condition (21) is given by:40

                                   Et { (ct+1 - ct+1 ) - qt+1 } = 0.                                             (26)

Thus, instead of a static relationship as in (22), incomplete-market risk sharing results in a
martingale condition for a combination of consumption and RER,  (ct -c  t )-qt . In other words,
it ties together expected depreciation and relative consumption growth without constraining
the comovement of these variables across states of the world.
   39
      Just like preference/utility shocks under complete markets, product-market taste shocks which shift import
demand (e.g. as in Pavlova and Rigobon 2008) can break this tight relationship between consumption and RER.
Even outside autarky, such shocks are useful to reduce counterfactually strong correlation between nxt and qt .
                                                                     r                       
   40
      Consider a foreign bond with deterministic real return Rt         = Rr  t+1 /(Pt+1 /Pt ), so that (21) becomes
Et exp{- ct+1 + qt+1 } = Et exp{- c             t+1 } , which is equivalent to (26) up to higher-order terms that tend
to be both small and non-time-varying. These higher-order terms could be ampli ed with alternative preferences
(e.g. habits as in Verdelhan 2010), heterogeneous agents (e.g. Kocherlakota and Pistaferri 2007) or time-varying
disaster risk (e.g. Farhi and Gabaix 2016).


                                                         29
   As with complete markets, we can substitute market clearing (20) into the risk-sharing
condition (26), which results in:

                                                            
                                   Et qt+1 =  · Et {yt+1 - yt +1 },                                           (27)

shaping the future expected path of RER instead of its equilibrium value as in (23). If ag-
gregate supply in the economy follows a martingale process, then RER is also a martingale
unpredictable in changes, Et qt+1 = 0. RER predictability (and, in particular, mean reversion)
in this case must come from predictable future changes in relative GDP growth.
    There are two further notable implications of (27). First, international risk sharing and
goods market clearing are, in general, insu cient to determine equilibrium RER. More specif-
ically, they characterize its expected path (in changes), but not its current equilibrium level qt .41
Second, (27) suggests that RER process contains a unit root, and even transitory shocks can per-
manently shift its entire equilibrium path including its long-run expectation, limj  Et qt+j .42

Risk sharing under nancial frictions With limited participation in the nancial mar-
ket, borrowing constraints, and other types of nancial frictions, condition (26) generalizes to
additionally feature a risk-sharing wedge t :43

                                 Et { (ct+1 - ct+1 ) - qt+1 } = t .                                           (28)

Risk-sharing wedge t re ects both exogenous shocks in the nancial market, as well as en-
dogenous feedback from conventional productivity and monetary shocks, and in general also
depends on state variables (e.g., net foreign assets) which may ensure long-run stationarity of
RER (see Itskhoki and Mukhin 2019). Time-series variation in t generates departures from
the martingale property of RER. Itskhoki and Mukhin (2017) argue that such shocks are es-
sential to breaking the tight link between RER and macroeconomic aggregates implied by the
  41
      By consequence, fully unexpected level jumps in RER may leave the equilibrium allocation unchanged, at
least from the point of the nancial market (21). For example, if goods market pass-through from RER is fully
muted by a border tax, the same macroeconomic allocation can be consistent with a level shift in RER, as is the
case under a scal devaluation policy studied in Farhi, Gopinath, and Itskhoki (2014).
   42                                                                                                     
      To see both implications, roll forward (27) to solve for qt = limj  Et qt+j + j =0 Et {yt+j -yt     +j }. The
long-run expectation is nite (thus cannot be ruled out by a `no-bubble condition') and undetermined without an
additional condition on the path of {qt+j }j 0 , namely the intertemporal budget constraint (see Section 6). Shocks
to the short-run path of qt+j generally a ect limj  Et qt+j . This last property is similar to the general non-
stationarity of (log-linearized) incomplete market open economies emphasized by Obstfeld and Rogo (1995a).
   43
      For example, t in (28) can arise in models with borrowing constraints (e.g. Mendoza, Quadrini, and Ríos-
Rull 2009), limited market participation (e.g. Alvarez, Atkeson, and Kehoe 2009), or imperfect intermediation
under limits-to-arbitrage (e.g. Jeanne and Rose 2002, Gabaix and Maggiori 2015, Itskhoki and Mukhin 2019), but
also can capture time-varying risk-premia terms in models without nancial frictions (see footnote 40). Note the
                                                                                            f    f
relationship between (28) and the uncovered interest parity (UIP; see Engel 2014) for RER, rt -rt  -Et qt+1= t ,
          f
where rt =  Et ct+1 is the real rate; thus, t is often referred to as a UIP deviation (shock).


                                                        30
goods-market shocks (as in (23) and (27)), in order to reproduce the empirical exchange rate
disconnect properties.44 An outstanding question is the fundamental nature of such " nancial"
shocks, as well as their likely endogeneity to policy and other macro-fundamental shocks.
    To summarize, outside of the two limiting cases of complete markets and autarky, equilib-
rium conditions in the nancial and goods markets, (28) and (20), are generally insu cient to
characterize equilibrium exchange rates, as we explore in the nal section.


6        Real Exchange Rate in General Equilibrium
6.1      Country budget constraint
The nal key determinant of the equilibrium RER is the intertemporal budget constraint of a
country. Following Farhi, Gopinath, and Itskhoki (2014) and Itskhoki and Mukhin (2019), we
can write the ow budget constraint of a country without loss of generality as:

                                             Bt = Rt Bt-1 + N Xt ,                                               (29)

where Bt is net foreign assets (NFA) and Rt is gross return on the NFA position.45 Flow
budget constraint holds state-by-state, and it can be rolled forward along any path of fu-
ture states (imposing no bubble condition) to arrive at the intertemporal budget constraint,
Rt Bt-1 + 
                   N Xt+j                        j
              j =0 Rt,t+ = 0, where Rt,t+j         =1 Rt+ . A negative net export surprise to-
day needs to be compensated either by future trade surpluses or by favorable returns on NFA,
along every path of the future (see Obstfeld and Rogo 1995b, Gourinchas and Rey 2007).
    An open economy equilibrium is characterized by the interplay of two dynamic forces --
international risk sharing (21) and intertemporal budget constraint (29). The relative role of
these two forces depends on asset market completeness. Under complete markets, the role
of (29) is reduced to determining the constant factor  in the Backus-Smith condition, with
the dynamics of allocations fully determined by risk sharing (21). Under nancial autarky,
Bt = N Xt = 0 in (29) state-by-state, which fully determined the allocation as the set of
risk-sharing conditions (21) is empty. Under general incomplete markets, risk sharing (21)
(or equivalently (28)) shapes the path of the future expected RER changes, while the budget
    44
      Furthermore, recent work in international nance nds an important empirical role for such shocks: see
e.g. Du, Tepper, and Verdelhan (2018), Lustig and Verdelhan (2019), Jiang, Krishnamurthy, and Lustig (2018).
   45                                                                            j                            j j
      If a country's portfolio positions (private and public) at t consist of {Bt  }j Jt , then Bt = j Jt Pt   Bt and
                        j       j     j
Rt+1 Bt = j Jt (Pt+1 + Dt+1 )Bt , which together de ne Rt+1 . Gross return Rt is stochastic: for example,
under complete markets, it generates a state-contingent wealth transfer required to support (22) as the outcome
of international risk sharing. Farhi, Gopinath, and Itskhoki (2014) show how various asset classes map into this
de nition. In practice, capital gains on NFA positions (especially FDI) are hard to capture, which leads to mis-
                     j
measurement of Pt     +1 , Rt+1 and Bt+1 (see e.g. Lane and Milesi-Ferretti 2007). This, however, is not consequential
for the present analysis, as it focuses on N Xt rather than the NFA position Bt .


                                                         31
constraint (29) determines its current value (unexpected level jump), as we now discuss.
   We log-linearize the ow budget constraint (29) around a symmetric steady state:

                               bt+1 - bt = nxt =  [qt - (ct - ct )],                                  (30)

where bt  RB ¯ t-1 /Y¯ is the NFA-to-GDP ratio,  = 1/R  ¯ < 1 is the discount factor, and nxt is
as de ned in (19). The dynamic equilibrium system combines (28) and (30) with a static goods
market clearing (20). This allows us to solve out aggregate consumption from the dynamic
equilibrium system, leaving RER qt and NFA bt as the two endogenous dynamic variables --
a forward-looking jump variable and a predetermined state variable. The equilibrium path of
                                                                                          
these variables is characterized given dynamic paths of relative output shocks y~  yt - yt and
 nancial shocks t , the initial condition b0 and the no-bubble condition limj   j bt+j = 0.
    For concreteness, assuming that both y  ~t and t follow an AR(1) process with a common
autoregressive coe cient   1, we obtain the following cointegration relationship for RER:

                      1     1-         1              (1 - )    1-
         qt = -        2       bt +     2        t +         +       y
                                                                     ~t ,                             (31)
                  +   1-2
                                    1 + 1-2 1 -      1 -       1 - 

where  and  are de ned in (23) and (25) respectively. Thus, equilibrium RER depreciates (qt )
with lower NFA bt , an increase in the relative supply of domestic goods y~t , and a nancial
shock t (which leads home to delay current consumption and buy foreign assets).
   Without nancial shocks t , we can further show that:

                                             (1 - )            1
                          qt =  ~
                                yt +                ( -  ) y
                                                           ~t - y~t-1 ,                               (32)
                                            1 -                

generalizing both the complete-market and the autarky solutions, (23) and (25), which are
nested as special cases.46 In the absence of nancial shocks, equilibrium RER inherits the
properties from these two special cases more generally -- namely, it is insu ciently volatile
relative to macroeconomic aggregates and it is strongly positively correlated with consump-
tion and output, violating disconnect properties and resulting in the Backus-Smith puzzle.
    These de ciencies are overcome in the presence of nancial risk-sharing shocks t , as
shown in Itskhoki and Mukhin (2017). Combining the equilibrium relationship (31) with the
budget constraint (30), one can solve for equilibrium RER qt , which follows an ARIMA(1,1,1)
process, that is qt follows an ARMA(1,1), with an AR root  and MA root 1/ . Furthermore,
this process is indistinguishable from a random walk when  and  are close to 1, which also
ensures excessive RER volatility relative to consumption and output, as well as a weak negative
  46
    Note that   1 turns (32) into (23), while   1 turns it into (25); all three are equivalent in the Cole-
Obstfeld case which implies  =  independently of the value of  and .


                                                    32
correlation between RER and relative consumption driven by expenditure switching in the
goods market (20), in line with the empirical properties of RER.47 It is, thus, essential that the
bulk of equilibrium RER volatility emerges from the nancial, rather than the goods, market.

Is RER stationary? It follows from our discussion that RER is, in general, non-stationary,
and is in fact integrated even when underlying shocks are transitory, and thus the assump-
tion of long-run mean reversion in RER is not generally justi ed. Intertemporal budget con-
straint (30) provides the theoretically-coherent discipline on the future path of qt -- via the
no-bubble condition, limj   j bt+j = 0, instead of an ad hoc assumption of mean reversion,
limj  qt+j = q    ¯.48 At the same time, the integrated nature of RER does not exclude no-
table departures from a pure random-walk behavior and a tendency for an imperfect mean
reversion at di erent horizons. In particular, the nite-sample autocorrelation is shaped by
corr(qt , qt-1 ) < 0, and thus when observing qt in nite samples, one may confuse it for
a persistent AR(1) with a nite half life. The more persistent are the underlying shocks, the
closer is RER to a pure random walk. Lastly, note that equilibrium persistence of RER is a result
of general equilibrium forces, and does not directly depend on the speci c nature of PPP devi-
ations outlined in Lemma 1 (as long as ,  > 0, which is ensured e.g. by home bias,  < 1/2).

6.2     Monetary policy and exchange rate regimes
The nal step in our general equilibrium analysis is to bring back together nominal and real
exchange rates, de ned in (1). In partial equilibrium, it is conventional to take NER shocks
as exogenous and study their transmission into prices, thus shaping the RER response, as we
discussed in Section 3. From the general equilibrium perspective, however, a reverse approach
is, arguably, more fruitful. Speci cally, we combine the equilibrium behavior of RER, described
in the previous Section 6.1, with the assumption that monetary policy stabilizes consumer price
in ation, and does so independently of the equilibrium exchange rate volatility. To the extent
               
that t and t    are stable, NER et inherits the volatility and persistent properties of RER qt ,
                        
et = qt + t - t          . The two exchange rates track each other closely at most horizons,
                                       
until the gap in in ation rates t - t     gradually accumulates to magnitudes comparable with
exchange rate volatility.
  47
      Small persistent t shocks generate small persistent departures from Et qt+j = 0, which must be met with
a large surprise jump in qt in the opposite direction to satisfy the intertemporal budget constraint (30); then,
home bias combined with incomplete ERPT ensures a muted transmission into aggregate prices and quantities,
which are a ected only indirectly via the expenditure switching mechanism in (20).
   48
      Formally, it is the interplay between the martingale risk sharing condition and the budget constraint that
results in an integrated ARIMA process for RER, with the MA root shaped by the discount factor  in the budget
constraint (see Itskhoki and Mukhin 2017 and cf. Engel and West 2005 where characterization uses the nancial
market equilibrium alone without the country budget constraint). Departure from the martingale risk-sharing
property, e.g. due to risk premia or nancial frictions, may render RER mean reverting, yet with virtually un-
bounded half lives.

                                                      33
    Despite being unconventional, this appears to be an empirically relevant description, as
in ation rates in OECD countries under oating regimes are an order of magnitude less volatile
than both exchange rates, as well as virtually uncorrelated with them (see Itskhoki and Mukhin
2019). Furthermore, any departures from a pure random walk in RER can be used to predict
changes in NER as well, provided the long-run adjustment towards equilibrium RER is not
achieved exclusively via accumulated in ation di erentials. This is indeed the case in the data
(see Eichenbaum, Johannsen, and Rebelo 2020).
    A remaining issue to address is how in ation-stabilizing monetary policy can be consistent
                                                                                           
with a volatile and persistent NER, violating the monetarist view that et must track t - t  , at
least over the long run. There is, of course, no inconsistency from a neoclassical perspective,
where each monetary authority chooses a nominal anchor (consumer price level), and NER
freely oats tracing RER which is determined in general equilibrium, as we discussed above.49
This requires that monetary shocks are not the key drivers of RER, as we discussed in Sec-
tion 3.4. The same logic applies in a monetary model with nominal rigidities, provided that
home bias and incomplete ERPT limit exchange rate uctuations from being the key contrib-
utors to domestic CPI in ation targeted by monetary policy (see Itskhoki and Mukhin 2017).

Exchange rate regimes and the Mussa puzzle Matters are di erent when monetary au-
thorities adopt a xed exchange rate regime (peg), which is a common occurrence in practice
                                                                                             
(see Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogo 2019). Under a peg, et = 0, and therefore qt = -(t - t      ),
which holds by de nition of RER. As a result, RER changes dramatically its equilibrium proper-
ties across policy regimes -- it closely tracks a volatile NER under a oat and becomes an order
of magnitude less volatile, tracing smooth in ation di erentials under a peg. This o ers an im-
portant source of identi cation and inference in macroeconomics, constituting prime evidence
of monetary non-neutrality, as RER is a real variable a ected by a change in monetary policy
(see Mussa 1986, Baxter and Stockman 1989, Nakamura and Steinsson 2018). However, the
properties of most other macro aggregates -- including CPI in ation, consumption and output
-- remain largely unchanged across monetary regimes, in a stark challenge to conventional
monetary models, which predict that non-neutrality must persist across all these variables. It-
skhoki and Mukhin (2019) present a resolution to this broader puzzle in a model of segmented
  nancial market, which results in a risk-sharing wedge t in (28) that is endogenous to the
exchange rate regime, while nominal rigidities play only a secondary role if present.50
  49
      While monetary policy ensures pt = p     t = 0, relative prices are determined from equilibrium conditions:
                                                                W       1               
e.g. real wages wt - pt = at - 1-   2 q t and wage-based RER qt    = 1-  2 qt - (at - at ), given equilibrium RER qt .
   50
      A peg switches o NER volatility, a source of risk in international interest rate arbitrage, reducing the extent
of the equilibrium risk-sharing wedge t and hence its contribution to equilibrium RER volatility, independently
of nominal rigidities in price setting.



                                                         34
7        Conclusion
The real exchange rate plays a central role in international macroeconomic models, in both
goods and asset markets. Some form of PPP violation is necessary for a theory of RER (Lemma 1).
Home bias in tradables and due to non-tradables acts as the primary source of PPP violations,
ampli ed by pricing to market, the distribution margin, imported intermediate inputs, and
foreign-currency export price stickiness.51 This is, however, insu cient to explain the equi-
librium behavior of RER, which is inherently a general equilibrium variable. In particular, its
equilibrium dynamics are shaped by the interplay of international risk sharing, goods market
clearing and the intertemporal budget constraint. These forces determine simultaneously the
expected future changes in RER, which equilibrate the nancial market, and the surprise level
jumps in RER, which balance the country's budget constraint. In turn, goods market clearing
shapes the comovement properties between RER and macroeconomic aggregates.
    Our analysis distinguishes between two types of exogenous shocks that account for RER
volatility -- namely, shocks to the relative equilibrium supply of goods (whether due to produc-
tivity shocks or due to markup shifts induced by monetary shocks) and shocks to relative asset
demand/savings supply (or international risk sharing wedges). While both types of shocks, if
su ciently persistent, can produce near-random-walk behavior of RER, the product-market
shocks fail to reproduce the disconnect property (including a su cient RER volatility) and the
Backus-Smith comovement observed in the data. Asset-market shocks, in contrast, ensure the
empirically relevant comovement properties and a large gap in volatility between RER and
macroeconomic aggregates. An important outstanding question concerns the speci c nature
of risk-sharing shocks and the extent to which they may be induced by macroeconomic funda-
mental shocks (e.g., monetary policy shocks), which is essential for normative analyses (e.g.,
weighing the relative bene ts of RER stabilization and expenditure switching).
    We conclude that RER should be taken as a generally non-stationary variable: its long-run
behavior is shaped by the intertemporal budget constraint rather than by PPP, which is gen-
erally violated at all horizons. Nonetheless, the budget constraint together with international
risk sharing typically imply imperfect mean reversion in RER, which may be confused for
stationarity even in large nite samples. Partial mean reversion in RER with monetary policy
e ectively stabilizing consumer price in ation results in long-run predictability of the nominal
exchange rate, which enables the long-run adjustment in RER. Our analysis focused on broad
unconditional exchange rate moments. Outstanding empirical questions concern exchange
rate behavior conditional on various well-identi ed shocks (including monetary and produc-
tivity shocks), which would further shed light on international transmission mechanism.
    51
     The interplay of these forces (e.g., input-output networks with dominant currency pricing), as well as the
role of very long-lasting nominal wage rigidities and import quantity adjustment frictions remain as some of the
open questions for future literature.

                                                      35
References
A                     , G., J. P. K             ,         V. M            (2010): "Inventories, Lumpy Trade, and Large De-
    valuations," American Economic Review, 100(5), 2304­39.
A                     , G. A.,          H. C         (2019): "The Dynamics of the U.S. Trade Balance and Real Exchange
    Rate: The J Curve and Trade Costs?," NBER Working Paper No. 25563.
A             , F., A. A               ,        P. J. K          (2009): "Time-Varying Risk, Interest Rates, and Exchange
    Rates in General Equilibrium," Review of Economic Studies, 76(3), 851­878.
A       , M., O. I                 ,        J. K             (2014): "Importers, Exporters, and Exchange Rate Disconnect,"
    American Economic Review, 7(104), 1942­1978.
               (2019): "International Shocks, Variable Markups and Domestic Prices," Review of Economic
    Studies, 6(86), 2356­2402.
             (2020): "Dominant Currencies: How rms choose currency and why it matters," https://scholar.
    princeton.edu/itskhoki/.
A                 , J. E.,         E.          W              (2004): "Trade Costs," Journal of Economic Literature, 42(3),
    691­751.
A                  , C., A. C                , D. D                  ,      A. R           C      (2019): "The Elusive Pro-
    Competitive E ects of Trade," Review of Economic Studies, 86(1), 46­80.
A              , A.,          A. T. B                  (2007): "Pricing-to-Market in a Ricardian Model of International
    Trade," American Economic Review, 97(2), 362­367.
             (2008): "Trade Costs, Pricing-to-Market, and International Relative Prices," American Economic
    Review, 98(5), 1998­2031.
A      , R., A. T. B                    ,         S. L       (2020): "Exchange Rates and Prices: Evidence from the 2015
    Swiss Franc Appreciation," American Economic Review, forthcoming.
B           , D. K.,          G. W. S              (1993): "Consumption and real exchange rates in dynamic economies
    with non-traded goods," Journal of International Economics, 35(3­4), 297­316.
B     , L.,            D. R          (1990): "Real Rigidities and the Non-Neutrality of Money," The Review of Eco-
    nomic Studies, 57(2), 183­203.
B           , D. R.,            E. F           (2019): "Networks, Barriers, and Trade," https://sites.google.com/site/
    davidbaqaee/.
B               , O., E. F        , G. G                ,       O. I          (2019): "The Macroeconomics of Border Taxes,"
    in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2018, vol. 33, pp. 395­457.
B      , S. (1995): "Intermediate Goods and Business Cycle: Implication for Productivity and Welfare,"
    American Economic Review, 85(3), 512­31.
B           , M.,          A. C. S                    (1989): "Business cycles and the exchange-rate regime: Some inter-
    national evidence," Journal of Monetary Economics, 23(3), 377­400.
B             , G.,         C. T                    (2008): "Consumption and real exchange rates with incomplete mar-
    kets and non-traded goods," Journal of International Money and Finance, 27(6), 926­948.
B         , M., M. B. D                   ,         C. E          (2012): "Real Exchange Rate Adjustment in and out of the
    Eurozone," American Economic Review, 102(3), 179­85.
              (2018): "Real Exchange Rates and Sectoral Productivity in the Eurozone," American Economic
    Review, 108(6), 1543­81.
B            , N., P. M              ,         T. M            (2012): "How do di erent exporters react to exchange rate
    changes?," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(1), 437­492.
B        , C.,          M. D                 (2000): "Exchange Rate Dynamics in a Model of Pricing-to-Market," Jour-


                                                            36
    nal of International Economics, 50(1), 215­44.
B        , C. M.,             T. J. K         (2008): "Real Exchange Rate Movements and the Relative Price of Non-
    traded Goods," NBER Working Papers No. 14437.
B     , M.,             P. J. K            (2004): "Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices," Journal of
    Political Economy, 112(5), 947­85.
B     , M., P. J. K                 ,       B. A. M          (2012): "Reset Price In ation and the Impact of Monetary
    Policy Shocks," American Economic Review, 102(6), 2798­2825.
B           , A.,          J. C           (2020): "Price Rigidities and Relative PPP," Journal of Monetary Economics,
    116, 104­116.
B         , J. (2018): "Global Firms in Large Devaluations," http://www.brown.edu/Departments/
    Economics/Faculty/Joaquin_Blaum/.
B           , M. W., J. H. C                   ,       P. S       C       (2006): "International risk sharing is better than
    you think, or exchange rates are too smooth," Journal of Monetary Economics, 53(4), 671­698.
B         , C.,          D. E. W                  (2006): "Globalization and the Gains from Variety," Quarterly Journal
    of Economics, 121(2), 541­85.
              (2008): "Understanding International Price Di erences Using Barcode Data," NBER Working
    Paper No. 14017.
B               , A. T.,         J. C             (2015): "Measured Aggregate Gains from International Trade," Amer-
    ican Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7(2), 181­218.
B               , A. T., M. E                     ,      S. R        (2005): "Large Devaluations and the Real Exchange
    Rate," Journal of Political Economy, 113(4), 742­784.
B               , A. T.,          G. G               (2012): "International Prices and Exchange Rates," in Handbook of
    International Economics, ed. by G. Gopinath, E. Helpman, and K. Rogo , vol. IV.
B               , A. T.,         N. J               (2012): "Understanding Movements in Aggregate and Product-level
    Real Exchange rates," http://www.econ.ucla.edu/arielb/.
B               , A. T., J. C. N        ,        S. R        (2003): "Distribution costs and real exchange rate dynamics
    during exchange-rate-based stabilizations," Journal of Monetary Economics, 50(6), 1189­1214.
C          , A. S.,           D. F. S             (1987): "Menu Costs and the Neutrality of Money," Quarterly Journal
    of Econmics, 102(4), 703­26.
C                 , C.,        F. N          (2011): "Aggregation and the PPP Puzzle in a Sticky-Price Model," Amer-
    ican Economic Review, 101(6), 2391­2424.
C             , A., B. N              ,       R. R            (2014): "Currency Unions, Product Introductions, and the
    Real Exchange Rate," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(2), 529­595.
C        , V., P. J. K            ,       E. R. M G              (2002): "Can Sticky Price Models Generate Volatile and
    Persistent Exchange Rates?," Review of Economic Studies, 69(3), 533­63.
C       , Y. .,            K. R           (2003): "Commodity currencies," Journal of International Economics, 60(1),
    133­160.
C         , A. K., P. L. G              , S. L ,        F. T             (2018): "What drives home market advantage?,"
    Journal of International Economics, 110, 135­150.
C                 , J. H. (2001): Asset Pricing. Princeton University Press.
C               , R.,         M. M. C            (2011): "Risks for the Long Run and the Real Exchange Rate," Journal
    of Political Economy, 119(1), 153­181.
            (2013): "International Asset Pricing with Recursive Preferences," Journal of Finance, 68(6), 2651­
    2686.


                                                            37
C       , H. L.,            M. O                 (1991): "Commodity trade and international risk sharing," Journal of
    Monetary Economics, 28(1), 3­24.
C                , G.,       L. D             (2005): "A macroeconomic model of international price discrimination,"
    Journal of International Economics, 67(1), 129­155.
C                , G., L. D          ,          S. L        (2008): "International Risk Sharing and the Transmission of
    Productivity Shocks," Review of Economic Studies, 75(2), 443­473.
C             , M. J.,         A. L             (2019): "Accounting for real exchange rates using micro-data," Journal
    of International Money and Finance, 91, 86­100.
C             , M. J.,         C. I. T             (2012): "Microeconomic Sources of Real Exchange Rate Variability,"
    NBER Working Papers No. 17978.
D     L             , J.,      P. K. G                 (2014): "Firm Performance in a Global Market," Annual Review of
    Economics, 6(1), 201­227.
D             , A.,        B. A        (2017): "Trying to Understand the PPPs in ICP 2011: Why Are the Results So
    Di erent?," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 9(1), 243­264.
D           , E., A. K. K               , M. M             ,       F. T           (2020): "Trade and Domestic Production
    Networks," Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.
D                   , R. (1987): "Exchange Rate and Prices," American Economic Review, 77(1), 93­106.
D    , W., A. T              ,       A. V                    (2018): "Deviations from Covered Interest Rate Parity," The
    Journal of Finance, 73(3), 915­957.
E          , J.,        S. K           (2002): "Technology, Geography, and Trade," Econometrica, 70(5), 1741­1779.
E          , J., S. S. K          ,          B. N          (2016): "Obstfeld and Rogo 's International Macro Puzzles: A
    Quantitative Assessment," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 72, 5­23.
E                    , M. S., B. K. J                 ,       S. T. R       (2020): "Monetary Policy and the Predictability
    of Nominal Exchange Rates," Review of Economics Studies, forthcoming.
E         , C. (1999): "Accounting for U.S. Real Exchange Rate Changes," Journal of Political Economy,
    107(3), 507­538.
               (2003): "Expenditure Switching and Exchange Rate Policy," in NBER Macroeconomics Annual
    2002, vol. 17, pp. 231­272.
               (2006): "Equivalence Results for Optimal Pass-Through, Optimal Indexing to Exchange Rates,
    and Optimal Choice of Currency for Export Pricing," Journal of European Economic Association, 4(6),
    1249­60.
               (2014): "Exchange Rates and Interest Parity," in Handbook of International Economics, ed. by
    G. Gopinath, E. Helpman, and K. Rogo , vol. 4, pp. 453­522. Elsevier.
              (2019): "Real Exchange Rate Convergence: The Roles of Price Stickiness and Monetary Policy,"
    Journal of Monetary Economics, 103, 21­32.
E         , C., N. C. M         ,         K. D. W         (2008): "Exchange Rate Models Are Not As Bad As You Think,"
    in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2007, Volume 22, pp. 381­441.
E         , C.,           K. D. W         (2005): "Exchange Rates and Fundamentals," Journal of Political Economy,
    113(3), 485­517.
E         , M. D. D.,          R. K. L            (2002): "Order Flow and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal of Political
    Economy, 110(1), 170­180.
F                , M., G. G                ,        O. I             (2011): "Price Dynamics for Durable Goods," https://
    scholar.princeton.edu/itskhoki/.
F        , E.,          X. G           (2016): "Rare Disasters and Exchange Rates," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    131(1), 1­52.

                                                            38
F        , E., G. G                ,        O. I              (2014): "Fiscal Devaluations," Review of Economics Studies,
    81(2), 725­760.
F              , R. C. (1994): "New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International Prices," The
    American Economic Review, 84(1), 157­177.
F              , R. C., P. L        , M. O              ,      K. N. R      (2018): "In Search of the Armington Elasticity,"
    The Review of Economics and Statistics, 100(1), 135­150.
F                 , D.,       S. H            (2013): "Pricing-to-Market: Evidence From Plant-Level Prices," Review
    of Economic Studies, 81(2), 761­786.
             (2018): "Exporters and Shocks," Journal of International Economics, 113(1), 154­171.
F                 , D., Y. Y          L ,            S. H          (2019): "Can Sticky Quantities Explain Export Insensi-
    tivity to Exchange Rates?," https://doireann.com/papers/.
F               , L., P. M            ,       G. O             (2018): "The international elasticity puzzle is worse than
    you think," Journal of International Economics, 115, 115­129.
G          , X.,          M. M                 (2015): "International Liquidity and Exchange Rate Dynamics," The
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(3), 1369­1420.
G      , J. (2008): Monetary Policy, In ation and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the New Keynesian
    Framework. Princeton University Press.
G      , J.,          T. M                (2005): "Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Volatility in a Small Open
    Economy," Review of Economic Studies, 72(3), 707­734.
G               , P.,       M. K               (1997): "Goods Prices and Exchange Rates: What Have We Learned?,"
    Journal of Economic Literature, 35(3), 1243­1272.
G               , G. (2016): "The International Price System," Jackson Hole Symposium Proceedings.
G               , G., E. B , C. C           , F. J. D , P. O. G                 ,      M. P          M      (2020): "Dom-
    inant Currency Paradigm," American Economic Review, 110(3), 677­719.
G               , G., P. O. G                     , C. T. H         ,      N. L (2011): "International Prices, Costs, and
    Markup Di erences," American Economic Review, 101(6), 2450­86.
G               , G.,        O. I              (2010): "Frequency of Price Adjustment and Pass-through," Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 125(2), 675­727.
             (2011): "In Search of Real Rigdities," in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2010, vol. 25, pp. 261­310.
             (2021): "The Existence and Implications of Dominant Currencies," in Handbook of International
    Economics, ed. by G. Gopinath, E. Helpman, and K. Rogo , vol. V. forthcoming.
G               , G., O. I               ,         R. R              (2010): "Currency Choice and Exchange Rate Pass-
    through," American Economic Review, 100(1), 306­336.
G               , G.,        R. R              (2008): "Sticky Borders," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(2), 531­
    575.
G                   , P. O. (2019): "The Dollar Hegemon? Evidence and Implications for Policymakers," the
    6th Asian Monetary Policy Forum, Singapore.
G                   , P. O.,         H. R (2007): "International Financial Adjustment," Journal of Political Econ-
    omy, 115(4), 665­703.
H             , L., M. K         ,         A. S           (2015): "Imported Inputs and Productivity," American Economic
    Review, 105(12), 3660­3703.
I            , E., C. M. R               ,        K. S. R          (2019): "Exchange Arrangements Entering the Twenty-
    First Century: Which Anchor will Hold?," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134(2), 599­646.
I     , J., H. M             , M. O. R          ,          H. R (2005): "PPP Strikes Back: Aggregation And the Real


                                                            39
  Exchange Rate," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(1), 1­43.
I             , O.,         D. M          (2017): "Exchange Rate Disconnect in General Equilibrium," NBER Work-
  ing Papers No. 23401.
            (2019): "Mussa Puzzle Redux," https://scholar.princeton.edu/itskhoki/pages/papers.
J         , O.,           A. K. R       (2002): "Noise Trading and Exchange Rate Regimes," The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 117(2), 537­569.
J     , Z., A. K                          ,       H. N. L         (2018): "Foreign Safe Asset Demand for U.S. Treasurys
  and the Dollar," https://people.stanford.edu/hlustig/.
K                         , L. (2014): "Home production, labor wedges, and international business cycles," Journal
  of Monetary Economics, 64(C), 68­84.
K       , P. J.,            V. M              (2008): "Sticky Prices and Real Exchange Rates in the Cross-Section,"
  http://www.virgiliumidrigan.com/.
K                       , N. R.,       L. P              (2007): "Household Heterogeneity and Real Exchange Rates,"
  Economic Journal, 117(519), C1­C25.
K                , R. (1995): "Consumption, real exchange rates and the structure of international asset mar-
  kets," Journal of International Money and Finance, 14(2), 191­211.
K              , P. (1987): "Pricing to Market when the Exchange Rate Changes," in Real Financial Linkages
  among Open Economies, ed. by S. Arndt, and J. Richardson, pp. 49­70. MIT Press, Cambridge.
L    , P. R. (2001): "The New Open Economy Macroeconomics: A Survey," Journal of International
  Economics, 54(2), 235­66.
L    , P. R.,              G. M. M           F           (2007): "The external wealth of nations mark II: Revised and
  extended estimates of foreign assets and liabilities, 1970-2004," Journal of International Economics,
  73(2), 223­250.
L       , A., M. M                  , B. N          ,      J. S           (2020): "Exchange Rate Reconnect," Review of
  Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
L        , H. N.,             A. V               (2019): "Does Incomplete Spanning in International Financial Mar-
  kets Help to Explain Exchange Rates?," American Economic Review, 109(6), 2208­44.
M       , R.,           K. R          (1983): "Empirical Exchange Rate Models of the Seventies: Do They Fit Out
  of Sample?," Journal of International Economics, 14(1), 3­24.
M         , M. J. (2003): "The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
  Productivity," Econometrica, 71(6), 1695­1725.
M              , E. G., V.                 ,       J. V. R      R     (2009): "Financial Integration, Financial Develop-
  ment, and Global Imbalances," Journal of Political Economy, 117(3), 371­416.
M           , D. (2017): "An Equilibrium Model of the International Price System," https://sites.google.com/
  site/dmitry0mukhin/research.
M          , U. K.,            M. W. W            (2018): "Long-Run Covariability," Econometrica, 86(3), 775­804.
            (2019): "Low-Frequency Analysis of Economic Time Series," work in progress.
M        , M. L. (1986): "Nominal exchange rate regimes and the behavior of real exchange rates: Evidence
  and implications," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 25(1), 117­214.
N                 , E.,        J. S            (2008): "Five Facts about Prices: A Reevaluation of Menu Cost Models,"
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(4), 1415­1464.
            (2012): "Lost in Transit: Product Replacement Bias and Pricing to Market," American Economic
  Review, 102(7), 3277­3316.
            (2018): "Identi cation in Macroeconomics," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 32(3), 59­86.


                                                          40
O              , M.,           K. R          (1995a): "Exchange Rate Dynamics Redux," Journal of Political Economy,
    103, 624­60.
             (1995b): "The intertemporal approach to the current account," vol. 3 of Handbook of Interna-
    tional Economics, pp. 1731­1799. Elsevier.
             (1996): Foundations of International Macroeconomics. The MIT Press.
             (2000): "New Directions for Stochastic Open Economy Models," Journal of International Eco-
    nomics, 50, 117­153.
             (2001): "The Six Major Puzzles in International Macroeconomics: Is There a Common Cause?,"
    in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, vol. 15, pp. 339­390.
P            , A.,          R. R           (2008): "The Role of Portfolio Constraints in the International Propagation
    of Shocks," Review of Economic Studies, 75(4), 1215­1256.
R      , M., S. S                   G       ,      M. U      (2006): "Deep Habits," The Review of Economic Studies,
    73(1), 195­218.
R         H               , R. (2016): "The Role of Trade Costs in the Surge of Trade Imbalances," http://scholar.
    princeton.edu/rmreyes/JMP.
R                    , A. (2018): "(Un)competitive Devaluations and Firm Dynamics," http://www.arodnyansky.
    com/research/.
R          , K. (1996): "The Purchasing Power Parity Puzzle," Journal of Economic Literature, 34, 647­668.
R          , K. S.,             V. S               (2008): "The Continuing Puzzle of Short Horizon Exchange Rate
    Forecasting," NBER Working Paper No. 14071.
R       , B. (2013): "Exchange Rate Predictability," Journal of Economic Literature, 51(4), 1063­1119.
R      , K. J. (2008): "The International Elasticity Puzzle," NYU Stern Working Papers.
S                    , I. (2015): "Income Di erences and Prices of Tradables: Insights from an Online Retailer,"
    The Review of Economic Studies, 82(4), 1612­1656.
S                   , V.,         J. T      (2015): "Exchange Rates and Monetary Policy," https://sites.google.com/
    site/vstavrakeva/research.
S               , J. (2008): "The Dynamic Behavior of the Real Exchange Rate in Sticky Price Models," Amer-
    ican Economic Review, 98(1), 519­33.
S        , J.,         M. W             (2007): "Why has U.S. in ation become harder to forecast?," Journal of Money,
    Credit and Banking, 39(1).
S                , A. C.,            L. L. T       (1995): "Tastes and Technology in a Two-Country Model of the
    Business Cycle: Explaining International Comovements," The American Economic Review, 85(1), 168­
    185.
V                  , A. (2010): "A Habit-Based Explanation of the Exchange Rate Risk Premium," Journal of
    Finance, 65(1), 123­146.




                                                          41
