                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      SOCIAL DISTANCING DURING A PANDEMIC:
                               THE ROLE OF FRIENDS

                                       Michael Bailey
                                      Drew M. Johnston
                                       Martin Koenen
                                       Theresa Kuchler
                                       Dominic Russel
                                      Johannes Stroebel

                                      Working Paper 28234
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28234


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2020




We thank various seminar and conference participants for helpful comment. The academic
authors have a research consulting relationship with Facebook. Bailey is an employee at
Facebook. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Michael Bailey, Drew M. Johnston, Martin Koenen, Theresa Kuchler, Dominic
Russel, and Johannes Stroebel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Social Distancing During a Pandemic: The Role of Friends
Michael Bailey, Drew M. Johnston, Martin Koenen, Theresa Kuchler, Dominic Russel, and
Johannes Stroebel
NBER Working Paper No. 28234
December 2020
JEL No. D83,D85,H0,I0

                                         ABSTRACT

We explore how social network exposure to COVID-19 cases shapes individuals' social
distancing behavior during the early months of the ongoing pandemic. We work with de-
identified data from Facebook to show that U.S. users whose friends live in areas with worse
coronavirus outbreaks reduce their mobility more than otherwise similar users whose friends live
in areas with smaller outbreaks. The effects are quantitatively large: a one standard deviation
increase in friend-exposure to COVID-19 cases early in the pandemic results in a 1.2 percentage
point increase in the probability that an individual stays home on a given day. As the pandemic
progresses, changes in friend-exposure drive changes in social distancing behavior. Given the
evolving nature and geography of the pandemic -- and hence friend-exposure -- these results rule
out many alternative explanations for the observed relationships. We also analyze data on public
posts and membership in groups advocating to "reopen" the economy to show that our findings
can be explained by friend-exposure raising awareness about the risks of the disease and inducing
individuals to participate in mitigating public health behavior.

Michael Bailey                                  Theresa Kuchler
Facebook                                        Stern School of Business
Economist                                       New York University
mcbailey@fb.com                                 44 West 4th Street
                                                New York, NY 10012
Drew M. Johnston                                and NBER
Harvard University                              tkuchler@stern.nyu.edu
drewjohnston@g.harvard.edu
                                                Dominic Russel
Martin Koenen                                   New York University
Harvard University                              Leonard N. Stern School of Business
martin_koenen@fas.harvard.edu                   44 West 4th Street
                                                New York, NY 10012
                                                drussel@stern.nyu.edu

                                                Johannes Stroebel
                                                Stern School of Business
                                                New York University
                                                44 West 4th Street
                                                New York, NY 10012
                                                and NBER
                                                johannes.stroebel@nyu.edu
1       Introduction
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has lead to an unparalleled global health crisis. As of November
14, 2020, more than 53 million reported cases and 1.3 million deaths worldwide have heavily burdened
health systems across the globe. Given the threats posed by the disease, policy makers have imposed
substantial restrictions on public life, and public health organizations have urged individuals to avoid
nonessential travel, wear masks, and practice social distancing. However, despite significant evidence
that these behavioral adjustments impede the transmission of the virus, there has been widespread
variation in the extent to which individuals have adjusted their behaviors. As a result, understanding
the different factors that determine individuals’ decisions to adjust their behaviors to reduce the spread
of the virus is central to designing an effective pubic health response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
    One potentially important factor in explaining public health behavior during a pandemic is the
information that individuals receive from their social networks about the seriousness of the disease.
Such information can be complementary to (and may be more trusted than) communications from health
officials or the news media. Especially close contacts, such as friends and family, may play important
roles in shaping individuals’ perceptions of the need to adjust their health behaviors. Indeed, prior
studies show that friends can influence whether an individual becomes obese, smokes regularly, and
chooses to get vaccinated (Christakis and Fowler, 2007, 2008; Sato and Takasaki, 2019).
    In this paper, we study the effects of network exposure to COVID-19 cases on health behavior during
the ongoing pandemic, focusing on the roles played by friends. We work with de-identified data from
Facebook, a large online social networking service. These data allow us to analyze health behaviors
and beliefs through providing information on (i) movement patterns, (ii) public posts on the platform,
and (iii) membership in public Facebook groups. The first of these outcomes is a measure of social
distancing behavior, while the latter two outcomes can provide information on beliefs about COVID-19
and related public health measures and can therefore shed light on potential mechanisms of the effects
of social networks. Relative to other work that has explored social distancing behavior using cell phone
location data, our data is unique in that it allows us to link these health behaviors to both individual-
level demographics and information on social networks. It can therefore provide insights into health
behavior and perceptions unavailable to other researchers, and thus has the potential to inform more
effective public health interventions. In addition, the Facebook data is highly representative of the U.S.
population and has been used extensively in prior research to study the determinants and effects of
social networks (e.g. Bailey et al., 2018a, 2019a,c).
    We begin by exploring aggregate time-series patterns in mobility, and find—consistent with prior
work—that, during the early stages of the pandemic, U.S. Facebook users drastically reduced their mo-
bility relative to before the outbreak of the pandemic. In mid-February, the probability of staying home
averaged around 18% on a given day; by late March, this probability had increased to about 30%.1 We
find that highly educated users, women, older users, and users living in high-income areas reduced
their mobility more than others.
1 Our
    mobility sample only includes Facebook users who consented to sharing and storing their location information. We
proxy for staying at home with staying within a single level-16 Bing tile, an area corresponding to about 600m x 600m at the
equator. For more details regarding our mobility sample and variable construction, see Section 2.1.



                                                            1
    We then look at the role of friend networks in shaping distancing behaviors. We find that users
with greater friend-exposure to COVID-19 cases—that is, those who have relatively more friends living
in areas highly affected by the virus—are substantially more likely to reduce their mobility. To isolate
this relationship, we take both a static as well as a dynamic approach. In the static approach, which
focuses on the early pandemic, we first classify users by whether their friend-exposure to COVID-19
is higher or lower than the median of users within their zip code as of March 15, right after President
Trump declared a national emergency. The average movement patterns of the two groups look strikingly
similar prior to the pandemic, before diverging strongly after the outbreak begins. Using an event
study design that controls for the time-varying effect of a number of relevant user characteristics that
might be correlated with friend-exposure to COVID-19 cases, we estimate that this above-median friend-
exposure to COVID-19 early in the pandemic is associated with a 1 percentage point increase in a user’s
likelihood of staying at home on a given day during the pandemic. Interestingly, this effect persists
through April and May, consistent with existing survey evidence showing that individuals in areas with
early COVID-19 spread remained the most worried about the virus in later months (Blumenthal, 2020).
Quantitatively, a one standard deviation increase in friend-exposure to COVID-19 cases is associated
with a 1.2 percentage point increase in the probability an individual stays home on a given day. We also
find that friend-exposure effects become larger with closer friendships. In addition, while the effects of
friend-exposure tend to be larger for some users—in particular those with a college-degree and those
living in higher income areas—sizeable positive effects can be observed for all subgroups considered.
    One possible concern with our analysis is that it might not capture a causal effect of friend-exposure
to the disease, but instead result from a correlation of friend-exposure with unobserved demographic
characteristics that explain differential changes in mobility. For example, since early outbreaks were
primarily concentrated in urban centers such as New York City and Seattle, it might be that people
with friends in these places would have disproportionately reduced their mobility even without the
outbreaks where their friends live. We think that such alternative explanations are unlikely to explain
our results: besides numerous demographic and location-specific controls, we control for various friend
characteristics, such as the average population density and income of places where friends live. This
allows us to rule out the possibility that we just pick up differences between people who have friends in
cities or high income areas and people who have more friends in rural areas or lower income places.
    In addition, we conduct a number of robustness checks to rule out many alternative stories. First, we
address concerns that friend-exposure to COVID-19 cases might be correlated with individuals’ ability
to work from home. To do this, we estimate the effects of friend-exposure to COVID-19 on movement
patterns separately for weekends and weekdays. Our results are virtually identical, suggesting differ-
ences in the ability to work from home that are correlated with friend-exposure to COVID-19 cases are
not driving the observed effects. Second, we limit our sample to users with college information on
Facebook and estimate the effect of friend-exposure to COVID-19 with an added control for users’ exact
college. Our results remain essentially unchanged. As this specification compares individuals within
the same zip code, of the same gender and age group, who attended the same college, it allows us to
hold fixed many factors determining individuals’ desire or ability to socially distance.
    In addition to studying the effects of friend-exposure early on in the pandemic, we also estimate


                                                    2
the effects of changes in friend-exposure to COVID-19 cases over a given month on changes in mobility
during that month, instead of using friend-exposure at a single point in time as we do in our static
baseline analysis. For example, we estimate the effect of the change in friend-exposure from late April
to late May on the change in social distancing behavior over the same time. We find strong positive
effects over all periods, even after controlling for changes in prior months. Because the geography
and characteristics of users with the highest change in our exposure measure varies as the pandemic
evolves (for example, in February, cases grew the fastest in New York City and Seattle, while in June,
they grew the fastest in Oklahoma, Texas, and Arizona), this dynamic relationship between changes in
friend-exposure to COVID-19 cases and changes in social distancing behavior allows us to rule out many
unobserved effects driving our results. In particular, it is difficult to argue that, in every month, it would
be exactly those individuals with friends in parts of the country with the fastest acceleration of the virus
that would have independently reduced their mobility for reasons other than their friend-exposure.
    Next, we explore the mechanisms through which friend-exposure to COVID-19 affects individual
behavior using data from public user posts and group memberships, as well as disaggregated mobility
and spending data. We first define a series of regular expressions to identify public posts related to the
pandemic and whether the post supports social distancing guidelines and other restrictions imposed on
public life. Similarly, we identify public groups advocating for a reopening of the economy (’Reopen-
Groups’). We find that friend-exposure to COVID-19 cases increases individuals’ propensity to post
about COVID-19 and the probability that a post with a social distancing opinion will voice support for
restrictions on public life. In addition, we find that greater friend-exposure to COVID-19 cases lowers
the likelihood of an individual joining a Reopen-Group. Overall, these observations are consistent with
our hypothesis that friend-exposure to COVID-19 cases raises awareness about the risks of the disease
and induces individuals to participate in mitigating public health behavior. It also suggests that the
effects come through an effect of individuals’ desire for social distancing (and support of policies that
enforce such distancing), rather than through a differential ability to engage in such behavior.
    In the final part of the analysis, we combine zip-code level mobility data from Safegraph with the
Social Connectedness Index (SCI) from Bailey et al. (2018b) to show that our qualitative results—that
friend-exposure to COVID-19 affects social distancing—replicates with alternative, public data sources.
In addition, we use these public data to better understand the mechanisms through which friend-
exposure to COVID-19 cases affects social distancing. We first find that, at the zip code level, friend-
exposure to COVID-19 results in substantial decreases in visits to restaurants, bars, and places related
to the arts, entertainment, and recreation. In contrast, we observe no effects for visits to essential places
such as food and beverage stores, or centers of health care and social assistance. This provides further
evidence that the reductions in mobility driven by friend-exposure are a measure of health-driven so-
cial distancing behavior, rather than capturing the ability to work from home. We also use transaction
data from Facteus to explore the effect of friend-exposure to COVID-19 on economic outcomes. We find
that individuals living in zip-codes with high friend-exposure to COVID-19 substantially decrease their
transactions at nonessential merchants (i.e. Starbucks) relative to others while not differentially chang-
ing their spending behavior on Amazon. This is again consistent with friend-exposure to COVID-19
increasing one’s desire to avoid nonessential physical interactions.


                                                      3
    This paper contributes to a recent literature that studies the relationship between social networks
and social distancing behavior using aggregated data. For example, Charoenwong et al. (2020) use the
SCI data introduced by Bailey et al. (2018b) to show that individuals living in US counties with more
connections to China and Italy—two early hotspots of the COVID-19 pandemic—are more likely to
reduce their mobility. Makridis and Wang (2020) also use the SCI to show that consumption decreases
more in counties with more friend-exposure to COVID-19. We contribute to this emerging literature
in several ways. Most importantly, because we measure mobility behavior at the individual level, we
are able to further explore the relationship between mobility and certain demographics. In turn, this
allows us to rule out various alternative explanations that might confound an observed relationship
between social networks and distancing behavior at the aggregate level. The availability of individual-
level demographic data also allows us to explore the heterogeneity of the effect of friend-exposure to
COVID-19 on different individuals. In addition, we can exploit additional data on posts and group
memberships that shine a light on the mechanisms driving these relationships.
    More broadly, this paper contributes to a rapidly growing literature on the determinants of so-
cial distancing during the COVID-19 pandemic. Giuliano and Rasul (2020b) and Brodeur et al. (2020a)
provide early overviews of this work. Prior work has investigated informational channels that drive
distancing behavior: Simonov et al. (2020) and Bursztyn et al. (2020) find that exposure to news down-
playing the seriousness of the pandemic decreased distancing behavior, while Tian et al. (2020) argue
that international migration networks helped to convey information about the disease. The literature
has also found that higher levels of civic capital (Giuliano and Rasul, 2020a; Barrios et al., 2020), trust
in scientific knowledge (Brzezinski et al., 2020), trust in policy makers (Bargain and Aminjonov, 2020),
and general trust (Brodeur et al., 2020b) are all associated with greater levels of social distancing. Re-
lated studies have investigated the role of political affiliation (Allcott et al., 2020b; Barrios and Hochberg,
2020). Not only are a state’s own policies an important determinant of social distancing (Allcott et al.,
2020a), but there are also important spillover effects across places (Holtz et al., 2020). Our results build
on these prior works, using large-scale individual level data to provide new insights into the determi-
nants of health behaviors during a pandemic.
    The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we describe the Facebook data and
descriptive patterns of social distancing over time. Section 3 presents our primary analyses, exploring
the effects of friend-exposure to COVID-19 on social distancing behavior. We discuss heterogeneity in
the effects of friend-exposure in Section 4. Using data on public post, group membership behavior as
well as public, disaggregated mobility and spending data, we provide evidence on the mechanisms of
our findings in Section 5. We conclude in Section 6.

2   Data and Descriptive Statistics
We work with de-identified data from the global online social networking site Facebook. As of Decem-
ber 2019, Facebook had 248 million monthly active users and 190 million daily active users in the U.S.
and Canada (Facebook, 2020). An independent 2016 study found that, among U.S. adults, usage rates are
relatively constant across income groups, education levels, and race; usage rates were slightly declining
in age (Duggan et al., 2016). Establishing a connection on Facebook requires the consent of both individ-


                                                      4
uals, and a person can have at most 5,000 connections. As a result, Facebook connections are primarily
between real-world acquaintances. Facebook networks therefore resemble real-world social networks
more closely than networks on other online platforms where uni-directional links to non-acquaintances
(e.g., celebrities) are common. Indeed, a number of prior studies show that Facebook networks pre-
dict many important real-world economic and social interactions including patterns of trade (Bailey
et al., 2020a), patent citations (Bailey et al., 2018b), travel flows (Bailey et al., 2019b, 2020b), bank lend-
ing (Rehbein et al., 2020), social program participation (Wilson, 2019), investment decisions (Kuchler
et al., 2020a), and disease transmission (Kuchler et al., 2020b). Information on individuals’ Facebook
friendship links can also help understand their product adoption decisions (Bailey et al., 2019c) and
their housing choices (Bailey et al., 2018a, 2019a).

2.1    Sample Restrictions and Summary Statistics
Our analyses of mobility behavior are limited to a sub-population of Facebook users who have con-
sented to sharing and storing their location; have active accounts; are 18 or older; live in the 50 U.S.
States or the District of Columbia; and have between 100 and 1,500 U.S. friends. We restrict the analysis
to ZIP Code Tabulation Areas (ZCTAs) with 50 or more users that meet all previous requirements. Over-
all, the sample of users that meet the above criteria includes 12.8 million individuals. The average ZCTA
has 592 users, the median has 319, and the 10th percentile has 72 users. We do not require users to have
location information in every week (for example, if their device was off) and thus observe information
for about 7.2 million users per week.
      Table 1 provides summary statistics describing the sample. Age is widely distributed, with the 10th
percentile at 26 years and the 90th percentile at 63 years. 53% of the sample is female, and just over
half has a college listed on Facebook. We also observe information about whether the user primarily
accesses Facebook mobile from an iPhone and whether the user accesses Facebook from a tablet (such
as an iPad). Around 25% of the sample primarily uses an iPhone and around half have a tablet.

                                                      [Table 1]

After mapping users to their presumed ZCTA of residence, we supplement our individual-level data
with public data on median household income from the 2014-2018 American Community Survey (ACS).
The median user in our sample lives in a ZCTA with a median household income of $54,000, not far from
the true median household income of $53,958. The 10th and 90th percentiles are $36,160 and $88,096,
respectively, close to the true population values of $34,658 and $89,355.

Measuring Mobility and Social Distancing. We measure mobility using user-level GPS data for indi-
viduals who have consented to sharing and storing their location.2 Location data are aggregated using
the Bing Maps Tile System, which defines a series of grids at different resolution levels over a rectan-
gular projection of the world (Schwartz, 2018). We use level-16 Bing tiles, which are 600 meters x 600
meters at the equator. Based on these data, we construct two mobility indices: (i) whether a user remains
in the same level-16 Bing tile throughout the day (which we will refer to as "staying at home") and (ii)
2 These
      data are similar to those described in Maas et al. (2019) and used to create the Facebook Data for Good Mobility
 Dashboard, available at https://www.covid19mobility.org/dashboards/facebook-data-for-good/.



                                                          5
the total number of distinct level-16 Bing tiles visited on a given day.

                                                          [Figure 1]

Figure 1 shows daily values of our two mobility measures between early February and late May.3 In
Figure 1a, we see that in February and early March, between 15% and 20% of users stay at home on a
given day, with recurring spikes on weekends.4 Starting around March 16—the day on which a large
number of schools and offices were closed in response to the pandemic—the probability of staying at
home jumps to well above 20%. As restrictions tightened in the U.S., the measure continues to rise,
exceeding 30% by March 23 and rarely falling under 30% throughout April. In May, as social distancing
restrictions were eased across parts of the U.S., the series decreases steadily; however, the probability
of staying at home remains elevated relative to the baseline period and never falls under 20%. Figure
1b looks at the average number of tiles visited and depicts a similar trend: at the beginning of the
sample period, there are fairly consistent patterns in the average number of tiles visited; the measure
drops substantially around March 16, reaches its lowest levels in late April, before increasing steadily
throughout May. Overall, we see similar large and persistent changes in both mobility metrics over time.
Thus, in the main body, we focus on the probability that a user stays at home as our primary metric. Our
findings remain unchanged if we instead use the percentage change in tiles visited as our metric. The
corresponding figures are presented in the Appendix.

2.2    Heterogeneity in Social Distancing Behavior by Demographics
In this section, we show how social distancing varies across demographic characteristics. Using Face-
book data allows us to understand the relationship between individual factors—such as age, gender, and
college degree attainment—and distancing behaviors. We also match users to their assumed place of
residence and study variation in distancing by geographically aggregated measures of income and di-
rect exposure to COVID-19 in their locations. In Table 2, we split our sample into demographic groups
and present statistics on each group’s baseline probability of remaining at home during a given day
(during the period between February 25 - March 2) and the change in that probability between the base-
line period and the period April 14 - April 20 as a measure of social distancing. (Appendix Table A1
shows corresponding statistics for the change in the average number of tiles visited.)

                                                           [Table 2]

Table 2 shows that, while older individuals already spent more time at home prior to the pandemic,
they also changed their behavior more during the pandemic. The probability of staying at home for
users older than 55 years increased from about 26 percent to about 41 percent; for users between 18 and
34 years old the probability of staying at home increased from about 14 percent to about 28 percent. This
finding is consistent with the fact that COVID-19 poses a greater risk to older individuals, which may
3 In all graphs in this section, we control for a change in the methodology of location data collection near the end of February.
  Specifically, we assume that the relationship between the levels of our metrics in early February and the levels in the week
  of February 24th matches the relationship over the same time periods in the SafeGraph data described in the Appendix. We
  do not make this adjustment in any other section, where we either use only data after the methodology change or estimate
  results using a difference-in-difference approach (where the methodology change had quasi-random effects across groups).
4 These patterns are also reflected in Table 1: during the month of February, the probability of staying at home is around 18.5%

  averaged over all days. It is 19.5% on weekends and 17% on weekdays.


                                                               6
induce them to social distance more. Similarly, prior to the pandemic, female users spent about 20% of
days at home, while males only spent about 16% of days at home. Despite these baseline differences,
women increased their rate of staying home by 15.7 percentage points, versus 11.3 percentage points for
men. This differential shift could be driven by gender-based differences in labor market participation or
occupation, or by the increased childcare burden being borne by women during the pandemic, as noted
in Boca et al. (2020) and Alekseev et al. (2020).
     We also find that while users who list a college education spent less time at home during the base-
line period (17.7% probability for college users vs. 19.1% for non-college users), they increased their
probability of staying home by more than users without college education. This finding is consistent
with the conclusions from Dingel and Neiman (2020), who note that jobs requiring high levels of ed-
ucational attainment are less likely to be deemed “essential” and can more often be done from home.
Individuals in areas with higher median incomes also spent less time at home before the pandemic, but
social distanced more after the onset of the pandemic. The likelihood of spending a day at home for
users in high-income ZCTAs increased by 16.7 percentage points compared to 12.8 percentage points
and 11.5 percentage points for users in middle- and low-income areas, respectively.5 Coven and Gupta
(2020) find similar results in New York City, hypothesizing that wealthier individuals have more work
flexibility and a greater ability to use expensive food delivery options to replace retail visits.
     Finally, the table shows heterogeneity in social distancing behavior by local exposure to COVID-19
cases, as reported by the Center for Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE) at Johns Hopkins Univer-
sity.6 In the baseline period, areas that had high, medium, and low levels of cases show similar mobility
patterns. During the pandemic, individuals in areas with worse COVID-19 outbreaks practiced more
aggressive distancing: users in high-COVID counties increased their share of days at home by 16.8 per-
centage points, compared to a 10.9 percentage point increase for users in low-exposure areas. This is
likely a result of both stricter local lockdown policies and differences in perceived threat. We present
time series versions of these results in Appendix Figure A1; these figures highlight that the demographic
differences in social distancing behavior discussed above arise in mid-March 2020, and persist through
the end of May. In Appendix Figure A2 we plot the corresponding figures using our alternative metric
of social distancing based on the average number of Bing tiles visited in a day. The conclusions using
this alternative measure mirror those discussed above.
     To explore whether these heterogeneities primarily reflect differences in the ability to work from
home, columns 3-6 of Table 2 separately analyze mobility on weekends and weekdays (see also Ap-
pendix Figures A3, A4, A5, and A6.). Although essential work may be also required on weekends, the
majority of workers do not work over the weekend. Hence, differences in the ability to work from home
should have a much smaller effect on social distancing on those days. However, we find similar hetero-
geneities in mobility on weekdays, suggesting that differences in the ability to work from home are not
the primary cause of the observed differences.
5 We sort individuals into low, medium, and high tertiles (with the same number of users) based on their ZCTA median income.

 Low-income ZCTAs have a median income below $47,178, while high-income ZCTAs have a median income above $62,734.
6 Counties in the bottom tertile had below 0.09 cases per 100k residents, while counties in the top tertile have above 0.47 cases
 per 100k residents.




                                                               7
3      Effects of Friend-Exposure to COVID-19 Cases on Social Distancing
In this section, we study the relationship between friend-exposure to COVID-19 cases and social dis-
tancing behavior. Specifically, we ask whether users whose friends live in areas with worse coronavirus
outbreaks engage in more social distancing. We begin by describing our measure of friend-exposure,
before outlining our empirical approach and our results.

3.1     Measuring Friend-Exposure to COVID-19 Cases
Our measure of friend-exposure to COVID-19 cases for a user at a given time is given by:

                                                  J
                                                         NumFriendsijt
                        FriendExposureit =       ∑      J
                                                                               × COV ID19Cases jt
                                                 j =1 ∑ j =1   NumFriendsijt
                                                                                                                         (1)
                                                  J
                                             =   ∑ FracFriendsijt × COV ID19Cases jt
                                                 j =1


NumFriendsijt gives the number of friends of person i in county j at time t, and COV ID19Cases jt gives
the cumulative number of COVID-19 cases reported in county j before time t.7 In our baseline spec-
ifications, we define FriendExposurei using case counts from March 15, capturing individuals’ early
perceptions of the pandemic. Table 1 shows that there is substantial variation in this measure, with a
mean of 10.35 friend weighted cases and a standard deviation of 19.34. For the first weeks of the out-
break, the correlation of FriendExposureit across time is high, as a similar set of U.S. locations had the
highest cumulative case counts. In Section 3.5, we analyze a longer time frame using changes in the log
of friend-exposure over time, a measure that has a pronounced negative correlation across months, as
different parts of the country were most affected by the pandemic at different points in time.
       While we want to understand the relationship between friend-exposure to COVID-19 and indi-
viduals’ mobility choices, it is important to emphasize that friend-exposure in March 2020 is not ran-
domly assigned. Instead, given the geographic concentration of U.S. COVID-19 cases in mid-March,
friend-exposure likely correlates with individual characteristics that might also affect behavior during
a pandemic. To understand the relationship between friend-exposure to COVID-19 and individual and
ZCTA-level characteristics, we regress several such factors on the log of FriendExposurei,March15 .

                                                          [Table 3]

Column 1 of Table 3 shows that, on March 15, users who have college experience, have an iPhone, or
live in higher income ZCTAs are more likely to have greater friend-exposure to COVID-19 than others.
An R-squared of over 0.38 indicates that these variables explain a substantial share of the variation in
friend-exposure. A regression featuring ZCTA fixed effects alone has an R-squared of about 0.67 —
7 Inthis section, we primarily use measures that do not normalize cases by the county populations. In the early stages of
 the pandemic, when cases counts were low, we believe that the raw number of cases was likely a more salient measure of
 COVID-19 exposure than a normalized measure. For example, the areas with highest case exposures on March 15th were
 King County and New York City, each widely covered as early pandemic hot spots. By contrast, the areas with highest
 population-normalized infection rates were Pitkin and Eagle counties in Colorado. The outbreaks in these small counties re-
 ceived relatively little attention. In column 3 of Appendix Table A3 we show that our primary results holds when normalizing
 by population. In Section 3.5 we use normalized measures of exposure when exploring later stages of the pandemic.



                                                                 8
consistent with the fact that a substantial share of most individuals’ friends live nearby (see Bailey et al.,
2018b) and that the severity of local outbreaks plays a large role in determining distancing behavior. In
Column 3, we add fixed effects for national percentiles of friend weighted median household income,
population density, and share urban population. More precisely, for each user i we calculate:

                                                      J
                                  FriendMetrici =    ∑ FracFriendsij × Metric j                                   (2)
                                                     j =1


Here, Metric j is, for county j, either median household income, population density, or the share of the
population living in urban areas.8 We rank all users based on the resulting three metrics and group
them into percentiles. Including these controls raises the R-squared to 0.85, consistent with the fact
that in mid-March, most COVID-19 cases in the United States were in urban areas. Column 4 shows
that the magnitude of the coefficients on the other observable characteristics falls substantially when
including fixed effects for ZCTA and other friend-weighted factors, though younger users, male users,
users with a college degree, and users who own an iPhone remain more likely to have high friend-
exposure to COVID-19. Because these analyses highlight that certain demographics are correlated with
friend-exposure on March 15 in an important way, we will always include a rich set of control variables
when assessing potential effects of friend-exposure to COVID-19 on social distancing. More importantly,
in Section 3.5 we also use the change in exposure over time—a measure that does not have a consistent
relationship with demographic observables—to document the robustness of our conclusions.

3.2     Social Distancing Behavior of Users with High and Low Friend-Exposure
Since much of the variation in friend-exposure to COVID-19 is determined by home ZCTA, we first
distinguish between users with high and low levels of friend-exposure relative to others within the same
ZCTA. Concretely, for every ZCTA k, we calculate the median friend-exposure to COVID-19 as of March
15. We then define HighExpi for user i as an indicator of whether the user is above or below their ZCTA
median. This measure allows us to introduce our baseline results with simple graphical representations.

                                                     [Figure 2]

Figures 2a and 2b present time series plots for our two measures of mobility—the probability of staying
home and the average number of tiles visited—split by HighExpi . Figure 2a shows that conditional
on ZCTA, users with high and low levels of friend-exposure behaved similarly before the pandemic.
Through February and early March, the probability of staying at home for both groups was between
17% and 20%, with differences never reaching half of a percentage point. Consistent with this, the bot-
tom rows of Table 2 show that from February 25 to March 2, the probability of staying at home was
18.5% for high friend-exposure users and 18.2% for low friend-exposure users. Starting in mid-March,
however, high friend-exposure users became substantially more likely to stay home. By early April,
individuals with high friend-exposure have a probability of staying at home of close to 35% compared
to less than 32% for users with lower levels of friend-exposure. Through April and May the probability
of staying home declines steadily for both groups, but the difference between them remains roughly
8 The data on median household income and population density come from the 5-year ACS from 2014-2018 and the share of
 the population living in urban areas comes from the 2010 Census.


                                                            9
the same. Figure 2b tells a similar story: while no differences in levels and in trends can be observed
between high and low friend-exposure group before the outbreak of the pandemic in the U.S., after the
beginning of the lockdown in mid-March, users with high friend-exposure are substantially more likely
to engage in social distancing. As before, these early differences persist through mid-May. That indi-
viduals’ early perceptions of the crisis could shape their later beliefs is consistent with existing survey
evidence showing that those in areas of early COVID-19 spread remained the most worried about the
virus in later months (Blumenthal, 2020).

Difference-in-Differences Analysis. To further explore the effects of friend-exposure on social dis-
tancing behavior, we estimate the following difference-in-differences specification:

                         Yit = β 0 + β 1t × HighExpi × week t + β 2t × Xi × week t + ηi + eit                                   (3)

The dependent variable, Yit , is a measure of mobility (either the probability of staying home or the
number of tiles visited) for individual i during week t. HighExpi is an indicator equal to one if user i
has friend-exposure greater than their ZCTA median on March 15. The vector week t includes indicators
for each week of the sample. We interact these weekly dummies with each of Xi , our controls for ZCTA,
college attainment, ownership of iPhone and tablet, age group, and gender, as well as for percentiles
of friend-weighted median household income, population density, and share urban. This allows us to
control for time-varying effects of differences in demographics on social distancing behavior. We also
include individual-level fixed effects, ηi . We cluster standard errors by ZCTA.
     Figures 2c and 2d show estimates for the coefficients of interest, β 1t , by week, for both measures of
mobility. In Figure 2c, the coefficient estimates prior to mid-March are close to zero, and nearly always
statistically insignificant. Then, as lockdowns began, the coefficient estimates jump. During the week
of March 16th, moving from below ZCTA-level median friend-exposure to above corresponds to an
increase in the probability of staying at home of about 0.7 percentage points. The coefficient estimates
continue to rise until late April, reaching levels above 1 percentage point. During the week of April
6, the coefficient estimate of close to 0.012 corresponds to a 3.8% increase in the probability of staying
home relative to the average of 32% among users with low friend-exposure. Towards the end of the
sample period, the coefficients begin to decline slightly, yet remain close to 0.01 and always highly
significant.9 The coefficient estimates for the number of tiles visited in Figure 2d are consistent with
this: movement patterns look similar for high and low friend-exposure users through mid-March, then
gradually decrease to levels around -0.2, where they remain through May. Together, Figures 2c and 2d
suggest sizeable effects of friend-exposure to COVID-19 on social distancing behavior. Although the
two groups’ movement look nearly identical prior to the pandemic in the U.S., high friend-exposure
9 While the qualitative patterns in Figures 2c and 2d are very consistent with Figures 2a and 2b, it is worth noting that the effect

 size is noticeably smaller. This decrease is due to the rich set of control variables in equation 3—individual demographics
 and other measures of friend-exposure—and highlights that differences in mobility, even within ZCTA, are related to factors
 other than friend-exposure. That we observe sizeable and highly significant coefficient estimates with the full set of controls
 suggests that friend-exposure to COVID-19 does indeed effect social distancing. However, we stress the importance of con-
 trolling for other factors (in particular those related to ability to work from home) when exploring this relationship. In Section
 3.4 we will also conduct a set of analyses to further test our identification.



                                                                10
users are substantially less mobile after the outbreak begins. This effect is persistent through May.

3.3      Benchmarking the Effects of Friend-Exposure Effects on Social Distancing Behavior
To benchmark the importance of friend-exposure to COVID-19 in determining social distancing behav-
ior relative to other factors, we return to our measure from Table 2: the change in the probability of
staying home between the week of February 25-March 2 (prior to the U.S. pandemic) and the week of
April 14-20 (during a period of widespread social distancing). We then conduct the following multivari-
ate analysis:
                              ∆Yi = α0 + α1 log( FriendExposurei ) + α2 Zi + α3 Ci + ei                                    (4)

Here, ∆Yi is individual i’s change in the probability of staying home. FriendExposurei is defined as in
equation 1 (as of March 15). Zi is a vector consisting of age dummies, gender, educational attainment,
ownership of iPhone and tablet, ZCTA-level income, and local exposure to COVID-19 (county-level
COVID-19 cases per resident as of March 15). As before, for each of the last three covariates, we rank
areas nationally and assign them to tertiles. The coefficients of interest are the vectors α1 and α2 . We also
include other controls, Ci , which vary across specifications.

                                                          [Table 4]

Table 4 presents the results; Appendix Table A2 presents corresponding results using the percentage
change in tiles visited as the dependent variable. Consistent with the univariate patterns documented
in Table 2, column 1 of Table 4 shows that older users engage in more social distancing: in the presence
of other controls, users aged 55 and above increase the probability of staying at home by 1.4 percentage
points more than users aged 18-34. Female users and those who attended college also increase their
probabilities of staying at home by 4.4 and 2.9 percentage points more than male users and those without
college education, respectively. Column 2 shows that the heterogeneities with respect to individual level
characteristics are robust to including ZCTA fixed effects.
        In columns 3-5 of Table 4, we include coefficient estimates for friend-exposure to COVID-19 cases,
as well as fixed effects for friend-weighted characteristics as described in the discussion of equation 2.10
Column 3 includes ZCTA fixed effects but omits all other individual-level characteristics of columns 1
and 2. Given a standard deviation in log( FriendExposurei ) of 1.35, the coefficient estimate on friend-
exposure of 0.92 indicates that a one standard deviation increase in friend-exposure is associated with
an increase in the probability of staying at home of about 1.2 percentage points, an 8.8% increase relative
to the sample mean of 13.7%. Adding additional individual-level characteristics to the regression in
column 4 slightly decreases the coefficient estimate for α1 only slightly to 0.85. Comparing the coefficient
estimates for friend-exposure to COVID-19 to those for other individual-level characteristics highlights
that friend-exposure is an important determinant of social distancing. An increase in friend-exposure
by one standard deviation corresponds to an increase in social distancing that is more than two thirds as
large as being age 55 or older, and hence belonging to a group that is considered most vulnerable to the
health risks of COVID-19. Similarly, the effect of a one standard deviation increase friend-exposure is
10 Tofurther assess the robustness of our results to including additional friend characteristics, in Appendix Table A3, we also
  control for the fraction of friends living in China, South Korea, Italy, and Spain, all of which were early hotspots of the
  COVID-19 pandemic. Reassuringly, coefficient estimates are virtually unchanged when adding these control variables.


                                                              11
roughly half of the effect of having college experience, often cited as an important driver of individuals’
ability to engage in social distancing behavior (see Dingel and Neiman, 2020).
      In column 5 of Table 4, we include the full interaction of individual-level controls with ZCTA fixed
effects. This has no additional impact on the estimated coefficient estimate for α1 .11 In Figure 3, we
present a binned scatter plot corresponding to this specification (Appendix Figure A7 presents the cor-
responding binned scatter plot for the percentage change in average tiles visited). This figure confirms
the linear relationship between the change in mobility and the log of friend-exposure. The relative
stability of the α1 coefficient to the addition of ever-tighter individual-level controls suggest a limited
confounding effect of other characteristics that might be correlated with friend-exposure, at least once
we control for ZCTA fixed effects.

                                                         [Figure 3]

3.4    Ruling Out Alternative Interpretations
The prior analyses in this section suggest the potential presence of important effects of friend-exposure
to COVID-19 on social distancing behavior. We find that users with higher levels of friend-exposure are
substantially more likely to stay at home than others in subsequent weeks, even after controlling flexibly
for a rich set of demographics and friend characteristics. Nevertheless, it is still possible that other
unobserved factors drive some of the relationship between social distancing and friend-exposure to
COVID-19 cases. In particular, differences in the ability to work from home or differences in preferences
are plausible confounding factors. We next present robustness checks to alleviate such concerns.

Friend-Exposure Effects on Weekends and Weekdays. Our first robustness check addresses concerns
that our estimates might be picking up differential ability to work from home, which could be correlated
with friend-exposure to COVID-19 cases. To rule out such effects, we separately analyze the effect of
friend-exposure on mobility on weekdays and weekends. If our previous results were predominantly
driven by differential abilities to work from home, we would likely observe different effect sizes on
weekdays and weekends. In particular, as most individuals do not work on weekends, we would ob-
serve smaller differences in distancing on weekends than on weekdays. However, if differences in social
distancing behavior are similar for weekdays and weekends, it will help rule out ability to work from
home as a confounding factor. In Figure 4, we re-estimate equation 3 with the probability of staying
at home as the outcome variable, separately for weekdays and weekends. Appendix Figure A8 shows
the corresponding coefficient estimates with the percentage change in the number of tiles visited as the
outcome variable. The differential effect of friend-exposure to COVID-19 on changes in mobility are
qualitatively and quantitatively similar for weekends and weekdays: in both cases, effect sizes are be-
tween 0.01 and 0.012 at the peak, nearly identical to the baseline estimation presented in Figure 2c. In
addition, in columns 6-7 of Table 4, we follow the estimation strategy of Section 3.3, but subset to week-
end and weekday behavior, respectively. Again, the coefficients are very similar, suggesting our earlier
results are unlikely to be driven by differences in ability to work from home.
11 Our sample size is about 5% smaller in this regression, due to combinations of ZCTA- and individual-level characteristics for

 which we have only a single observation.



                                                              12
                                                          [Figure 4]


Within-College Comparisons. For our second robustness check, we subset our analysis to users who
list a college on their Facebook profile and include college fixed effects interacted with week indicators.
Since educational attainment plays a large role in determining employment, users who went to the exact
same college (and are also of similar age, the same gender, live in the same ZCTA, have same ownership
of iPhone and tablet, and have generally quite similar friend characteristics) should have comparable
levels of ability to work from home. Figure 4c shows the corresponding coefficient estimates.12 The
results are qualitatively and quantitatively very similar to the baseline findings presented in Figure
2c, despite the substantially smaller sample and narrower comparison of users. Consistent with this,
column 8 of Table 4 highlights that the coefficient estimates discussed in depth in Section 3.3 remain
almost unchanged—and if anything increase—when focusing on this more restricted sample and adding
college fixed effects. Together, these finding provide further evidence against unobservables driving our
previous results.

3.5     Dynamics of Friend-Exposure to COVID-19 and Social Distancing Behavior Over Time
Finally, rather than focusing on the effects of friend-exposure to COVID-19 at one specific point in time,
we study the effects of changes in friend-exposure as the pandemic evolves on changes in social dis-
tancing. We do so to alleviate concerns that the correlations presented in Table 3 between our March
15th exposure measure and certain individual characteristics—or, more worrisome, correlations with
unobservables—are driving our earlier results. As the pandemic progressed, the geography of out-
breaks, and therefore the set of individuals exposed to COVID-19 through their friends, changed sub-
stantially. It is thus difficult to argue that, in every month, it would be exactly those individuals with
friends in parts of the country with the fastest acceleration of the virus that would have independently
reduced their mobility for reasons other than their friend-exposure. To operationalize this research de-
sign, for each month, we define:

      ChangeFriendExposureit = Log(1 + FriendExposure100k it ) − Log(1 + FriendExposure100k it−1 )                           (5)

with
                                                          J
                                                                                 COV ID19Cases jt
                          FriendExposure100k it =       ∑ FracFriendsijt ×        Residents100k j
                                                                                                                             (6)
                                                        j =1


In words, for each month we take the log of friend-exposure to COVID-19 (per 100,000 inhabitants) at
the end of that month and subtract the same measure from the end of the preceding month.13
12 In Figure 4c the dependent variable is the probability of staying at home. Appendix Figure A8c presents the corresponding
   estimates for the number of tiles visited as LHS variable.
13 We normalize cases by population to alleviate concerns that potential effects might be driven by factors that are correlated

   with population size. See footnote 7 for an explanation of why we do not normalize in our previous measure of exposure.
   Our earliest measure of exposure uses cases as of March 27th. Our decision to use the difference of logs will weight new cases
   in new outbreaks more than new cases in old outbreaks—for example, because log(100) − log(1) > log(199) − log(100)—
   which we believe to be consistent with the salient, behavior-altering change we hope to measure.



                                                               13
                                                [Figure 5]

To support the notion that the set of individuals with high levels of ChangeFriendExposureit changes
substantially over time, in Figure 5 we present maps showing the ZCTA-level average of this mea-
sure by month. Bright green colors indicate large increases in friend-exposure to COVID-19 for a
given month, while darker blues indicate smaller changes. The Figure shows that the geography of
ChangeFriendExposureit shifts substantially over time. In March, the measure is particularly high in
New York, Seattle, Denver and Louisiana. By April, however, the highest average levels are throughout
the Midwest; in May, hotspots appear in Minnesota, Iowa, and North Carolina, while in June they are in
Texas, Oklahoma, and Arizona. Finally, in July it is in particular places in Texas bordering Mexico that
exhibit high average increases in friend-exposure to COVID-19.

                                                 [Table 5]

We provide further evidence of the variation in the characteristics of users with high levels of new friend-
exposure to COVID-19 over time in Table 5, which regresses ChangeFriendExposureit for each month
from March to July on various individual- and region-characteristics. We find that the relationship
between friend-exposure to COVID-19 and other factors varies across months. For example, users with
a college degree were more exposed to COVID-19 through their friends at the beginning of the pandemic
(when the pandemic was primarily an urban phenomenon); in later months, as the pandemic spread
across the United States, the relationship reverses. Similar reversals occur for each of the other control
variables, most interestingly for friends’ incomes and population density.
    Together, Figure 5 and Table 5 highlight that the set of individuals with the largest increases in
friend-exposure to COVID-19 varies substantially over time. While our previous analyses suggest that
very early friend-exposure plays a substantial role in shaping behavior throughout the first months of
the pandemic, we next test if the changes in friend-exposure lead to changes in social distancing behavior.
Given that those who experience the largest increase in this exposure look very different from month
to month, this result would be unlikely to be driven by omitted variables. We estimate the following
equation:
                      ∆Yit = σ0 + σ1 ChangeFriendExposureit + σ2t Xit + σ3t Nit + ei                     (7)

∆Yit is the change in the probability of staying at home from the last week of the prior month to the
last week of the current month t (e.g., from end of February to end of March). Xit is a flexible vector
of controls. Figure 6 presents the resulting estimate of σ1 . In Panel (a), we control for individual-level
variables as in Equation 4 all interacted with each other, ZCTA, and month. In addition, we control for
month interacted with fixed effects of percentiles of friend weighted urbanity, population density and
median household income, Nit . In Panel (b), we additionally control for user fixed effects. Consistent
with the hypothesis that changes in exposure result in changes in social distancing behavior, we observe
a strong and positive relationship between friend-exposure to COVID-19 and the probability of staying
at home. Depending on the specification, the magnitude of the coefficient (based on a linear regression)
is between 0.21 and 0.26, and is in both cases highly significant.

                                                [Figure 6]


                                                    14
We next test the relationship between changes in social distancing behavior and friend-exposure for
each month separately. Concretely, for each month, we regress the change in the probability of staying
at home on changes in friend-exposure to COVID-19 over that month, as well as over all preceding
months:
                                          t
                          ∆Yit = σ0 + ∑ σ1j ChangeFriendExposureij + σ2 Xi + σ3 Ni + eit                                     (8)
                                         j =1

We conjecture that if friend-exposure to COVID-19 is a key explanatory factor in determining social
distancing, changes in social distancing in a given month should respond most to the change in friend-
exposure to COVID-19 during that same month. In all our regressions, we control for interactions of
individiual-level characteristics and ZCTA fixed effects (Xi ) as well as other friend weighted character-
istics (Ni ).

                                                           [Table 6]

Table 6 presents the results of this analysis, which support our interpretation. In March, the increase in
friend-exposure to COVID-19 has a highly significant positive effect on the change in the probability to
stay at home: a doubling of the increase in friend-exposure leads to a roughly 0.14 percentage point in-
crease in the probability of staying at home.14 More importantly, in subsequent months, changes in social
distancing behavior is driven by changes in the friend-exposure of the corresponding months. Across
all months, we find that the most recent changes in the rate of friend-exposure are the most important,
though our results in April are not statistically significant. These findings support our hypothesis that
friend-exposure to COVID-19 has a sizeable effect on social distancing behavior. Because characteristics
of users with high friend-exposure to COVID-19 change substantially over time, the dynamic relation-
ship between changes in friend-exposure and changes in social distancing behavior allows us to rule out
many unobserved effects that could potentially influence our results. In addition, in Appendix Table A4,
we regress changes in mobility only on changes in friend-exposure for the same month (without also
including changes in prior months).15 The results are again consistent with a causal interpretation of
changes in friends’ exposure to COVID-19 on own social distancing behavior.

4    Heterogeneity of Friend-Exposure Effects
We next explore how the effect of friend-exposure on social distancing behaviors differs with an indi-
vidual’s own characteristics as well as characteristics defining the friendships underlying our measure
of friend-exposure.

Heterogeneity of Friend-Exposure Effects — Own Characteristics. To explore heterogeneity in the
effect of friend-exposure by an individual’s own characteristics, we amend equation 4 to estimate the
effect of friend-exposure (on March 15) separately for several sets of mutually exclusive characteristics.
14 Noticeably,  this effect is somewhat smaller than our baseline presented in Table 4 (and for normalized cases in Table A3).
   Differences are driven by two factors: 1) here we measure exposure on March 27, as opposed to March 15 and 2) here
   we measure change in mobility as of March 24-30, as opposed to April 14-20. These two reasons also result in noticeable
   differences in mean and variance of the exposure metrics: in the context of Table 4, log of friend exposure had a mean of 1.45
   with a standard deviation of 1.35, compared with 2.80 and 0.85, respectively for the definition used in Table 6.
15 Formally, we estimate ∆Y = σ + σ ChangeFriendExposure + σ X + σ N + e and report the σ coefficient estimates.
                                it 0    1t                      it    2 i    3 i     it                  1t



                                                               15
We consider several dimensions, looking separately at age, gender, educational attainment, ZCTA-level
income, and county-level COVID-19 exposure. In all of these specifications, we use the set of controls
included in column 5 in Table 4.

                                                          [Table 7]

Table 7 explores the characteristics that influence the response of "staying at home" to friend-exposure
to COVID-19 cases; Appendix Table A5 shows the corresponding estimates for average daily tile move-
ment. The effect of friend-exposure is much stronger for younger users: the effect for those aged 55+ is
only about one third the size of the effect among those aged 18-34. In addition, the coefficient estimates
for users with a college degree are about three times as large as corresponding estimates for non-college
educated users. Coefficient estimates for females are somewhat larger than for males, though the differ-
ences are economically small. At the ZCTA-level, the effect of friend-exposure to COVID-19 on own mo-
bility monotonically increases with the average income of an area: while a doubling of friend-exposure
leads to an increase in the probability of staying at home of around 1.1 percentage points for users living
in high-income ZCTAs, that effect size drops to around a quarter for users living in the lowest-income
areas.16 Interestingly, regardless of these heterogeneities, for all the various groups we consider, we find
that friend-exposure leads to noticeable increases in social distancing behavior.

Heterogeneity of Friend-Exposure Effects — Friendship Characteristics. We also study heterogene-
ity in the effects of friend-exposure to COVID-19 by characteristics of the friendship. Specifically, we
investigate the extent to which the effects of friend-exposure vary with strength of the friendship.
        We consider a ranking of friendship ’closeness’ based on the number of interactions between users
on Facebook. Our specification amends equation 4 by replacing replace FriendExposurei by the four
variables FriendExposure1−25,i , FriendExposure25−50,i , FriendExposure51−75,i , and FriendExposure76−100,i .
For example, FriendExposure1−25,i is defined as friend-exposure to COVID-19 cases among the 25 closest
friends of user i. It is important that each group contains the same number of friends, since the same
average friend-exposure among a larger group of friends may induce larger effects. We then run speci-
fications that are otherwise identical to the ones underlying column 5 in Table 4. The regression results
are presented in the rightmost column of Table 7.
        We find that the effects of friend-exposure tend to be strongest for the closest friends, with effect size
falling off among more marginal friends. A doubling of friend-exposure among a person’s 25 closest
friends leads to a 0.14 percentage point increase in the likelihood that the person stays home. A similar
increase in friend-exposure among the person’s next 25 closest friends (those ranked 26-50) leads to
a substantially smaller effect, of 0.08 percentage points. The effect size is smaller for the two more
distant friend groups, so that the friend-exposure effects associated with the 25 closest friends are about
16 InAppendix Figure A9 we show the same results in the event-study framework described in Section 3.2, where we estimate
  separate coefficients for the effects of friend-exposure by week for the various demographic groups. The corresponding
  results using the average daily tiles visited as an outcome are shown in Appendix Figure A10. The results are very consistent
  with the ones shown in Table 7.




                                                              16
twice as large as those associated with friends ranked 76-100.17 The decrease in the effect size of friend-
exposure as we move toward more ’distant’ friends supports our hypothesis that the observed effects on
health behavior are indeed driven by friend-exposure to COVID-19 cases rather than omitted variables
and selection effects. Users are more connected to their closer friends and, therefore, more likely to
obtain information from them, including about COVID-19. This informational channel is one possible
mechanism for our previous results which we discuss in greater detail below.

5      Mechanisms
In our previous analyses, we have identified an effect of friend-exposure to COVID-19 on social distanc-
ing behavior, finding that greater friend-exposure to COVID-19 is associated with a substantial increase
in a person’s likelihood of staying at home. In this section, we explore the mechanisms behind these find-
ings. Several mechanisms seem plausible. Most eminently, users are likely to learn from their friends –
that is, they receive information about the threat of COVID-19 and hence adjust their behavior accord-
ingly. Alternatively, users might simply respond to restrictions they are facing: the reduction in mobility
as a result of greater friend-expoure to COVID-19 could reflect the fact that users are unlikely to visit
friends and relatives and are thus more likely to remain at home. To differentiate between these and
other potential mechanisms, we leverage data on public posts and public group membership on Face-
book. In addition, we combine several sources of public data to highlight that the observed reduction
in mobility as a result of greater friend-exposure to COVID-19 is consistent with individuals choosing to
reduce physical interactions to minimize the transmission of the virus.

5.1      Posting Behavior
We begin by considering users’ public Facebook posts, which can be viewed by any other user on the
platform. We use these public posts to construct three different measures. First, we use regular ex-
pression searches to measure the percentage of a user’s public posts that mention the coronavirus; this
measure captures the user’s level of general engagement in discussions about the coronavirus. Second,
we identify common phrases used to support or oppose social distancing measures, to quantify a user’s
level of opposition to social distancing measures. Specifically, we create a metric that is defined as the
number of posts opposed to social distancing as a fraction of all ’signed’ posts (i.e., all posts identified as
either supporting or opposing these measures). Third, we measure the sentiment of public posts using a
text analysis algorithm, constructing monthly averages of the sentiment of each user’s posts. Appendix
C provides details on these measurements.
       We then amend equation 4 slightly to estimate the effect of friend-exposure to COVID-19, as well as
other individual- and ZCTA-level characteristics, on our three public post outcomes:

                                 Yi = δ0 + δ1 log( FriendExposurei ) + δ2 Zi + δ3 Ci + ei                                    (9)

Yi here corresponds to one of the three outcomes described above. FriendExposurei , Zi and Ci are defined
17 The  focus in this section is on the relative magnitudes of the effects of different equally-sized friends group. The absolute
    magnitudes cannot be easily compared to those from Table 4, since that looks at the effect of an increase in the average
    exposure among a much larger group of friends, which is likely to have a substantially larger effect.



                                                                17
as in equation 4. Table 8 presents the coefficients of interest, δ1 and δ2 . In columns 1 and 2, Yi is the share
of public posts between February and April 2020 that are about the coronavirus. In columns 3 and 4, Yi
is the percentage of signed posts between February and April 2020 that are opposed to social distancing
measures. In columns 5 and 6, Yi is the change in sentiment of a user’s posts between February and
April. We impose the sample restrictions described in Sections 2 and 2.1 and further require that users
have posted publicly at least once in February, March, or April of 2020. Unlike in our examination of
mobility, we do not limit to users with location sharing and storage permissions, which increases our
sample size substantially.18 Summary statistics for this sample are shown in Appendix Table A6.

                                                       [Table 8]

Column 1 of Table 8 shows that, conditional on posting, users with college experience are close to 0.6
percentage points more likely to post about COVID-19 than users without college experience. This effect
is large—a 33% increase from the baseline average of 1.8% of posts related to coronavirus. Individuals
in areas with higher median incomes are also more likely to post about the coronavirus.
     Friend-exposure to COVID-19 cases also has substantial effects on posting behavior. In column
1, we see that a doubling in friend-exposure corresponds to a increase in the share of posts about the
coronavirus of about 0.22 percentage points, a 12% increase relative to the average. This effect remains
sizeable when we include fixed effects for ZCTA interacted with individual characteristics in column 2.
Figure 7a shows a binned scatter plot that corresponds to our analysis in column 2. The relationship
between the percentage of posts about COVID-19 and friend-exposure is strong, with a functional form
that is close to linear.

                                                      [Figure 7]

This first analysis suggest that users with higher levels of friend-exposure to COVID-19 are generally
more likely to talk about the coronavirus; however, it does not allow us to capture the nature of individ-
uals’ posts. Specifically, our measure includes both (a) posts supportive of the notion that the virus poses
a great threat to public health and endorsing measures to contain the risk, and (b) posts downplaying
the threat of the virus or calling for an end to various restrictions. We therefore repeat our analysis in
columns 3 and 4 of Table 8, focusing on the percentage of ’signed’ posts which either oppose social dis-
tancing guidelines and shutdowns, or call for an earlier re-opening of the economy. For this analysis,
we concentrate on the subset of users who share a ‘signed’ post in February, March or April.
     The coefficient estimates in Table 8 show that friend-exposure to COVID-19 decreases the likelihood
that users oppose social distancing measures in their posts. The effect is large even in our most conser-
vative specification: a doubling in friend-exposure corresponds to a 1.3 percentage point reduction in
the share of signed posts opposing distancing. This implies a 4% reduction given a baseline average of
36%. In Figure 7b we present a binned scatter plot corresponding to the specification of column 4.
     To further analyze the effects of friend-exposure on user behavior, we use the VADER algorithm
described in Hutto and Gilbert (2014) to estimate the average sentiment of individuals’ posts over time.
We replace Yi in equation 9 with the change in average post sentiment between February 3-23 and April
18 Importantly,
              we still observe an assumed ZCTA of residence (based on IP address, profile information, and other factors)
 allowing us to include ZCTA-level controls in our regressions.


                                                          18
6-26, and present the results in Columns 5 and 6 of Table 8. Users with higher levels of friend-exposure to
COVID-19 cases have significantly larger decreases in post sentiment, even in our strictest specification.

5.2    Group Membership
We next explore the effect of friend-exposure to COVID-19 cases on users’ decisions to join various Face-
book groups. Facebook users can create and join various forms of groups to chat, meet and otherwise
engage with others. For our analysis, we focus on membership in public groups, which any Facebook
user can access without additional restrictions. Since no restrictions on posting behavior and/or loca-
tion settings are necessary for this part of the analysis, we simply focus on active users who meet the
non-mobility data requirements described in Section 2. We present summary statistics for this group of
users in Appendix Table A7.
      To further explore the determinants of health behavior, we focus on groups created between March
1 and June 28, 2020 with names that suggest support for an early reopening (or “liberation”) of the
economy. Appendix C provides details on how we identify these groups. We then estimate:

                    ReopenGroupi = γ0 + γ1 log( FriendExposurei ) + γ2 Zi + γ3 Ci + ei                     (10)

where ReopenGroupi is an indicator equal to one if on June 28 user i is a member of at least one group
advocating for the lifting of COVID-19 related restrictions. FriendExposurei , Zi and Ci are defined as in
equations 4 and 9 with the exception that, in addition to the control variables used above, we include
fixed effects for national percentiles of group membership as of February 2020. That is, based on data
from February 2020, we construct national percentiles of the number of groups a user is a member of.
We then assign each user to a percentile based on the number of groups they are a member of as of
February 2020. We do so in order to correct for potential differences in Facebook usage behavior. We
present coefficient estimates for the coefficients of interest (i.e., γ1 and γ2 ) in columns 7 and 8 of Table 8.
      Given the small number of sample restrictions, the number of observations included in this part
of the analysis greatly increases. About 1.2% of all users are a member of at least one Reopen Group.
Column 7 of Table 8 shows that older and male users are substantially more likely to be members of
Reopen Groups than younger and female users, respectively. Users without college experience and
users living in higher income areas are also more likely to be members of a group supporting reopening.
These results are generally consistent with those observed for mobility and posting behavior: younger
users, female users, and users with college experience are more likely to engage in social distancing and
appear more supportive of restrictions on public life. Returning to our main variable of interest, in the
presence of ZCTA-level fixed effects interacted with individual level covariates, we find a significant
negative effect of friend-exposure to COVID-19 on membership in a group supporting reopening. In
column 8, a doubling in friend-exposure to COVID-19 decreases the probability of being a member of a
group that backs reopening by about 0.09 percentage points, or 7.5%.
      Taken together, our results suggest that higher friend-exposure to COVID-19 cases increases the
likelihood of posting about COVID-19 and increases the share of users who support social distancing
guidelines. In addition, higher friend-exposure to COVID-19 appears to lower the likelihood that a user
joins groups opposing public health guidelines. Together, these results add an important insight into


                                                      19
the mechanisms driving our findings in Section 3: individuals more exposed to COVID-19 are more
concerned about COVID-19 and support public health measures to a greater extent. This is consistent
with the explanation that greater friend-exposure affects social distancing by shaping individuals’ infor-
mation and attitudes towards the disease. Moreover, the findings speak against alternative explanations
based on the notion that individuals with higher friend-exposure might reduce their mobility simply as
a response to restrictions they are facing without updating their beliefs and perceptions about the threat
associated with COVID-19.19

5.3      Disaggregation of Friend-Exposure Effects
To extend our findings, we next use public data on movement and transactions from Safegraph that
has been used extensively in contemporaneous research on COVID-19. We combine these data with
Social Connectedness Index (SCI) data from Facebook (Bailey et al., 2018b). Our analysis serve two
purposes. First, in Appendix Section A, we replicate our findings on the effects of friend-exposure on
social distancing at the ZCTA-level. While this analysis does not allow us to effectively control for many
individual-level characteristics that are correlated with changes in social distancing behavior and expo-
sure to COVID-19, it has some advantages. Most importantly, the Safegraph mobility data are based
on a different and larger set of individuals, thus mitigating concerns that the results discussed in Sec-
tion 3 are merely an artifact of the somewhat selected sample of Facebook users who have consented
to sharing and storing their location information with the platform. We find that our qualitative obser-
vation that friend-exposure to COVID-19 increases social distancing replicates fully at the ZCTA-level
using alternative measures of mobility. Second, in the following sections, we expand our analysis at the
ZCTA-level to explore a number of other observable outcomes that speak to the mechanism behind the
observed reduction in mobility. This analysis also allows us to provide some evidence on the economic
effects of the mobility reduction. More concretely, we disaggregate our results by type of establishment
(or point-of-interest) and merchant type to understand whether individuals with high friend-exposure
to COVID-19 not only reduce their mobility in general, but in particular stop visiting “nonessential”
establishments where close physical interaction is common.
5.3.1     Mobility Effects By Type of Establishment
Safegraph aggregates cellphone GPS data to measure the number and duration of visits to points of
establishments on a daily basis. We use these data through July 28, 2020 to construct a measure of
the total number of POI visits by ZCTA, both for all POIs and for POIs of selected industries.20 With
the objective of distinguishing between ‘essential’ and ‘nonessential’ places, we focus on the following
categories: (i) Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation (NAICS code 71), (ii) Food Services and Drinking
Places (NAICS code 722), (iii) Retail Trade Excl. Food and Beverage Stores (NAICS codes 44 and 45,
excluding 445), (iv) Food and Beverage Stores (NAICS code 445), (v) Parks (NAICS code 712190); and
(vi) Health Care and Social Assistance (NAICS code: 62). We think of (i)-(iii) as less essential places that
can be avoided in order to reduce physical interaction. In contrast, (iv)-(vi) are either more essential or
entail very limited physical interaction. We aggregate visits to the weekly level.
19 In addition to the results presented in this Section, in Appendix Tables A8, A9, A10, we study heterogeneities in the observed

  effects of friend-exposure to COVID-19, finding results largely consistent with those presented in Section 4.
20 Forthe sample period, there are on average 27.5 million POI visits each day, distributed over roughly 5.4 million POIs.


                                                               20
     To study the effect of friend-exposure to COVID-19 on POI visits, we construct a measure of friend-
exposure that is very similar to the one used in Section 3, but differs in that it is a ZCTA-level average
rather than being observable at the individual level. In particular, HighExpi is an indicator equal to
one if ZCTA i has friend-exposure to COVID-19 higher than the median for the county it is located in,
based on the number of COVID-19 cases as of March 17. We discuss the construction of this ZCTA-level
friend-exposure metric in detail in Appendix Section A. Following the difference-in-differences analysis
in Section 3, we then estimate:


                                Yit = β 0 + β 1t × HighExpi × week t + β 2t × Xit + eit                                   (11)

where Yit corresponds to the log of one plus the number of POI visits (by type of establishment) in a
given ZCTA i per week t. We control for county-time fixed effects together with ZCTA fixed effects
as well as various ZCTA-level covariates interacted with time fixed effects. These covariates are me-
dian household income of the area, as well as the fraction of individuals in in each of the following
demographic groups: male, Asian, Black, White, service employee, manager, art or science employee,
high-speed internet user, high-school educated, some college completion, college educated. We also
control for the fraction of individuals in different age buckets.21 All these measures are obtained from
the most recent 5-year ACS (2014-2018). Following Section 3, we also control for national percentiles
of friend weighted median household income, population density and urbanity. We cluster standard
errors at the ZCTA-level.

                                                         [Figure 8]

Figure 8 shows coefficient estimates for β 1t , with each panel corresponding to a different type of POI.
For reference, we include results for all POIs aggregated in the gray series. The patterns are consistent
with the hypothesis that people in places with high friend-exposure to COVID-19 disproportionately re-
duce their mobility to avoid unnecessary physical interactions. While differential responses in POI visits
are negative for nonessential POIs in Panels (a)-(c), they are close to zero and insignificant for essential
POIs in Panels (d)-(f). More concretely, the coefficient estimates for arts, recreation, and entertainment
locations (Figure 8a) show that the difference in the change of visits between high and low exposure
places can be as large as 0.05 log points (in absolute magnitude). Similar effects can be observed for
retail destinations (Figure 8b), and restaurants and bars (Figure 8c). Although coefficient estimates re-
turn to zero well before the end of the sample period, they are negative and highly significant for the
period from mid-March to mid-April. In contrast, coefficient estimates for visits of food and beverage
stores (Figure 8d), health care and social assistance (Figure 8e) and parks (Figure 8f) are insignificant and
substantially smaller, suggesting that there is no differential reduction in these types of visits among in-
dividuals with differential friend-exposure to COVID-19. Reassuringly, all coefficient estimates in every
panel are very close to zero prior to March, indicating no differential behavior before the outbreak of
the pandemic. Note that since friend-exposure is defined within counties—and distancing policies were
nearly always administered at the federal, state, or county level—differences in business closures across
21 These buckets are the fraction of individuals 18 or younger, between 18 and 24, between 25-34, between 35-44, between 45-54,

 between 55-64, between 65-74 and above 75.



                                                              21
places are unlikely to drive our results. This set of results thus provides evidence that high friend-
exposure to COVID-19 not only causes individuals to reduce their mobility in general, but causes them
to do so in a way that is consistent with the objective of minimizing interactions. Individuals with high
friend-exposure choose to participate in social distancing. These findings thus once again provide evi-
dence against potential concerns that the observed effects of friend-exposure on social distancing might
merely pick up differences in the ability to work from home or simply reflect responses to government
restrictions.
5.3.2      Economic Effects By Type of Merchant
We next study the extent to which individuals who are more exposed to COVID-19 through their social
network behave differently in terms of their spending. To do so, we use data on transactions and spend-
ing behavior provided by Facteus. These data are collected primarily from smaller banks (e.g. N26,
Simple), payroll cards, and government cards, and include aggregated (by ZCTA of the card holder)
information on the number of cards used, the number of transactions made, and the total amount of
all transactions combined for a given merchant. Although the sample is skewed towards younger indi-
viduals and lower-income households, and is therefore not perfectly representative, it is very large and
includes information on cardholders from over 21,000 ZCTAs across the U.S., with an average of 5.7 mil-
lion transactions and $218.7 million in spending per day. Thus, these data allow us to make meaningful
statements about the U.S. population.22
     In Appendix Figure A12, we first plot two spending outcomes over time: the log of one plus the
total amount spent in USD and the log of one plus the total number of transactions. At the beginning
of the year, the number of transactions and the total amount of money spent were relatively low, but
both increase in late January before peaking in mid-February. This peak can be explained by tax rebate
season: because our data over-represents low-income households, spending is particularly responsive to
the receipt of a large cash rebate. As the pandemic begins in the U.S., spending and transactions decrease
sharply, reaching a low at the end of March. Both then slowly increase in the middle of April when many
Americans received stimulus checks (or in anticipation thereof). Given these seasonal fluctuations, in
order to estimate the effect of friend-exposure to COVID-19 on spending behavior we thus build on
equation 11 and estimate a triple-diff in order to smooth out seasonal fluctuations. We do so by using
expenditure data from 2020 and 2019.


                                 Yit = β 0 + β 1t × HighExpi × week t × year2020t
                                            + β 2t × HighExpi × week t
                                                                                                                         (12)
                                            + β 3t × Xit
                                            + β 4t × Covi × week t × year2020 + eit

HighExpi , week t , and eit are defined as before. Yit is defined as the log of one plus the total number of
22 Thesestatistics are calculated after excluding the top 0.001% of ZCTAs, outliers that exhibit spending behavior unlikely to
 represent the true spending behavior of individuals living in these areas. Also note that because of data quality issues, we
 focus on spending data until April 16, 2020.



                                                             22
transactions made by cardholders residing in ZCTA i during week t.23 year2020t is an indicator equal
to one for the year 2020 and zero other otherwise. Xit is a vector of county-time fixed effects as well as
ZCTA fixed effects. Covi is a vector of covariates as in equation 11. We again cluster standard errors at
the ZCTA-level.

                                                            [Figure 9]

Figure 9 shows our β 1t estimates. In Figure 9a we present results aggregating across all types of mer-
chants. We cannot detect large effects of friend-exposure to COVID-19 on overall transcation behavior.
More importantly, these data again allow for a disaggregated analysis of spending behavior. We thus
re-estimate equation 12 for different types of merchants to capture the extent to which individuals with
greater friend-exposure to COVID-19 change their transaction behavior to reduce social interactions.
We focus on two merchants in particular: Starbucks and Amazon. Transactions made at Starbucks are
almost exclusively in-person (and discretionary) while transactions made at Amazon are exclusively
online. Thus, we would expect individuals seeking to socially distance to reduce their shopping at
Starbucks more than their shopping at Amazon. Figure 9b shows patterns consistent with this hy-
pothesis. Before the pandemic, there are no notable differences in spending between groups at either
merchants, but after the outbreak places with high friend-exposure are close to 0.1 log points less likely
to make transactions at Starbucks than low friend-exposure places. This effect is large and statistically
significant. In contrast, the coefficient estimates for Amazon spending are all statistically insignificant
and very close to zero. This case study suggests that those with higher friend-exposure to COVID-19
reduced discretionary in-person spending without changing their online spending patterns where no
physical interactions are required.
         In sum, in this section, we use disaggregated information on POI visits and purchases to show
that the overall reductions in mobility are consistent with the objective of social distancing and avoid-
ing nonessential interactions: while the effects of friend-exposure to COVID-19 on nonessential visits
are large, negative, and highly significant, effects are near-zero and insignificant for essential places.
Similarly, in places with high friend-exposure, we observe a great reduction in transactions made at
Starbucks (which involve in-person interactions) and no effect on transactions made on Amazon (which
are entirely online).

6        Conclusion
In this paper, we use de-identified data from Facebook to explore how personal connections shape social
distancing behavior during the COVID-19 pandemic. We find that U.S. users whose friends lived in
areas with worse coronavirus outbreaks on March 15 reduced their mobility in subsequent months more
than otherwise similar users without friends in areas affected by COVID-19. As the outbreak progressed
in the U.S., users with more friends in emerging hotspots in one month were more likely to reduce their
mobility in the same month than others. Because we measure mobility at the individual level, we are
able to rule out various alternative explanations that might confound an observed relationship between
social networks and distancing behavior at the aggregate level. We are also able to explore how personal
23 All   of the results shown below are robust to using the log of one plus the total amount spent in USD as outcome variable.



                                                                23
connections shape distancing behavior differentially across demographics; for example, the effect of
having friends in areas with many COVID-19 cases on distancing behavior is substantially larger for
younger users and for users with college experience.
    We also use data on Facebook posts and group memberships, as well as public disaggregated mobil-
ity and spending data, to illuminate the mechanisms driving these relationships. We find evidence that
friend-exposure to COVID-19 raises awareness about the risks of the disease, thereby inducing individ-
uals to participate in mitigating public health behavior. Specifically, users with higher friend-exposure
to COVID-19 are more likely to post about the coronavirus and are less likely to oppose distancing in
these posts. These users are also less likely to join Facebook groups advocating for a reopening of the
economy during the early months of the pandemic. At the zip code level, friend-exposure to COVID-19
results in substantial decreases in visits to restaurants, bars, and places related to the arts, entertainment,
and recreation; by contrast, we observe no effects for visits to essential places such as grocery stores, or
for places of health care and social assistance.
    We conclude that an individual’s personal connections play an important role in shaping their health
behaviors during a pandemic. In the context of the current outbreak, these results add important insights
to a growing literature that explores the factors affecting individuals’ social distancing behaviors. More
broadly, our work illustrates how data from online social networks can help social scientists overcome
important measurement challenges and better understand the determinants of public health outcomes.




                                                      24
7    Primary Tables and Figures

                           Table 1:Table 1A: Summary
                                    Summary          Statistics Mobility
                                                Characteristics          SampleSample
                                                                  - Mobility

                                       Mean            SD           P10       P25         P50         P75          P90
Age                                     43.58        14.93           26        32          42         54            63
Female                                   0.53         0.50            0         0           1          1            1
Has College                              0.53         0.50            0         0           1          1            1
Has iPhone                               0.25         0.43            0         0           0          0            1
Has Tablet                               0.53         0.50            0         0           1          1            1
Zip Code Income                       $58,792      $21,961        $36,160   $43,648     $54,000     $69,203      $88,096
Number of Friends                      532.80       326.61          193       276         441         718         1047
Friend Exposure to Cases                10.35        19.34          0.74     1.77        4.49        11.12        26.31
Staying at home (Feb)
  - All                                 18.33       29.35            0         0            0         28.57       66.67
  - Weekend                             19.39       34.44            0         0            0         50.00      100.00
  - Weekday                             16.83       29.80            0         0            0         20.00       66.67
Bing tiles visited (Feb)
  - All                                 10.96        9.07          1.57      3.43         9.00        15.86       23.43
  - Weekend                             10.57        9.79          1.00      3.00         7.50        15.50       24.50
  - Weekday                             11.34        9.77          1.50      3.40         9.00        16.20       24.60
Note: Table presents summary statistics describing individuals analyzed in our mobility sample of users. Individual-level
characteristics include age, gender, whether the user has a college listed on Facebook, whether the user primarily accesses
Facebook mobile from an iPhone, whether the individual has accessed Facebook from a tablet, number of friends, friend-
exposure to COVID cases on March 15th, and patterns of mobility during the week of February 25th to March 2nd. The table
also includes information on the users’ home ZCTA 2018 median household income. [Return to text]




                                                             25
                                          Figure 1: Mobility Over Time
                                         (a) Probability of Staying at Home




                                       (b) Average Number of Tiles Visited




Note: Figures show average patterns of mobility from February 3rd to May 24th according to two metrics described in Section
2.1. Panel (a) shows the probability of staying at home and panel (b) shows the percent change in average number of tiles
visited from February 3rd. [Return to text]




                                                            26
                                             Table
                            Table 2: Change in     2: MobilityStaying at Home
                                               Probability

                                                                           Stay at Home
                                                      All                    Weekdays                   Weekends
                                            Level Feb ΔFeb-Apr           Level Feb ΔFeb-Apr       Level Feb ΔFeb-Apr
Overall                                          18.33           13.68      16.83        13.58         19.39        14.29
By Age Group
  18-34                                          14.49           13.17      13.23        13.30         14.54        13.12
  35-54                                          16.57           13.22      14.95        13.13         17.98        13.79
  55+                                            25.68           14.99      24.10        14.64         27.04        16.29
By Gender
  Female                                         20.15           15.68      18.72        15.76         21.19        15.89
  Male                                           16.21           11.33      14.62        11.02         17.26        12.39
By College
  Has College                                    17.66           15.27      16.11        15.33         18.94        15.48
  No College                                     19.10           11.84      17.66        11.56         19.90        12.89
By Zip Code Income
  Bottom Tertile                                 19.27           11.54      17.84        11.29         19.96        12.50
  Middle Tertile                                 18.19           12.78      16.69        12.65         19.33        13.43
  Top Tertile                                    17.55           16.69      15.98        16.76         18.88        16.85
By County Total Cases/Population
  Bottom Tertile                                 18.62           10.86      17.15        10.65         19.75        11.66
  Middle Tertile                                 17.97           15.17      16.56        15.07         18.71        15.84
  Top Tertile                                    18.15           16.75      16.55        16.80         19.30        17.02
By Exposure through Friends
  High Exposure                                  18.46           14.82      16.97        14.77         19.45        15.34
  Low Exposure                                   18.21           12.55      16.70        12.40         19.33        13.23

Note: Table describes changes in social distancing across different user characteristics. Social distancing is measured as
the average probability of staying home. Characteristic splits include age group, gender, whether the user has a college
listed on Facebook, the tertile of home ZCTA median household income, the tertile of county-level cases per resident as
of March 15th, and whether the log of friend-exposure to COVID cases on March 15th is above (high exposure) or below
(low exposure) the user’s home ZCTA median. Columns 1, 3, and 5 show the levels for the week of February 25th to
March 2nd (prior to the pandemic). Columns 2, 4, 6 show the difference between the week of April 14th to 20th (during
the early stages of the pandemic) and this baseline. Columns 1 and 2 include movement on all days; 3 and 4 include
weekdays only; and 5 and 6 include weekends only. [Return to text.]




                                                            27
        Table 3: Relationship Between Friend-Exposure and Individual Characteristics
                                     Table 3Pre: Social Distancing by Demographics

                                                                          DV: log(Friend Exposure)

Age Group
  35-54                                            -0.005***                                   0.017***
                                                    (0.002)                                     (0.001)
  55+                                              -0.055***                                   0.022***
                                                    (0.004)                                     (0.001)
Female                                             -0.100***                                   -0.015***
                                                    (0.001)                                     (0.001)
Has College                                         0.185***                                   0.052***
                                                     (0.003)                                    (0.001)
Has iPhone                                          0.090***                                   0.004***
                                                     (0.002)                                    (0.001)
Has Tablet                                          0.045***                                   0.014***
                                                     (0.001)                                    (0.000)
Zip Code Income
  Middle Tertile                                    0.120***
                                                     (0.019)
  Top Tertile                                       0.415***
                                                     (0.019)
County Cases/Pop
  Middle tertile                                    1.030***
                                                     (0.015)
  Top Tertile                                       1.676***
                                                     (0.020)
Zip Code FE                                                           Y              Y               Y
Other network exposure FE                                                            Y               Y         Y
Zip Code x Age Group x Gender x Has College
                                                                                                               Y
 x Has Tablet x Has iPhone
R-Squared                                            0.377         0.671           0.851         0.851       0.873
Sample Mean                                          1.458         1.458           1.458         1.458       1.487
N                                                   6,803,762     6,803,761       6,803,761     6,803,761   6,400,738
Note: Table shows results from regressing various measures on the log of friend-exposure to COVID cases on March
15th. Each observation is an individual. Column 1 includes controls for age groups, gender, whether the individual has
a college listed on Facebook, whether the individual primarily accesses mobile Facebook from an iPhone, whether the
individual has accessed Facebook from a tablet, the tertile of home ZCTA median household income, and the tertile of
home county cases per resident as of March 15th. Column 2 includes only ZCTA fixed effects. Column 3 adds percentiles
of friend-exposures (as described in equation 2) for median household income, population density and the share of the
population living in urban areas. Column 4 adds back the individual-level controls from column 1. Column 5 adds fixed
effects for every group constructed from interacting ZCTA, age group, gender, has college, has tablet, and has iPhone.
Standard errors are clustered by ZCTA. Significance levels: *(p<0.10), **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01). [Return to text]




                                                         28
               Figure 2: Effects of Friend-Exposure to COVID-19 on Mobility Behavior
(a) Times Series: Probability of Staying Home                               (b) Time Series: Average Tiles Visited




  (c) Diff-In-Diff: Probability of Staying Home                             (d) Diff-In-Diff: Average Tiles Visited




Note: Figures show the relationship between friend-exposure to COVID-19 on March 15th cases and mobility behavior. Panels
(a) and (b) show weekly averages of the probability of staying at home and the average number of tiles visited from the week
of February 3rd to the week of May 18th, seperately for individuals above their ZCTA median friend-exposure and below their
median friend-exposure. Panels (c) and (d) show coefficients estimated using the difference-in-differences setup specified in
equation 3 with the outcome variable as the probability of staying at home and the average number of tiles visited, respectively.
Both specifications include fixed effects at the individual level as well as the following groups interacted with week: ZCTA,
age group; gender; has college listed on Facebook; has iPhone; has tablet; and percentiles of friend-exposures (as described in
equation 2) for median household income, population density and the share of the population living in urban areas. Standard
errors are clustered by ZCTA. [Return to text]




                                                               29
         Table 4: Social Distancing by Demographics: Probability of Staying at Home
                                              Table 3: Social Distancing by Demographics

                                                                              DV: Δ Stay at Home (Feb - Apr)

Age Group
  35-54                                       -0.394*** -0.360***                 -0.347***
                                                (0.036)  (0.032)                    (0.032)
  55+                                          1.381*** 1.544***                   1.589***
                                                (0.045)  (0.038)                    (0.037)
Female                                        4.404***    4.718***                4.852***
                                               (0.031)     (0.030)                 (0.029)
Has College                                   2.876***    2.538***                2.228***
                                               (0.029)     (0.026)                 (0.025)
Has iPhone                                    0.147*** -0.332***                  -0.465***
                                               (0.035)  (0.032)                    (0.032)
Has Tablet                                    0.936***    0.900***                0.851***
                                               (0.024)     (0.023)                 (0.023)
Zip Code Income
  Middle Tertile                              1.001***
                                               (0.109)
  Top Tertile                                 3.671***
                                               (0.109)
County Cases/Pop
  Middle tertile                              3.816***
                                               (0.089)
  Top Tertile                                 5.105***
                                               (0.120)
log(Friend Exposure)                                                   0.923***   0.849***    0.878***   0.825***   0.919***   0.961***
                                                                        (0.026)    (0.026)     (0.028)    (0.037)    (0.030)    (0.045)
Zip Code FE                                                   Y           Y           Y
Other Network Exposure FE                                                 Y           Y           Y            Y       Y          Y
Zip Code x Age Group x Gender x Has College
                                                                                                  Y            Y       Y          Y
 x Has Tablet x Has iPhone
College FE                                                                                                                        Y
Sample                                                                                                   Weekend Weekday       College
R-Squared                                       0.021     0.041     0.035     0.044     0.175     0.159     0.174     0.193
Sample Mean                                    13.683    13.683    13.683    13.683    13.800    14.415    13.704    15.852
N                                             6,804,168 6,804,167 6,803,761 6,803,761 6,400,738 5,808,187 6,309,820 2,616,959

Note: Table shows results from regression 4. Each observation is an individual. The outcome in all columns is the change
in probability of staying at home from the week of February 25-March 2, 2020 (prior to the pandemic) to April 14-20, 2020.
Column 1 includes controls for age groups, gender, whether the individual has a college listed on Facebook, whether
the individual primarily accesses Facebook mobile from an iPhone, whether the individual has accessed Facebook from
a tablet, the tertile of home ZCTA median household income, and the tertile of home county cases per resident as of
March 15th. Column 2 adds ZCTA fixed effects, but maintains the individual level controls. Column 3 includes only
the log of friend-exposure to COVID cases on March 15th; ZCTA fixed effects; and percentiles of friend-exposures (as
described in equation 2) for median household income, population density and the share of the population living in
urban areas. Column 4 adds back the individual-level controls from column 1. Column 5 adds fixed effects for every
group constructed from interacting ZCTA, age group, gender, has college, has tablet, and has iPhone. In Column 6
the outcome is measured using weekend movement and in column 7 using weekday movement. Column 8 limits to
individuals that attended a college, limiting to colleges with more than 100 individuals, and adds a fixed effect for
each individual college. Standard errors are clustered by ZCTA. Significance levels: *(p<0.10), **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01).
[Return to text]




                                                                  30
             Figure 3: Probability of Staying at Home vs. Friend-Exposure to COVID-19




                        Change in Share Days Single Tile (%)
                        12 12.5 13 13.5 14 14.5




                                                               0        1               2             3
                                                                   log(Friend Weighted Cases)

Note: Figure shows a binned scatter plot of the log of friend weighted friend-exposure to COVID-19 on March 15th and the
change in probability of staying at home from the week of February 25-March 2, 2020 (prior to the pandemic) to April 14-20,
2020. The plot controls for fixed effects constructed from interacting ZCTA, age group, gender, has a college listed on Facebook,
has iPhone, and has tablet. It also controls for percentiles of friend-exposures (as described in equation 2) for median household
income, population density and the share of the population living in urban areas. [Return to text]




                                                                            31
Figure 4: Robustness: Effects of Friend-Exposure to COVID-19 on Probability of Staying Home
                    (a) Weekdays                                                            (b) Weekends




                                             (c) Controlling for Exact College




Note: Figures show coefficients estimated using the difference-in-differences setup specified in equation 3 with the outcome
variable as the probability of staying at home. The outcome is measured on weekdays in panel (a) and weekends in panel (b).
Panel (c) limits to individuals that attended college, limiting to colleges with more than 100 individuals, and adds a fixed effect
for each individual college interacted with week. All specifications include fixed effects at the individual level as well as the
following groups interacted with week: ZCTA; age group; gender; has a college listed on Facebook; has iPhone; has tablet; and
percentiles of friend-exposures (as described in equation 2) for median household income, population density and the share
of the population living in urban areas. Standard errors are clustered by ZCTA. [Return to text]




                                                                32
                 Figure 5: Local Variation in Friend-Exposure to COVID-19 by Month
                      (a) March                                                              (b) April




                       (c) May                                                               (d) June




                                                           (e) July




Note: Figures show average changes in log friend-exposure to COVID-19 cases per 100k residents (as described in equation 6)
by ZCTA for the continental U.S. Exposure is measured on the last Friday of each month: panel (a) shows that change from
February to March, panel (b) shows the change from March to April, panel (c) shows the change from April to May, panel (d)
shows the change from May to June and panel (e) shows the change from June to July. The sample of users is restricted to those
for whom location can be observed at the end of each of the two relevant months. Darker blue indicates a smaller increase and
brighter green and yellow indicate a larger increase. Grey areas are excluded because of small populations, white areas are not
assigned ZCTAs by the Census Bureau. [Return to text]




                                                              33
                      Table 5: Determinants of ∆ Friend-Exposure to COVID-19 by Month
                                                                                   Monthly Change in log(Friend Exposure + 1)
                                            March       April       May            June        July        March        April       May         June        July

Age Group
  35-54                                    0.040***   0.014***    -0.013***    -0.008***     -0.001**     0.015***    0.005***    -0.004***   -0.003***   0.001***
                                            (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
  55+                                      0.076***   0.015***    -0.026***    -0.018***    -0.004***     0.024***    0.007***    -0.006***   -0.006***     0.001
                                            (0.002)    (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
Female                                    -0.021***    0.006***    0.003***     0.006***     0.004***    -0.004***     0.002***    0.001***   0.000**     -0.000***
                                            (0.001)     (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)
Has College                                0.039***   -0.031***   -0.007***    -0.008***    -0.004***     0.003***    -0.013***   -0.003***   0.002***     0.004***
                                            (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)
Has iPhone                                 0.011***   0.005***    -0.007***    0.008***     0.013***      0.002***    -0.002***     -0.000    0.002***    0.003***
                                            (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
Has Tablet                                 0.005***   -0.009***   -0.008***    -0.001***    0.002***      0.003***    -0.002***   -0.002***   -0.000***   0.001***
                                            (0.001)    (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
Network-Exposure Median HH Income ($k)     0.015***   -0.004***   0.001***     -0.009***    -0.013***
                                            (0.001)    (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)
Network-Exposure Population Density       349.495*** -34.302*** -65.142*** -71.383*** -88.601***
 (residents/meter !)                        (5.622)    (1.527)    (1.280)    (1.582)    (1.764)
Network-Exposure Fraction of Pop. Urban    1.112***   -0.076**    -0.263***    0.319***     0.456***
                                            (0.035)    (0.019)     (0.016)      (0.014)      (0.016)
Zip Code Income
  Middle Tertile                          -0.034***    -0.017**      0.007     -0.011**       -0.004
                                           (0.011)      (0.008)    (0.006)      (0.005)      (0.006)
  Top Tertile                               0.002     -0.026***     -0.008       -0.006        0.005
                                           (0.011)      (0.008)    (0.005)      (0.005)      (0.006)
Zip Code FE                                                                                                   Y           Y           Y           Y           Y
Other Network Exposure FE                                                                                     Y           Y           Y           Y           Y

R-Squared                                   0.560       0.044       0.117        0.215        0.281         0.877       0.680       0.728       0.781       0.822
Sample Mean                                 2.800       2.303       0.810        0.476        0.615         2.800       2.303       0.810       0.476       0.615
N                                         7,090,255   6,981,142   6,571,618    6,251,614    5,859,728     7,090,254   6,981,141   6,571,617   6,251,614   5,859,728

Note: Table shows results from regressing various measures on the change in log of friend-exposure to COVID cases per 100k
residents (as described in 6) between the last Fridays of each month (e.g. Feb to March in column 1). Columns 1-5 include age
groups; gender; whether the individual has a college listed on Facebook; whether the individual primarily accesses mobile
Facebook from an iPhone; whether the individual has accessed Facebook from a tablet; friend-exposures (as described in
equation 2) for median household income, population density and the share of the population living in urban areas; and the
tertile of ZCTA-level median household income. Columns 6-10 control for ZCTA fixed effects and percentiles of the friend
weighted exposure metrics. Standard errors are clustered by ZCTA. Significance levels: *(p<0.10), **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01).
[Return to text]




                                                                              34
         Figure 6: ∆ Probability of Staying at Home vs. ∆ Friend-Exposure to COVID-19
                                                                      (a) Without User Fixed-Effects




                        Change in Share Days in Single Tile (%)
                          1.4 1.45 1.5 1.55 1.6 1.65




                                                                  1   1.2      1.4      1.6       1.8   2
                                                                      Change in log(FWC per 100k + 1)
                                                                       (b) With User Fixed-Effects
                        Change in Share Days in Single Tile (%)
                          1.45 1.5 1.55 1.6 1.65 1.7




                                                                  1   1.2      1.4      1.6       1.8   2
                                                                      Change in log(FWC per 100k + 1)

Note: Figure shows a binned scatter of the change in log friend-exposure to COVID-19 cases per 100k residents (as described
in equation 6) and the change in the probability of staying home. Each observation is a unique individual and month for the
months of March, April, May, June and July. Change in exposure is measured as of the last Friday of each month. Change in
movement patterns is measured using the Tuesday to Monday week that includes each of these Fridays. Panel (a) includes
controls for fixed effects constructed from interacting month, ZCTA, age group, gender, college background, and iPhone and
tablet ownership. It also controls for month interacted with percentiles of friend-exposures (as described in equation 2) for
median household income, population density and the share of the population living in urban areas. Panel (b) includes the
same controls and also adds user fixed effects. [Return to text]




                                                                                   35
           Table 6: Effects of Friend-Exposure by Month: ∆ Probability of Staying at Home
                                         Table 9: Effects of Friend-Exposure by Months of Exposure: Δ Stay at Home

                                                                                     Monthly Change in Δ Stay at Home
                                                    All months     All months        March           April           May       June        July

Δ log(Friend Exposure + 1), All Months               0.206***       0.261***
                                                      (0.029)        (0.032)
Δ log(Friend Exposure + 1), March                                                   0.207***         0.006       -0.076**      0.097       0.037
                                                                                     (0.046)        (0.040)       (0.048)     (0.054)    (0.064)
Δ log(Friend Exposure + 1), April                                                                    0.035         0.096     0.329***    0.069**
                                                                                                    (0.052)       (0.056)     (0.061)    (0.071)
Δ log(Friend Exposure + 1), May                                                                                  0.379***      0.044      -0.057
                                                                                                                  (0.082)     (0.078)    (0.094)
Δ log(Friend Exposure + 1), June                                                                                             0.854***    -0.329*
                                                                                                                              (0.114)    (0.127)
Δ log(Friend Exposure + 1), July                                                                                                         0.323**
                                                                                                                                         (0.138)
User FE                                                                 Y
Other Network Exposure FE                                Y                              Y              Y              Y         Y           Y
Zip Code x Age Group x Gender x Has College              Y              Y               Y              Y              Y         Y           Y
 x Has Tablet x Has iPhone
R-Squared                                             0.211          0.287            0.174          0.141          0.150       0.146      0.145
Sample Mean                                           1.611          1.456           14.214         -0.923         -5.989      -1.068      0.679
N                                                   30,742,008     29,777,929       6,688,448     6,579,359      6,169,176   5,848,722   5,456,303

Note: Table shows results from regression 8. Each observation is an individual. The outcome variable is the change in the
probability of staying home between the final weeks of a given month and the previous months’ final week: February 25-
March 2 for February; March 24-March 30 for March; April 21-April 27 for April; May 26-June 1; June 23-June 29; July 21-July
28. The sample of users is restricted to those for whom location can be observed at the end of each of the two relevant
months. In the first two columns, we pool the changes over all months from March to July. In the next columns, we consider
changes by month. In all columns we control for interactions of ZCTA fixed effects, age groups, gender, whether the individual
has a college listed on Facebook, whether the individual primarily accesses mobile Facebook from an iPhone, and whether the
individual has accessed Facebook from a tablet. Columns 1 and 3-7 also include fixed effects for percentiles of friend-exposures
(as described in equation 2) for median household income, population density and the share of the population living in urban
areas. In column 2, we include user fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by ZCTA. Significance levels: *(p<0.10),
**(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01). [Return to text]




                                                                            36
        Table 7: Heterogeneity  of Friend-Exposure
                           Heterogeneity of Network-ExposureEffects:    Probability
                                                             Effects - %Δ Stay at Home of Staying at Home

                                                                                %Δ Stay at Home

log(Friend Exposure) x I(Age < 35)                   1.241***
                                                      (0.042)
log(Friend Exposure) x I(Age 35-55)                  0.960***
                                                      (0.033)
log(Friend Exposure) x I(Age > 55)                   0.412***
                                                      (0.038)
log(Friend Exposure) x Female                                    0.949***
                                                                  (0.032)
log(Friend Exposure) x Male                                      0.796***
                                                                  (0.033)
log(Friend Exposure) x College                                               1.321***
                                                                              (0.034)
log(Friend Exposure) x No College                                            0.443***
                                                                              (0.031)
log(Friend Exposure) x Zip Income First Tertile                                          0.386***
                                                                                          (0.037)
log(Friend Exposure) x Zip Income Second Tertile                                         0.794***
                                                                                          (0.036)
log(Friend Exposure) x Zip Income Third Tertile                                          1.608***
                                                                                          (0.045)
log(Friend Exposure) x County Cases First Tertile                                                    0.676***
                                                                                                      (0.030)
log(Friend Exposure) x County Cases Second Tertile                                                   1.384***
                                                                                                      (0.058)
log(Friend Exposure) x County Cases Third Tertile                                                    1.245***
                                                                                                      (0.055)
log(Friend Exposure - Rank 1 - 25)                                                                                0.204***
                                                                                                                   (0.017)
log(Friend Exposure - Rank 26 - 50)                                                                               0.112***
                                                                                                                   (0.017)
log(Friend Exposure - Rank 51 - 75)                                                                               0.082***
                                                                                                                   (0.017)
log(Friend Exposure - Rank 76 - 100)                                                                              0.098***
                                                                                                                   (0.017)
Other Network Exposure FE                               Y             Y         Y            Y           Y            Y
Zip Code x Age Group x Gender x Has College             Y             Y         Y            Y           Y            Y
 x Has Tablet x Has iPhone
R-Squared                                              0.175      0.175        0.175      0.175        0.175        0.177
Sample Mean                                           13.800      13.800      13.800      13.800      13.800        14.488
F Test (Rank 1-25 = Rank 76-100)                                                                                  17.328***
N                                                    6,400,738   6,400,738   6,400,738   6,400,738   6,400,738    5,684,469

Note: Table shows results from regressions of friend-exposure to COVID-19 on March 15th, interacted with individual char-
acteristics, on the percentage change in the probability of staying at home. Friend-exposure is interacted with age groups in
rows 1-3; gender in rows 4-5; whether the individual has a college listed in Facebook in rows 6-7; ZCTA median household
income in rows 8-10; county-level cases of COVID-19 in rows 11-13; and friend rank (i.e. a measure for how close friends
are) in rows 14-16. All columns include controls for percentiles of friend-exposures (as described in equation 2) for median
household income, population density and the share of the population living in urban areas. All columns include fixed effects
for every group constructed from interacting ZCTA, age group, gender, has college, has tablet, and has iPhone. Standard errors
are clustered by ZCTA. Significance levels: *(p<0.10), **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01). [Return to text]




                                                                 37
                                            Table 8: Posting Behavior and Group Membership
                                                             Posting Behavior and Group Membership

                                                                                        DV: Share "Signed Posts"
                                                        DV: Share Posts about Corona                                   Δ Sentiment (Feb - Apr)    DV: Member "Reopen Group"
                                                                                       Opposed to Distancing (Feb -
                                                                 (Feb - Apr)                                                  All Posts                by June 28, 2020
                                                                                                  Apr)
log(Friend Exposure)                                      0.324***       0.249***       -1.659***       -1.929***     -0.109***      -0.094***       -0.003      -0.129***
                                                           (0.006)        (0.006)        (0.107)         (0.245)       (0.016)        (0.025)       (0.018)       (0.007)
Age Group
  35-54                                                   0.579***                      -2.196***                     -0.480***                     0.767***
                                                           (0.005)                        (0.168)                      (0.026)                       (0.011)
  55+                                                     0.351***                       4.667***                       -0.031                      0.851***
                                                           (0.005)                        (0.194)                      (0.030)                       (0.012)
Female                                                   -0.266***                      -17.713***                     0.942***                    -0.582***
                                                           (0.003)                        (0.142)                       (0.024)                     (0.010)
Has College                                               0.637***                       -2.392***                    -0.283***                    -0.188***
                                                           (0.004)                        (0.141)                       (0.023)                     (0.006)
Has iPhone                                                0.137***                      -7.215***                     -0.150***                     0.019***
                                                           (0.003)                       (0.135)                       (0.023)                       (0.006)
Has Tablet                                                0.028***                      -1.997***                       0.039*                     -0.048***
                                                           (0.003)                       (0.125)                       (0.023)                       (0.003)
Zip Code Income
  Middle Tertile                                          0.069***                      -0.886***                      -0.075*                      0.211***
                                                           (0.013)                       (0.229)                       (0.031)                       (0.041)
  Top Tertile                                             0.269***                      -1.946***                     -0.121***                     0.379***
                                                           (0.016)                       (0.250)                       (0.035)                       (0.044)
County Cases/Pop
  Middle tertile                                         -0.064***                       1.458***                        0.027                      0.219***
                                                          (0.014)                         (0.256)                       (0.037)                      (0.049)
  Top Tertile                                            -0.097***                       1.049***                        0.034                      0.204***
                                                          (0.013)                         (0.240)                       (0.036)                      (0.048)
Percentiles of Total Number of Groups (Feb 2020)                                                                                                       Y            Y
Other Network Exposure FE                                    Y               Y              Y               Y             Y              Y             Y            Y
Zip Code FE
Zip Code x Age Group x Gender x Has College
                                                                             Y                              Y                                                       Y
 x Has Tablet x Has iPhone                                                                                                               Y

Sample                                                     People With Any Posts       People With "Signed Posts"     People With Posts between       People With Group
                                                               February - April               February - April             Feb 3 and May 3              Memberships
R-Squared                                                   0.013           0.060          0.087            0.445        0.000           0.118       0.013         0.074
Sample Mean                                                 1.750           1.755         39.806           35.979       -1.817          -1.823       1.217         1.216
N                                                        34,828,054      34,528,373      546,499          277,776     11,209,068     10,777,790   119,384,394 119,145,833

Note: Table shows results from regression 9 and 10. Each observation is an individual. The outcome in columns 1-2 is the
percentage of individual posts that are about COVID-19; in columns 3-4 it is the percentage of pro- or anti-distancing posts
that are anti-distancing; in columns 5-6 it is the change in the average sentiment of the posts from February 3rd through 23rd to
April 6th through 26th; in columns 7-8 it is whether the individual was a member of a ‘Reopen’ Facebook group as of June 28th.
For ease of interpretation and because of small magnitudes, we rescale coefficients and standard errors by 100, so that they
correspond to percentages. Post classification is based on the regex in Appendix C.1. Sentiment is measured on a scale from -
100 to 100 using the VADER algorithm described in Hutto and Gilbert (2014). Group classification is determined by the regular
expression described in Appendix C.2. Columns 1, 3, 5 and 7 include controls for the log of friend-exposure to COVID-19 on
March 15th; age groups; gender; whether the individual has a college listed on Facebook; whether the individual primarily
accesses Facebook mobile from an iPhone; whether the individual has accessed Facebook from a tablet; the tertile of home
ZCTA median household income; the tertile of home county cases per resident as of March 15th; and percentiles of friend-
exposures (as described in equation 2) for median household income, population density, and the share of the population
living in urban areas. Columns 2, 4, 6, 8 add fixed effects for every group constructed from interacting ZCTA, age group,
gender, has college, has tablet, and has iPhone. For the group based analysis in columns 7 and 8 we also include fixed effects
for the percentile of the number of groups an individual was in as of February 2020. Standard errors are clustered by ZCTA.
Significance levels: *(p<0.10), **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01). [Return to text]




                                                                                 38
                      Figure 7: Posting Behavior vs. Friend-Exposure to COVID-19
                                                                             (a) Percentage of Posts About COVID-19




                                                     2
                        Share Posts about Corona (%)
                               1.6        1.81.4




                                                                        .5           1          1.5        2            2.5
                                                                                    log(Friend Weighted Cases)
                                                                   (b) Percentage of Signed Posts Opposing Distancing
                        Share 'Signed Posts' Anti-Distancing (%)
                         38       39      40       41       42




                                                                   .5                1          1.5         2             2.5
                                                                                    log(Friend Weighted Cases)

Note: Figures show binned scatter plots of the log of friend-exposure to COVID-19 on March 15th and Facebook post based
measures. The outcome variable in panel (a) is the percentage of individual posts that are about COVID-19 and in panel (b) it
is the percentage of pro- or anti-lockdown posts that are anti-distancing. Post classification is based on the regex in Appendix
C.1. The plots control for fixed effects constructed from interacting ZCTA, age group, gender, has college, has iPhone, and
has tablet. They also control for percentiles of friend-exposures (as described in equation 2) for median household income,
population density and the share of the population living in urban areas. [Return to text]




                                                                                              39
                    Figure 8: Coefficient Estimates for Different Types of POI Places
      (a) Arts, Entertainment & Recreation                            (b) Retail Trade, excl. Food & Beverage Stores




      (c) Food Services & Drinking Places                                         (d) Food & Beverage Stores




      (e) Health Care & Social Assistance                                                    (f) Parks




Note: Figures show coefficient estimates based on equation 11 for various types of POIs. For reference, we include estimates
aggregating across all types of POIs in gray in all panels. We control for ZCTA fixed effects, county fixed effects interacted
with week indicators as well as a rich set of covariates interacted with week indicators. These covariates are the fraction of
people being male, the fraction of asian/black/white people, median household income, the fraction of individuals working in
service occupations, the fraction of individuals working in production or transportation, the fraction of individuals working in
management, arts or science, the fraction of individuals with a high school degree, some college education and a college degree
as well as the fraction of households with high speed internet. We also include various age-related controls, i.e. the fraction
of individuals 18 or younger, between 18 and 24, between 25-34, between 35-44, between 45-54, between 55-64, between 65-74
and above 75. All these control variables are obtained from the most recent 5-year ACS (2014-2018). In addition, we also
control for ventiles of friend-exposure to other characteristics, namely income, population density (both from 2014-2018 ACS)
and urbanity (from 2010 Census), again interacted with week indicators. Standard errors are clustered at the ZCTA level.
[Return to text]




                                                              40
                          Figure 9: Coefficient Estimates for β 1t from equation 12
                                        (a) Log Number of Transactions Made




                            (b) Log Number of Transactions at Amazon and Starbucks




Note: Figures present regression estimates of β 1t based on equation 12. In Panel (a) we present coefficient estimates for the log
of one plus the number of transactions made. In addition to controlling for ZCTA fixed effects as well as county fixed effects
interacted with week indicators, we also control for a rich set of covariates interacted with week indicators. These covariates
are the fraction of people being male, the fraction of asian/black/white people, median household income, the fraction of
individuals working in service occupations, the fraction of individuals working in production or transportation, the fraction
of individuals working in management, arts or science, the fraction of individuals with a high school degree, some college
education and a college degree as well as the fraction of households with high speed internet. We also include various age-
related controls, i.e. the fraction of individuals 18 or younger, between 18 and 24, between 25-34, between 35-44, between
45-54, between 55-64, between 65-74 and above 75. All these control variables are obtained from the most recent 5-year ACS
(2014-2018). We also control for ventiles of friend-exposure to other characteristics, namely income, population density (both
from 2014-2018 ACS) and urbanity (from 2010 Census), again interacted with week indicators. In panel (b), we instead present
coefficient estimates where the dependent variable is the log of one plus the number of transactions made at Starbucks and at
Amazon. The black series corresponds to transactions made at Amazon while the red series corresponds to transactions made
at Starbucks. The set of control variables included is identical to panel (a). In all regressions standard errors are clustered at
the ZCTA level. [Return to text]




                                                               41
References
Georgij Alekseev, Safaa Amer, Manasa Gopal, Theresa Kuchler, JW Schneider, Johannes Stroebel, and
  Nils Wernerfelt. The effects of covid-19 on u.s. small businesses. Technical report, 2020.

Hunt Allcott, Levi Boxell, Jacob Conway, Billy Ferguson, Matthew Gentzkow, and Benny Goldman.
  Economic and health impacts of social distancing policies during the coronavirus pandemic. Available
  at SSRN 3610422, 2020a.

Hunt Allcott, Levi Boxell, Jacob C Conway, Matthew Gentzkow, Michael Thaler, and David Y Yang.
  Polarization and public health: Partisan differences in social distancing during the coronavirus pan-
  demic. Working Paper 26946, National Bureau of Economic Research, April 2020b. URL http:
  //www.nber.org/papers/w26946.

Michael Bailey, Rachel Cao, Theresa Kuchler, and Johannes Stroebel. The economic effects of social
  networks: Evidence from the housing market. Journal of Political Economy, 126(6):2224–2276, 2018a.

Michael Bailey, Rachel Cao, Theresa Kuchler, Johannes Stroebel, and Arlene Wong. Social connectedness:
  Measurements, determinants, and effects. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 32(3):259–80, 2018b.

Michael Bailey, Eduardo Dávila, Theresa Kuchler, and Johannes Stroebel. House price beliefs and mort-
  gage leverage choice. The Review of Economic Studies, 86(6):2403–2452, 2019a.

Michael Bailey, Patrick Farrell, Theresa Kuchler, and Johannes Stroebel. Social connectedness in urban
  areas. Working Paper 26029, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2019b.

Michael Bailey, Drew M Johnston, Theresa Kuchler, Johannes Stroebel, and Arlene Wong. Peer effects in
  product adoption. Working Paper 25843, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2019c.

Michael Bailey, Abhinav Gupta, Sebastian Hillenbrand, Theresa Kuchler, Robert Richmond, and Jo-
  hannes Stroebel. International trade and social connectedness. Working paper, 2020a.

Michael Bailey, Theresa Kuchler, Dominic Russel, Bogdan State, and Johannes Stroebel. Social connect-
  edness in europe. Working paper, 2020b.

Olivier Bargain and Ulugbek Aminjonov. Trust and compliance to public health policies in times of
  covid-19. 2020.

John M Barrios and Yael Hochberg. Risk perception through the lens of politics in the time of the
  covid-19 pandemic. Working Paper 27008, National Bureau of Economic Research, April 2020. URL
  http://www.nber.org/papers/w27008.

John M Barrios, Efraim Benmelech, Yael V Hochberg, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. Civic cap-
  ital and social distancing during the covid-19 pandemic. Working Paper 27320, National Bureau of
  Economic Research, June 2020. URL http://www.nber.org/papers/w27320.




                                                   42
Mark Blumenthal.             The spread of coronavirus to red america is not shifting opinions,
  2020. URL https://today.yougov.com/topics/politics/articles-reports/2020/06/
  09/spread-coronavirus-red-america-analysis.

Daniela Del Boca, Noemi Oggero, Paola Profeta, and Mariacristina Rossi. Women’s work, housework
  and childcare, before and during covid-19. 2020.

Abel Brodeur, David M Gray, Anik Islam, Suraiya Jabeen Bhuiyan, et al. A literature review of the
  economics of covid-19. Technical report, Institute of Labor Economics (IZA), 2020a.

Abel Brodeur, Idaliya Grigoryeva, and Lamis Kattan. Stay-at-home orders, social distancing and trust.
  2020b.

Adam Brzezinski, Valentin Kecht, David Van Dijcke, and Austin L Wright. Belief in science influences
  physical distancing in response to covid-19 lockdown policies. University of Chicago, Becker Friedman
  Institute for Economics Working Paper, (2020-56), 2020.

Leonardo Bursztyn, Aakaash Rao, Christopher Roth, and David Yanagizawa-Drott. Misinformation
  during a pandemic. University of Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute for Economics Working Paper, (2020-
  44), 2020.

Ben Charoenwong, Alan Kwan, and Vesa Pursiainen. Social connections to covid-19-affected areas in-
  crease compliance with mobility restrictions. Available at SSRN, 2020.

Nicholas A. Christakis and James H. Fowler. The spread of obesity in a large social network over 32
  years. New England Journal of Medicine, 357(4):370–379, 2007. doi: 10.1056/NEJMsa066082. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMsa066082. PMID: 17652652.

Nicholas A. Christakis and James H. Fowler. The collective dynamics of smoking in a large social net-
  work. New England Journal of Medicine, 358(21):2249–2258, 2008. doi: 10.1056/NEJMsa0706154. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMsa0706154. PMID: 18499567.

Joshua Coven and Arpit Gupta. Disparities in mobility responses to covid-19. 2020.

Jonathan I Dingel and Brent Neiman. How many jobs can be done at home? Working Paper 26948, Na-
  tional Bureau of Economic Research, April 2020. URL http://www.nber.org/papers/w26948.

Maeve Duggan, Shannon Greenwood, and Andrew Perrin.                     Social media update 2016.    Report,
  Pew Research Center, 2016. URL https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/2016/11/11/
  social-media-update-2016/.

Facebook.      Facebook form 10-k, 2019 annual report, 2020.             URL http://d18rn0p25nwr6d.
  cloudfront.net/CIK-0001326801/45290cc0-656d-4a88-a2f3-147c8de86506.pdf.

Paola    Giuliano      and   Imran     Rasul.       Civic    capital   and   social   distancing:   Evidence
  from     italians’   response   to    covid-19,   2020a.         URL    https://voxeu.org/article/
  civic-capital-and-social-distancing.

                                                       43
Paola   Giuliano     and     Imran      Rasul.           Compliance    with    social    distancing   dur-
  ing    the     covid-19     crisis,     2020b.              URL      https://voxeu.org/article/
  compliance-social-distancing-during-covid-19-crisis.

David Holtz, Michael Zhao, Seth G. Benzell, Cathy Y. Cao, Mohammad Amin Rahimian, Jeremy Yang,
  Jennifer Allen, Avinash Collis, Alex Moehring, Tara Sowrirajan, Dipayan Ghosh, Yunhao Zhang,
  Paramveer S. Dhillon, Christos Nicolaides, Dean Eckles, and Sinan Aral. Interdependence and the
  cost of uncoordinated responses to covid-19. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(33):
  19837–19843, 2020. ISSN 0027-8424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2009522117. URL https://www.pnas.org/
  content/117/33/19837.

Clayton J Hutto and Eric Gilbert. Vader: A parsimonious rule-based model for sentiment analysis of
  social media text. In Eighth international AAAI conference on weblogs and social media, 2014.

Theresa Kuchler, Lin Peng, Johannes Stroebel, Yan Li, and Dexin Zhou. Working Paper 27299, National
  Bureau of Economic Research, 2020a.

Theresa Kuchler, Dominic Russel, and Johannes Stroebel. The geographic spread of covid-19 correlates
  with structure of social networks as measured by facebook. Working Paper 26990, National Bureau of
  Economic Research, 2020b.

Paige Maas, Shankar Iyer, Andreas Gros, Wonhee Park, Laura McGorman, Chaya Nayak, and P Alex
  Dow. Facebook disaster maps: Aggregate insights for crisis response and recovery. Proceedings
  of the 16th International Conference on Information Systems for Crisis Response and Management (IS-
  CRAM), 2019. URL https://research.fb.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/iscram19_
  camera_ready.pdf.

Christos Makridis and Tao Wang. Learning from friends in a pandemic: Social networks and the macroe-
  conomic response of consumption. Available at SSRN 3601500, 2020. URL https://papers.ssrn.
  com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3601500.

Oliver Rehbein, Simon Rother, et al. Distance in bank lending: The role of social networks. Technical
  report, University of Bonn and University of Mannheim, Germany, 2020.

Ryoko Sato and Yoshito Takasaki. Peer effects on vaccination behavior: Experimental evidence from
  rural nigeria. Economic Development and Cultural Change, 68(1):93–129, 2019. doi: 10.1086/700570.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1086/700570.

Joe Schwartz.     Bing maps tile system, 2018.        URL https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/
  bingmaps/articles/bing-maps-tile-system.

Andrey Simonov, Szymon K Sacher, Jean-Pierre H Dubé, and Shirsho Biswas. The persuasive effect
  of fox news: Non-compliance with social distancing during the covid-19 pandemic. Working Paper
  27237, National Bureau of Economic Research, May 2020. URL http://www.nber.org/papers/
  w27237.


                                                    44
Yuan Tian, Maria Esther Caballero, and Brian K. Kovak. Social learning along international migrant
  networks. Working paper, July 2020. URL http://www.contrib.andrew.cmu.edu/~bkovak/
  tian_caballero_kovak.pdf.

Riley Wilson. The impact of social networks on eitc claiming behavior. 2019.




                                                  45
Appendices
A        Replication of Friend-Exposure Effects Using Public Data
We use public data sources on movement and social connections to replicate and extend our previous
findings. By doing so, we assess the robustness of our key results using other, well-studied data sources.
This helps us benchmark the magnitude of our estimated effects against a broader literature exploring
the factors shaping social distancing behavior. As is done in Section 5.3, we can also use these data
sources to provide evidence regarding the mechanisms of the observed effects of friend-exposure to
COVID-19.

A.1       Data
A.1.1      Safegraph
In light of the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, Safegraph Inc. has released several data products
that allow for a detailed understanding of consumer spending and of mobility patterns across time
and space. These data are available to researchers on request. We use three different data products
from Safegraph: (a) social distancing data, (b) point of interest (POI) visit data and (c) transaction data
provided by Facteus. All three of these data sources have been used by other contemporaneous research
on the COVID-19 pandemic. For the purpose of this Section, we focus on social distancing data. In
Section 5, we exploit data sources (b) and (c) to shed light on the mechanisms of friend-exposure effects
on social distancing behavior.
        The Safegraph Social Distancing data contains location data obtained from a number of smartphone
applications. Safegraph uses each user’s location history to impute their Census block group of resi-
dence, and provides aggregated data for each block group from January 1, 2020. We use data through
July 28. In particular, we use three metrics: the number of devices that are assigned to a given Census
block group on a given day, the number of devices that do not leave their home location during a given
day24 as well as the average distance traveled.25 The average number of devices observed on a given
day in our sample period is about 19 million. Using these metrics, we calculate (a) the fraction of de-
vices that remain at home over the course of a day and (b) the average distance traveled in kilometers.
We believe that these two ZCTA-level measures of social distancing correspond nicely to the measures
employed in the individual level analysis, i.e. the probability of staying at home and average daily tile
movement. As before, for ease of computation and to smooth out fluctuations, we construct weekly
averages.
A.1.2      Friend-Exposure to COVID-19
To construct a measure of friend-exposure to COVID-19 we combine data from Facebook on social con-
nectedness and data from the Center for Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE) at Johns Hopkins
University. The Social Connectedness Index (SCI) (Bailey et al., 2018b) is a scaled metric of relative
24 Inthis case, home location corresponds to the geohash-7 in which home is located. A geohash-7 is a region about 500 feet on
   each side.
25 We construct the average distance traveled based on the number of devices per bin of travel distance. Where possible, we

   use the mean of highest and lowest value of the bin. For the open ended top bin (> 50km) we assign a value of 75km.


                                                             46
connectedness of different ZCTAs across the U.S., defined as:

                                                      FBConnectionsij
                                          SCIij =                                                                   (13)
                                                    FBUsersi × FBUsers j

FBConnectionsij is the scaled number of connections between ZCTA i and ZCTA j, and FBUsersi and
FBUsers j are the respective numbers of users for ZCTA i and j. To create our measure of friend-exposure,
we begin by calculating per-user connections between ZCTA i and county k:

                                       PerUserConnectik =      ∑ SCIij ∗ Pop j                                      (14)
                                                               j∈k


Pop j is the population of ZCTA j that is in county k. Note that in the absence of public data on user
counts, we use population counts rather than user counts. In constructing this measure we have two
objectives. First, since the data on COVID-19 cases is only available at the county level this measure
moves us from zips to counties. Second, this measure of per-user connections helps to construct friend-
exposure that is independent of the number of users or friends on Facebook (which might systematically
differ with the way Facebook is used across regions). Next, for each ZCTA i we calculate the fraction of
per-user connections from county k relative to all counties:

                                                          PerUserConnectik
                                    FracConnectik =                                                                 (15)
                                                        ∑k∈K PerUserConnectik

We can loosely think of this measure as the fraction of all friends a user in ZCTA i has in county k. As
a final step, we multiply this metric with the number of COVID-19 cases in county k and sum over all
counties in order to create our measure of friend-exposure to COVID-19. Since the number of cases
varies over time, this metric is also time-variant.

                              FriendExpCOV IDit =        ∑ FracConnectik × Caseskt                                  (16)
                                                         k∈K

Here, t denotes the time-dimension which in our case is weeks. Together, these simplifications allow us
to generate a measure of friend-exposure similar to the one used for our prior individual-level analyses.

A.2       Replication of Individual Level Results
To validate the findings presented in Section 3, we now estimate the effect of having high exposure at
the zip level on social distancing behavior at the zip level. More concretely, we estimate:

                              Yit = β 0 + β 1t × HighExpi × week t + β 2t × Xit + eit                               (17)

Yit is our measure of social distancing for ZCTA i during week t t constructed from Safegraph data,
i.e. either (a) the average fraction of devices at home full-time for a given ZCTA or (b) the percentage
change in the average distance traveled relative to the month of January 2020.26 HighExpi is an indica-
26 More
     precisely, based on our measure of average distance traveled for ZCTA i during week t, i.e. AvgDistit , we calculate
            AvgDistit − AvgDistiJan20
 %∆Distit =      AvgDistiJan20        ∗ 100.


                                                          47
tor equal to one if ZCTA i has friend-exposure to COVID-19 higher than the median for the county it is
located in, based on the number of COVID-19 cases as of March 17. We include a rich set of controls: in
addition to including county-time fixed effects together with ZCTA fixed effects in our regressions, we
control for various zip-level covariates interacted with time fixed effects. These are the median house-
hold income of the area, as well as the fraction of individuals in in each of the following demographic
groups: male, Asian, black, white, service employee, manager, art or science employee, high-speed in-
ternet user, high-school educated, some college completion, college educated. We also control for the
fraction of individuals in several age buckets.27 All these control variables are obtained from the most
recent 5-year ACS (2014-2018). Finally, as described in depth in Section 3, we control for national ventiles
of friend-exposure to other factors, i.e. median household income, population density and urbanity.28 In
Table A11, we show the differences between high and low friend-exposure places with respect to these
characteristics.

                                                        [Table A11]

     While high and low friend-exposure places appear balanced with respect to many key demographic
and socio-economic characteristics, a few differences are noticeable. In particular, high exposure places
are slightly more racially diverse, have a somewhat lower median household income, and include in-
dividuals more likely to have a college degree. High exposure places also have larger populations, are
more densely populated, and have more POIs. While none of these differences is very large, they might
affect the the average ability or willingness of residents to engage in social distancing in a way that is
independent of friend-exposure. We therefore control for all the above-mentioned set of covariates and
allow for the value of these controls to vary over time. Together, these control variables help to alleviate
concerns that any observed effects are merely driven by differences in demographic, socio-economic or
other work-related variables that are correlated with social distancing behavior. Figure A11 depicts the
corresponding β 1t estimates from Equation 17. These coefficients capture the effect of having a level of
(ZCTA-level) friend-exposure to COVID-19 that is above the county mean. Standard errors are clustered
at the ZCTA-level.

                                                       [Figure A11]

     Figure A11 shows changes in mobility as a result of friend-exposure to COVID-19 that are qualita-
tively very consistent with the results presented in Section 3. As is in apparent both in Figure A11a and
in Figure A11b, in January and February—before the outbreak of the pandemic in the U.S.—changes in
mobility between high and low-exposure places are always very close to zero. Beginning in the week of
March 4, these coefficients begin to shift, indicating that groups with more friend-exposure have begun
to stay home more and travel less. For the fraction of devices at home, coefficients continue to rise,
reaching levels of around 0.025 in late-March and early-April. Thereafter, coefficients slowly return to
values closer to zero, yet they remain statistically significant for several more weeks and up until some-
27 These are the fraction of individuals 18 or younger, between 18 and 24, between 25-34, between 35-44, between 45-54, between

 55-64, between 65-74 and above 75.
28 Thesefriend-exposure variables are constructed as FriendExpMetrici = ∑k∈K FracConnectik × Metrick where Metrick is one
 of population density, median household income (both from ACS 2014-2018) and the fraction of the population residing in
 urban settings (from 2010 Census).


                                                              48
time in mid-May. In line with these patterns, for the percentage change in the average distance traveled,
coefficients continue to fall during late March and stay low, i.e. around -1.5, for much of April before
they gradually return to zero, although never quite reaching zero. Together, these estimates highlight
that as the COVID-19 pandemic hits the U.S., places with greater friend-exposure to COVID-19 reduce
their mobility more than places with lower friend-exposure. These effects are persistent over time and
cannot entirely be explained by our measures of differential ability and/or willingness to engage in
social distancing. In spite of the different data source, the different level of analysis and the different
sample, these results are thus consistent with the evidence presented in Section 3: friend-exposure to
COVID-19 matters when trying to explain differences in social distancing behavior across individuals
and across places.




                                                    49
B     Additional Tables and Figures

                       Figure A1: Heterogeneity in Probability of Staying at Home
                      (a) Age                                                               (b) Gender




           (c) Educational Attainment                                                       (d) Income




                                           (e) Local Exposure to COVID-19




Note: Figures show weekly averages of the probability of staying at home from the week of February 3rd to the week of May
18th across certain characteristics. Panel (a) shows age; panel (b) shows gender; panel (c) shows whether the user has a college
listed on Facebook; panel (d) shows the tertile of home ZCTA median household income; and panel (e) shows the tertile of
county-level cases per resident as of March 15th.




                                                              50
                      Figure A2: Heterogeneity in Change in Average Tiles Visited
                        (a) Age                                                            (b) Gender




           (c) Educational Attainment                                                      (d) Income




                                           (e) Local Exposure to COVID-19




Note: Figures show the percent change in the weekly average of daily tiles visited from the week of February 3rd to the week
of May 18th across certain characteristics. Panel (a) shows age; panel (b) shows gender; panel (c) shows whether the individual
has college information in Facebook; panel (d) shows the tercile of ZCTA-level median household income; and panel (e) shows
the tercile of county-level cases per resident as of March 15th.




                                                              51
                                Table A1: Appendix
                                          Change Table  2: Mobility
                                                   in Average  Tiles Visited

                                                                        Bing Tile Visited
                                                    All                    Weekdays                    Weekends
                                          Level Feb ΔFeb-Apr         Level Feb ΔFeb-Apr          Level Feb ΔFeb-Apr
Overall                                      10.957        -3.590        11.339        -3.632       10.570        -3.714
By Age Group
  18-34                                      11.590        -3.593        11.883        -3.587       11.555        -3.843
  35-54                                      11.507        -3.753        11.952        -3.818       10.975        -3.834
  55+                                         9.287        -3.307         9.656        -3.358        8.804        -3.381
By Gender
  Female                                      9.729        -3.641         9.937        -3.697        9.694        -3.711
  Male                                       12.398        -3.530        12.985        -3.555       11.602        -3.717
By College
  Has College                                11.041        -3.945        11.395        -4.012       10.714        -4.014
  No College                                 10.862        -3.179        11.275        -3.193       10.405        -3.362
By Zip Code Income
  Bottom Tertile                             10.735        -3.146        11.110        -3.147       10.392        -3.372
  Middle Tertile                             10.899        -3.367        11.265        -3.386       10.530        -3.525
  Top Tertile                                11.238        -4.247        11.642        -4.353       10.787        -4.228
By County Total Cases/Population
  Bottom Tertile                             10.670        -2.916        11.006        -2.883       10.358        -3.186
  Middle Tertile                             11.317        -4.066        11.713        -4.129       10.939        -4.174
  Top Tertile                                11.140        -4.246        11.579        -4.382       10.643        -4.174
By Exposure through Friends
  High Exposure                              10.959        -3.849        11.333        -3.900       10.599        -3.968
  Low Exposure                               10.956        -3.331        11.345        -3.365       10.542        -3.460


Note: Table describes changes in social distancing across different user characteristics. Social distancing is measured as
the average number of daily Bing tiles visited. Characteristic splits include age group, gender, whether the individual
has college information in Facebook, the tercile of ZCTA-level median household income, the tercile of county-level
cases per resident as of March 15th, and whether the log of friend-exposure to COVID cases on March 15th is above
(high exposure) or below (low exposure) the users’ home ZCTA median. Columns 1, 3, and 5 show the levels for the
week of February 25th to March 2nd (prior to the pandemic). Columns 2, 4, 6 show the difference between the week of
April 14th to 20th (during the early stages of the pandemic) and this baseline. Columns 1 and 2 include all days; 3 and 4
include weekdays only; and 5 and 6 include weekends only.




                                                           52
            Figure A3: Weekdays, Heterogeneity in the Probability of Staying at Home
                       (a) Age                                                          (b) Gender




           (c) Educational Attainment                                                   (d) Income




                                          (e) Local Exposure to COVID-19




Note: Figures show weekly averages, of weekdays, of the probability of staying at home from the week of February 3rd to the
week of May 18th across certain characteristics. Panel (a) shows age; panel (b) shows gender; panel (c) shows whether the
individual has college information in Facebook; panel (d) shows the tercile of ZCTA-level median household income; and
panel (e) shows the tercile of county-level cases per resident as of March 15th.




                                                            53
            Figure A4: Weekends, Heterogeneity in the Probability of Staying at Home
                       (a) Age                                                            (b) Gender




           (c) Educational Attainment                                                      (d) Income




                                           (e) Local Exposure to COVID-19




Note: Figures show weekly averages, of weekend days, of the probability of staying at home from the weekend of February 8th to
the weekend of May 23rd across certain characteristics. Panel (a) shows age; panel (b) shows gender; panel (c) shows whether
the individual has college information in Facebook; panel (d) shows the tercile of ZCTA-level median household income; and
panel (e) shows the tercile of county-level cases per resident as of March 15th.




                                                             54
           Figure A5: Weekdays, Heterogeneity in the Average Number of Tiles Visited
                       (a) Age                                                            (b) Gender




           (c) Educational Attainment                                                      (d) Income




                                           (e) Local Exposure to COVID-19




Note: Figures show the percent change in the weekly average, of weekdays, of daily tiles visited from the week of February 3rd
to the week of May 18th across certain characteristics. Panel (a) shows age; panel (b) shows gender; panel (c) shows whether
the individual has college information in Facebook; panel (d) shows the tercile of ZCTA-level median household income; and
panel (e) shows the tercile of county-level cases per resident as of March 15th.




                                                             55
           Figure A6: Weekends, Heterogeneity in the Average Number of Tiles Visited
                       (a) Age                                                          (b) Gender




           (c) Educational Attainment                                                   (d) Income




                                         (e) Local Exposure to COVID-19




Note: Figures show the percent change in the weekly average, of weekend days, of daily tiles visited from the weekend of
February 8th to the weekend of May 23rd across certain characteristics. Panel (a) shows age; panel (b) shows gender; panel
(c) shows whether the individual has college information in Facebook; panel (d) shows the tercile of ZCTA-level median
household income; and panel (e) shows the tercile of county-level cases per resident as of March 15th.




                                                           56
Table A2: Social Distancing by Demographics: Percent Reduction in Number of Tiles Visited
                                               Table 3: Social Distancing by Demographics

                                                                       DV: % Reduction - Bing Tiles Visited (Feb - Apr)

 Age Group
   35-54                                        1.073*** 0.986***                     1.012***
                                                  (0.104) (0.101)                      (0.101)
   55+                                          3.534*** 3.702***                     3.842***
                                                  (0.119) (0.112)                      (0.112)
 Female                                         9.577*** 10.036***                    10.285***
                                                  (0.084) (0.082)                      (0.082)
 Has College                                    7.347*** 6.825***                     6.233***
                                                  (0.085) (0.081)                      (0.081)
 Has iPhone                                     5.847*** 4.934***                     4.635***
                                                  (0.099) (0.098)                      (0.098)
 Has Tablet                                        0.141*    0.041                      -0.057
                                                  (0.079)   (0.078)                    (0.078)
 Zip Code Income
   Middle Tertile                               3.467***
                                                  (0.229)
   Top Tertile                                  9.432***
                                                  (0.226)
 County Cases/Pop
   Middle tertile                               8.387***
                                                  (0.204)
   Top Tertile                                  9.892***
                                                  (0.227)
 log(Friend Exposure)                                                      1.802***   1.585***    1.514***   1.455***     1.481***   1.473***
                                                                            (0.083)    (0.083)     (0.092)    (0.155)      (0.103)    (0.144)
 Zip Code FE                                                  Y               Y           Y
 Other Network Exposure FE                                                    Y           Y          Y          Y            Y          Y
 Zip Code x Age Group x Gender x Has College
                                                                                                     Y          Y            Y          Y
  x Has Tablet x Has iPhone
 College FE                                                                                                                             Y
 Sample                                                                                                      Weekend      Weekday    College
 R-Squared                                       0.009      0.018     0.015    0.020      0.154     0.155    0.156      0.172
 Sample Mean                                     15.640    15.640    15.641   15.641     15.801    -1.943    12.668    20.942
 N                                             6,804,168 6,804,167 6,803,761 6,803,761 6,400,738 5,808,187 6,309,820 2,616,959

 Note: Table shows results from regression 4. Each observation is an individual. The outcome in all columns is the percent
 reduction in average number of Bing tiles visited from the week of February 25th to March 2nd (prior to the pandemic)
 to April 14th to 20th. Column 1 includes controls for age groups, gender, whether the individual has college information
 in Facebook, whether the individual primarily accesses mobile Facebook from an iPhone, whether the individual has
 accessed Facebook from a tablet, the tercile of ZCTA-level median household income, and the tercile of county-level
 cases per resident as of March 15th. Column 2 adds ZCTA fixed effects, but maintains the individual level controls.
 Column 3 includes only the log of friend-exposure to COVID cases on March 15th; ZCTA fixed effects; and percentiles
 of friend-exposures (as described in equation 2) for median household income, population density and the share of the
 population living in urban areas. Column 4 adds back the individual-level controls from column 1. Column 5 adds fixed
 effects for every group constructed from interacting ZCTA, age group, gender, has college, has tablet, and has iPhone. In
 Column 6 the outcome is weekend movement and in column 7 the outcome is weekday movement. Column 8 limits to
 individuals that attended a college, limiting to colleges with more than 100 individuals, and adds a fixed effect for each
 individual college. Standard errors are clustered by ZCTA. Significance levels: *(p<0.10), **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01).




                                                                      57
     Figure A7: Percent Reduction in Average Number of Tiles Visited vs. Friend-Exposure




                                                         18
                        Reduction in Avg Daily Tiles (%)
                        12        14         16




                                                              0        1               2            3
                                                                  log(Friend Weighted Cases)

Note: Figure shows a binned scatter plot of the log of friend weighted friend-exposure to COVID on March 15th and the percent
reduction in average number of tiles visited from the week of February 25th to March 2nd (prior to the pandemic) to April
14th to 20th. The plot controls for fixed effects constructed from interacting ZCTA, age group, gender, has college information
in Facebook, has iPhone, and has tablet. It also controls for percentiles of friend-exposures (as described in equation 2) for
median household income, population density and the share of the population living in urban areas.




                                                                           58
                                  Table A3: Social
                                         Social        Distancing
                                                Distancing             and Other
                                                           and Other Measures          Exposure
                                                                              of Exposure

                                                                              DV: Δ Stay at Home (Feb ‐ Apr)

log(Friend Exposure)                            0.878***   0.521***               0.872***    0.875***    0.876***   0.872***   0.861***
                                                 (0.028)    (0.043)                (0.028)     (0.028)     (0.028)    (0.028)    (0.028)
log(Friend Exposure, Cases per 100k)                                   0.778***
                                                                        (0.029)
Share Friends China                                                               1.116***                                      1.075***
                                                                                   (0.090)                                       (0.089)
Share Friends South Korea                                                                     0.215***                          0.207***
                                                                                               (0.022)                           (0.021)
Share Friends Italy                                                                                       0.068***              0.053***
                                                                                                           (0.014)               (0.014)
Share Friends Spain                                                                                                  0.209***   0.200***
                                                                                                                      (0.022)    (0.022)
                                                           Friends
Sample
                                                           >100mi
Other Network Exposure FE                          Y          Y           Y           Y           Y            Y        Y          Y
Zip Code x Age Group x Gender x Has College
                                                   Y          Y           Y           Y           Y            Y        Y          Y
 x Has Tablet x Has iPhone
R‐Squared                                         0.175     0.229    0.175     0.175     0.175     0.175     0.175     0.175
Sample Mean                                      13.800    14.876   13.800    13.800    13.800    13.800    13.800    13.800
N                                              6,400,738 2,479,352 6,400,738 6,400,738 6,400,738 6,400,738 6,400,738 6,400,738
Note: Table shows results from regression 4, using alternative measures of friend-exposure to COVID-19. Each observation is
an individual. The outcome in all columns is the percent reduction in average number of Bing tiles visited from the week of
February 25th to March 2nd (prior to the pandemic) to April 14th to 20th. Column 1 is the same specification as column 5 of
Table 4. Column 2 limits exposure to only friendships with individuals in counties more than 100 miles away. The sample size
falls as we restrict to individuals with more than 100 such friends (as described in Section 2.1, we use a similar friend count
including all friends in our primary sample). Column 3 uses cases per 100k residents (instead of cases) to calculate friend-
exposure. Columns 4, 5, 6, and 7 add controls for the share of friends individuals have in China, South Korea, Italy, and Spain
respectively. Column 8 adds all four of these country controls at once. Standard errors are clustered by ZCTA. Significance
levels: *(p<0.10), **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01).




                                                                  59
Figure A8: Robustness: Effects of Network-Exposure to COVID-19 on Average Daily Tiles
Visited
                    (a) Weekdays                                                            (b) Weekends




                                            (c) Controlling for Exact College




Note: Figures show coefficients estimated using the difference-in-differences setup specified in equation 3 with the outcome
variable as the average number of Bing tiles visited. The outcome is measured on weekdays in panel (a) and weekends in
panel (b). Panel (c) limits to individuals that attended college, limiting to colleges with more than 100 individuals, and adds a
fixed effect for each individual college interacted with week. All specifications include fixed effects at the individual level as
well as the following groups interacted with week: ZCTA; age group; gender; has college information in Facebook; has iPhone;
has tablet; and percentiles of friend-exposures (as described in equation 2) for median household income, population density
and the share of the population living in urban areas. Standard errors are clustered by ZCTA.




                                                               60
        Table A4: Effects of Friend-Exposure by Month: ∆ Probability of Staying at Home
                          Table 9: Effects of Friend-Exposure by Months of Exposure: Δ Stay at Home

                                                                      Monthly Change in Δ Stay at Home
                                                       March          April          May              June        July

 Δ log(Friend Exposure + 1), March                    0.207***
                                                       (0.046)
 Δ log(Friend Exposure + 1), April                                    0.032
                                                                     (0.048)
 Δ log(Friend Exposure + 1), May                                                   0.460***
                                                                                    (0.073)
 Δ log(Friend Exposure + 1), June                                                                0.577***
                                                                                                  (0.089)
 Δ log(Friend Exposure + 1), July                                                                                0.076
                                                                                                                (0.089)
 Other Network Exposure FE                                Y             Y              Y               Y           Y
 Zip Code x Age Group x Gender x Has College              Y             Y              Y               Y           Y
  x Has Tablet x Has iPhone
 R-Squared                                             0.174           0.141         0.150          0.146        0.145
 Sample Mean                                          14.214          -0.923        -5.989         -1.068        0.679
 N                                                   6,688,448      6,579,359     6,169,176      5,848,722     5,456,303
Note: Table shows results from regression 8. Each observation is an individual. The outcome variable is the change in the
probability of staying home between the final weeks of a given month and the previous months’ final week: February 25-
March 2 for February; March 24-March 30 for March; April 21-April 27 for April; May 26-June 1; June 23-June 29; July 21-July
28. We consider changes by month. In all columns we control for interactions of age groups, gender, whether the individual
has a college listed on Facebook, whether the individual primarily accesses mobile Facebook from an iPhone, and whether
the individual has accessed Facebook from a tablet. We also control for fixed effects for percentiles of friend-exposures (as
described in equation 2) for median household income, population density and the share of the population living in urban
areas. In column 2, we include user fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by ZCTA. Significance levels: *(p<0.10),
**(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01). [Return to text]




                                                              61
             Figure A9: Heterogeneity of Friend Effect: Probability of Staying at Home
                        (a) Age                                                             (b) Gender




           (c) Educational Attainment                                                       (d) Income




                                           (e) Local Exposure to COVID-19




Note: Figures show coefficients estimated using the difference-in-differences setup described in Section 4 with the outcome
variable as the probability of staying at home. The heterogeneities interacted with exposure are: age in panel (a), gender in
panel (b), whether the individual has a college listed on Facebook in panel (c); the tertile of home ZCTA median household
income in panel (d); and the tertile of home county cases per resident as of March 15th in panel (e). All specifications include
fixed effects at the individual level as well as the following groups interacted with week: ZCTA; age group; gender; has
college; has iPhone; has tablet; and percentiles of friend-exposures (as described in equation 2) for median household income,
population density and the share of the population living in urban areas. Standard errors are clustered by ZCTA.




                                                              62
                Figure A10: Heterogeneity of Friend Effect: Average Daily Tiles Visited
                         (a) Age                                                               (b) Gender




            (c) Educational Attainment                                                         (d) Income




                                             (e) Local Exposure to COVID-19




Note: Figures show coefficients estimated using the difference-in-differences described in Section 4 with the outcome variable
as the average daily tiles visited. The heterogeneities interacted with exposure are: age in panel (a), gender in panel (b),
whether the individual has a college listed on Facebook in panel (c); the tertile of home ZCTA median household income in
panel (d); and the tertile of home county cases per resident as of March 15th in panel (e). All specifications include fixed effects
at the individual level as well as the following groups interacted with week: ZCTA; age group; gender; has college; has iPhone;
has tablet; and percentiles of friend-exposures (as described in equation 2) for median household income, population density
and the share of the population living in urban areas. Standard errors are clustered by ZCTA.




                                                                63
          Table A5: Heterogeneity   ofofFriend-Exposure
                          Heterogeneity                        Effects:
                                         Network-Exposure Effects - %Δ BingAverage
                                                                            Tiles VisitedDaily Tiles Visited

                                                                              %Δ Bing Tiles Visited

log(Friend Exposure) x I(Age < 35)                   1.942***
                                                      (0.146)
log(Friend Exposure) x I(Age 35-55)                  1.860***
                                                      (0.114)
log(Friend Exposure) x I(Age > 55)                   0.535***
                                                      (0.123)
log(Friend Exposure) x Female                                    1.125***
                                                                  (0.100)
log(Friend Exposure) x Male                                      1.971***
                                                                  (0.123)
log(Friend Exposure) x College                                               2.030***
                                                                              (0.107)
log(Friend Exposure) x No College                                            1.006***
                                                                              (0.114)
log(Friend Exposure) x Zip Income First Tertile                                            0.576***
                                                                                            (0.136)
log(Friend Exposure) x Zip Income Second Tertile                                           1.289***
                                                                                            (0.122)
log(Friend Exposure) x Zip Income Third Tertile                                            2.990***
                                                                                            (0.135)
log(Friend Exposure) x County Cases First Tertile                                                     0.926***
                                                                                                       (0.104)
log(Friend Exposure) x County Cases Second Tertile                                                    2.429***
                                                                                                       (0.183)
log(Friend Exposure) x County Cases Third Tertile                                                     3.087***
                                                                                                       (0.168)
log(Friend Exposure - Rank 1 - 25)                                                                                 0.463***
                                                                                                                    (0.058)
log(Friend Exposure - Rank 26 - 50)                                                                                   0.097
                                                                                                                    (0.060)
log(Friend Exposure - Rank 51 - 75)                                                                                  -0.062
                                                                                                                    (0.059)
log(Friend Exposure - Rank 76 - 100)                                                                                0.139**
                                                                                                                    (0.059)
Other Network Exposure FE                               Y             Y         Y              Y          Y            Y
Zip Code x Age Group x Gender x Has College             Y             Y         Y              Y          Y            Y
 x Has Tablet x Has iPhone
R-Squared                                              0.154      0.154        0.154        0.154       0.154        0.156
Sample Mean                                           15.801      15.801      15.801        15.801     15.801        17.436
F Test (Rank 1-25 = Rank 76-100)                                                                                   13.393***
N                                                    6,400,738   6,400,738   6,400,738    6,400,738   6,400,738    5,684,469

Note: Table shows results from regressions of friend-exposure to COVID-19 on March 15th, interacted with individual charac-
teristics, on the percentage change in average tile movement. Each observation is an individual. Friend-exposure is interacted
with age groups in rows 1-3; gender in rows 4-5; whether the individual has a college listed in Facebook in rows 6-7; zip-level
median household income in rows 8-10; county-level cases of COVID-19 in rows 11-13; and friend rank (i.e. a measure for how
close friends are) in rows 14-16. All columns include controls for percentiles of friend-exposures (as described in equation 2)
for median household income, population density and the share of the population living in urban areas. All columns include
fixed effects for every group constructed from interacting ZCTA, age group, gender, has college, has tablet, and has iPhone.
Standard errors are clustered by ZCTA. Significance levels: *(p<0.10), **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01). [Return to text]




                                                                 64
                                  Table 1B:
                     Table A6: Summary      Summary Statistics
                                         Characteristics       Posts Sample
                                                            - Posting  Behavior Sample

                                           Mean          SD           P10         P25          P50         P75          P90
  Age                                       42.40       15.96           24         29          40           53         64
  Female                                     0.58        0.49            0          0          1             1          1
  Has College                                0.60        0.49            0          0          1             1          1
  Zip Code Income                         $61,284     $23,993        $36,729    $44,902     $55,662      $72,704     $94,000
  Has iPhone                                 0.59        0.49            0          0          1             1          1
  Has Tablet                                 0.47        0.50            0          0          0             1          1
  Number of Friends                        564.85      341.16          196        289         477          776        1103
  Friend Exposure to Cases                  10.31       19.68         0.78        1.84       4.55         10.83       25.16

  Number of Posts Feb                      16.12        64.85           0          0           1            8           34
   Average Sentiment (Feb)                 31.89        35.26         -3.41      3.50        29.91        58.00        83.00
  Number of Posts April                    20.83        74.95           0          0           2           13           47
   Average Sentiment (April)               29.94        34.21         -4.75      3.86        27.80        53.84        79.47
  Number Posts about Corona                0.724        4.687           0          0           0            0            2
   Average Sentiment Corona Posts          21.46        52.79        -52.75     -10.13       21.09        66.71        93.37
  Number Posts Support Lockdown            0.013        0.238           0          0           0            0            0
  Number Posts Oppose Lockdown             0.008        0.118           0          0           0            0            0


Note: Table presents summary statistics describing users in our sample underlying the analysis of public posts. Individual-
level characteristics include age, gender, whether the user has a college listed on Facebook, whether the user primarily accesses
Facebook mobile from an iPhone, whether the individual has accessed Facebook from a tablet, number of friends, friend-
exposure to COVID cases on March 15th, and patterns of mobility during the week of February 25th to March 2nd. The table
also includes information on the users’ home ZCTA 2018 median household income.




                                                                65
                                Table 1C:
                   Table A7: Summary      Summary Statistics
                                       Characteristics       Group Sample
                                                         - Group    Membership Sample

                                            Mean           SD       P10          P25         P50         P75         P90
Age                                          41.97       16.01        24          29          39         53           64
Female                                       0.57         0.50         0           0          1           1            1
Has College                                  0.59         0.49         0           0          1           1            1
Zip Code Income                            $63,798     $26,081     $36,954     $45,848     $57,600     $76,544     $99,328
Has iPhone                                   0.61         0.49         0           0          1           1            1
Has Tablet                                   0.43         0.50         0           0          0           1            1
Number of Friends                           502.52      319.56       177         252         410         676        1003
Friend Exposure to Cases                     12.42       22.17      0.91        2.23        5.64        13.77       31.75
Number Groups (Feb)                         33.03       57.89          3           8          18          38          73
Has Any Groups (Feb)                        0.98         0.13          1           1          1            1           1
Number Anti-Lockdown Groups (April)         0.014       0.133          0           0          0            0           0
Has Anti-Lockdown Group (April)             0.012       0.110          0           0          0            0           0

Note: Table presents summary statistics describing users in our sample underlying the analysis of group memberships.
Individual-level characteristics include age, gender, whether the user has a college listed on Facebook, whether the user pri-
marily accesses Facebook mobile from an iPhone, whether the individual has accessed Facebook from a tablet, number of
friends, friend-exposure to COVID cases on March 15th, and patterns of mobility during the week of February 25th to March
2nd. The table also includes information on the users’ home ZCTA 2018 median household income.




                                                             66
             A8: Heterogeneity
       TableHeterogeneity               of Friend-Exposure
                          of Friend-Exposure                        Effects
                                             Effects on Posts + Groups        - Own Age
                                                                       - Own Characteristics    / Gender
                                                                                             - Age / Gender / /  College
                                                                                                              College

                                                    % Posts about      % Corona-Posts      Δ Sentiment All    Member "Reopen
                                                       Corona          Opp. Distancing          Posts            Group"

 log(Friend Exposure) x I(Age < 35)                   0.209***           -1.650***            -0.075**           -0.034***
                                                       (0.007)            (0.416)              (0.033)            (0.006)
 log(Friend Exposure) x I(Age 35-55)                  0.307***           -2.185***            -0.081**           -0.210***
                                                       (0.007)            (0.287)              (0.033)            (0.009)
 log(Friend Exposure) x I(Age > 55)                   0.213***           -1.572***           -0.143***           -0.127***
                                                       (0.006)            (0.384)              (0.039)            (0.007)
 Other Network Exposure FE                                Y                   Y                   Y                  Y
 Zip Code x Age Group x Gender x Has College              Y                   Y                   Y                  Y
  x Has Tablet x Has iPhone
 R-Squared                                             0.060                0.445               0.118              0.074
 Sample Mean                                           1.755               35.979              -1.823              1.216
 N                                                   34,528,373           277,776            10,777,790         119,145,833
                                                    % Posts about      % Corona-Posts      Δ Sentiment All    Member "Reopen
                                                       Corona          Opp. Distancing          Posts            Group"

 log(Friend Exposure) x Female                        0.197***           -1.536***           -0.174***           -0.060***
                                                       (0.006)            (0.262)             (0.028)             (0.006)
 log(Friend Exposure) x Male                          0.319***           -3.074***             0.034             -0.216***
                                                       (0.007)            (0.388)             (0.034)             (0.008)
 Other Network Exposure FE                                Y                   Y                   Y                  Y
 Zip Code x Age Group x Gender x Has College              Y                   Y                   Y                  Y
  x Has Tablet x Has iPhone
 R-Squared                                             0.060                0.445               0.118              0.074
 Sample Mean                                           1.755               35.979              -1.823              1.216
 N                                                   34,528,373           277,776            10,777,790         119,145,833
                                                    % Posts about      % Corona-Posts      Δ Sentiment All    Member "Reopen
                                                       Corona          Opp. Distancing          Posts            Group"
 log(Friend Exposure) x College                       0.352***           -2.281***           -0.122***           -0.171***
                                                       (0.007)             (0.258)            (0.030)             (0.007)
 log(Friend Exposure) x No College                    0.124***            -0.838**            -0.058*            -0.082***
                                                       (0.005)             (0.399)            (0.031)             (0.000)

 Other Network Exposure FE                                Y                   Y                   Y                  Y
 Zip Code x Age Group x Gender x Has College              Y                   Y                   Y                  Y
  x Has Tablet x Has iPhone
 R-Squared                                             0.060                0.445               0.118              0.074
 Sample Mean                                           1.755               35.979              -1.823              1.216
 N                                                   34,528,373           277,776            10,777,790         119,145,833

Note: Table shows results from regressions of friend-exposure to COVID-19 on March 15th, interacted with individual charac-
teristics, on a number of outcomes. Each observation is an individual. Friend-exposure is interacted with age groups in rows
1-3; gender in rows 4-5; and whether the individual has a college listed in Facebook in rows 6-7. The outcomes in columns 1-2
are the change in probability of staying at home and the percent reduction in the average number of tiles visited, respectively,
from the week of February 25 - March 2 (prior to the pandemic) to April 14 - 20. The outcome in column 3 is the percentage
of individual posts that are about COVID-19. In column 4 it is the percentage of pro- or anti-distancing posts that are anti-
distancing. In column 5 it is the change in the average sentiment of the posts from February 3 - 23 to April 6 - 26. In column 6
it is whether the individual, as of June 28, was a member of a ‘Reopen’ Facebook group. Post and group classifications are de-
fined in Appendix C. All columns include controls for percentiles of friend-exposures (as described in equation 2) for median
household income, population density and the share of the population living in urban areas. All columns include fixed effects
for every group constructed from interacting ZCTA, age group, gender, has college, has tablet, and has iPhone. Standard errors
are clustered by ZCTA. Significance levels: *(p<0.10), **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01).



                                                              67
       Table A9:  Heterogeneity of Friend-Exposure Effects - Own Income / Local Cases
             Heterogeneity of Friend-Exposure Effects on Posts + Groups - Own Characteristics - Income / Local Cases

                                                      % Posts about   % Corona-Posts    Δ Sentiment All   Member "Reopen
                                                         Corona       Opp. Distancing        Posts           Group"

 log(Friend Exposure) x Zip Income First Tertile        0.163***        -2.155***           -0.034           -0.080***
                                                         (0.007)         (0.377)           (0.033)            (0.011)
 log(Friend Exposure) x Zip Income Second Tertile       0.216***        -1.792***         -0.101***          -0.136***
                                                         (0.007)         (0.335)           (0.034)            (0.012)
 log(Friend Exposure) x Zip Income Third Tertile        0.404***        -1.884***         -0.172***          -0.185***
                                                         (0.010)         (0.338)           (0.040)            (0.014)
 Other Network Exposure FE                                  Y                Y                 Y                 Y
 Zip Code x Age Group x Gender x Has College                Y                Y                 Y                 Y
  x Has Tablet x Has iPhone
 R-Squared                                               0.060            0.445              0.118             0.074
 Sample Mean                                             1.755            35.979            -1.823             1.216
 N                                                     34,528,373        277,776          10,777,790        119,145,833
                                                      % Posts about   % Corona-Posts    Δ Sentiment All   Member "Reopen
                                                         Corona       Opp. Distancing        Posts           Group"
 log(Friend Exposure) x County Cases First Tertile      0.190***        -1.904***         -0.086***          -0.065***
                                                         (0.006)         (0.294)           (0.028)            (0.012)
 log(Friend Exposure) x County Cases Second Tertile     0.392***        -2.084***           -0.047           -0.183***
                                                         (0.013)         (0.422)           (0.050)            (0.012)
 log(Friend Exposure) x County Cases Third Tertile      0.356***        -1.855***         -0.168***          -0.123***
                                                         (0.012)         (0.399)           (0.046)            (0.011)
 Other Network Exposure FE                                  Y                Y                 Y                 Y
 Zip Code x Age Group x Gender x Has College                Y                Y                 Y                 Y
  x Has Tablet x Has iPhone
 R-Squared                                               0.060            0.445              0.118             0.074
 Sample Mean                                             1.755            35.979            -1.823             1.216
 N                                                     34,528,373        277,776          10,777,790        119,145,833

Note: Table shows results from regressions of friend-exposure to COVID-19 on March 15th interacted with various ZCTA-
level characteristics on a number of outcomes. Each observation is an individual. Friend-exposure is interacted with
tertiles of ZCTA median household income in rows 1-3; and tertiles of county cases per resident as of March 15th in rows
4-6. The outcomes in columns 1-2 are the change in probability of staying at home and the percent reduction in the average
number of tiles visited, respectively, from the week of February 25 - March 2 (prior to the pandemic) to April 14 - 20. The
outcome in column 3 is the percentage of individual posts that are about COVID-19. In column 4 it is the percentage of
pro- or anti-distancing posts that are anti-distancing. In column 5 it is the change in the average sentiment of the posts
from February 3 - 23 to April 6 - 26. In column 6 it is whether the individual, as of June 28, was a member of a ‘Reopen’
Facebook group. Post and group classifications are defined in Appendix C. All columns include controls for percentiles
of friend-exposures (as described in equation 2) for median household income, population density and the share of the
population living in urban areas. All columns include fixed effects for every group constructed from interacting ZCTA,
age group, gender, has college, has tablet, and has iPhone. Standard errors are clustered by ZCTA. Significance levels:
*(p<0.10), **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01).




                                                                68
            Table A10: Heterogeneity of Friend-Exposure Effects - Friend Characteristics
                                         Table 7: Heterogeneity of Friend Effects - Friend Characteristics

                                                                             Share "Signed Posts"
                                                                                                                         Member "Reopen
                                                       Share Posts about          Opposed to      Δ Sentiment (Feb -
                                                                                                                         Group" by May 24,
                                                            Corona             Distancing (Feb -     Apr) All Posts
                                                                                                                               2020
                                                                                     Apr)
  log(Friend Exposure - Rank 1 - 25)                        0.061***               -0.360***                 -0.032**       -0.053***
                                                             (0.002)                 (0.149)                  (0.016)        (0.002)
  log(Friend Exposure - Rank 26 - 50)                       0.046***                 -0.299*                   0.013        -0.036***
                                                             (0.002)                 (0.160)                  (0.016)        (0.002)
  log(Friend Exposure - Rank 51 - 75)                       0.033***                -0.433**                   0.008        -0.053***
                                                             (0.002)                 (0.158)                  (0.017)        (0.002)
  log(Friend Exposure - Rank 76 - 100)                      0.022***                  -0.016                 -0.037**       -0.051***
                                                             (0.002)                 (0.159)                  (0.017)        (0.002)
  Percentiles of Total Number of Groups (Feb 2020)                                                                               Y
  Other Network Exposure FE                                     Y                      Y                        Y                Y
  Zip Code x Age Group x Gender x Has College                   Y                      Y                        Y                Y
   x Has Tablet x Has iPhone
  R-Squared                                                   0.060                   0.446                     0.122         0.074
  Sample Mean                                                 1.869                  35.319                    -1.869         0.012
  F Test (Rank 1-25 = Rank 76-100)                         184.345***                 2.180                     0.045         1.352
  N                                                        30,814,578               255,095                  9,482,790     108,911,020

Note: Table shows results from regressions of friend-exposure to COVID-19 on March 15th, calculated using limited friend
sets, on a number of outcomes. Each observation is an individual. Friend-exposure is calculated using only subsets friends
based on the strength of friendship connections. The outcomes in columns 1 and 2 are the change in probability of staying
at home and the percent reduction in the average number of tiles visited, respectively, from the week of February 25th to
March 2nd (prior to the pandemic) to April 14th to 20th. The outcome in column 3 is the percentage of individual posts that
are about COVID-19. In column 4 it is the percentage of pro- or anti-lockdown posts that are anti-distancing. In column 5
it is the change in the average sentiment of the posts from February 3rd through 23rd to April 6th through 26th. In column
6 it is whether the individual, as of June 28th, was a member of a ’Reopen’ Facebook group. Post and group classifications
are defined in Appendix C. All columns include controls for percentiles of friend-exposures (as described in equation 2) for
median household income, population density and the share of the population living in urban areas. All columns also include
fixed effects for every group constructed from interacting ZCTA, age group, gender, has college, has tablet, and has iPhone.
Standard errors are clustered by ZCTA. Significance levels: *(p<0.10), **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01).




                                                                        69
 Table A11: Summary Statistics of ZCTAs with High and Low Friend-Exposure to COVID-19


                                                           Low Friend-Exposure                High Friend-Exposure
                                                           Mean             SD                Mean             SD
Fraction Male                                               0.49           0.03                0.49           0.03
Fraction White                                              0.74           0.23                0.72           0.21
Fraction Black                                              0.12           0.18                0.13           0.18
Fraction Asian                                              0.05           0.08                0.06           0.09
Median HH Inc.                                           $65426.94       $24643.08          $64707.44       $28886.90
Management, Business, Science, Arts                         0.17           0.08                0.18           0.08
Service Occupations                                         0.08           0.02                0.08           0.03
Production + Transportation                                 0.07           0.03                0.06           0.03
Fraction Age <18                                            0.23           0.05                0.22           0.05
Fraction Age 18-24                                          0.09           0.03                0.10           0.07
Fraction Age 25-34                                          0.14           0.04                0.14           0.05
Fraction Age 35-44                                          0.13           0.02                0.13           0.02
Fraction Age 45-54                                          0.14           0.02                0.13           0.02
Fraction Age 55-64                                          0.13           0.03                0.13           0.03
Fraction Age 65-74                                          0.09           0.03                0.09           0.03
Fraction Age >= 75                                          0.06           0.03                0.07           0.03
Fraction High School / GED                                  0.20           0.07                0.17           0.07
Fraction Some College                                       0.20           0.05                0.19           0.05
Fraction College Degree                                     0.19           0.11                0.23           0.13
Population Density                                        1606.18         4122.32            1531.22         3490.32
Fraction High-Speed Internet                                0.80           0.11                0.80           0.11
Population                                               30175.11        21494.15           32923.65        20222.50
Mean Number of POIs                                       435.91          372.62             538.79          376.59
Number of ZCTAs                                            14079                              11880
Note: Table presents ZCTA-level summary statistics for the sample used in Section 5.3. Definitions of high- and low-exposure
areas are based on friend-exposure to COVID-19 as defined in equation 16. High-exposure ZCTAs are ZCTAs with friend-
exposure to COVID-19 above the median for corresponding county. Similarly, low-exposure ZCTAs are places with friend-
exposure below that median. Medians are defined based on the number of COVID-19 cases as of March 17. Data on covariates
is obtained from the 2014-2018 ACS data. [Return to text]




                                                            70
                            Figure A11: Coefficient Estimates for β 1t Equation 17
                                              (a) Fraction of Devices Home




                                   (b) Percentage Change Avg. Distance Traveled




Note: Figures show coefficient estimates based on equation 17. In Panel (a), the dependent variable is the fraction of devices
at home, while in Panel (b), the dependent variable is the percentage change in average distance traveled relative to the
month of January 2020. The unit of observation is ZCTA by week. Regressions include a rich set of controls: in addition to
ZCTA fixed effects and county fixed effects interacted with week indicators, we additionally control for a rich set of covariates
interacted with week indicators. These covariates are the fraction of people being male, the fraction of asian/black/white
people, median household income, the fraction of individuals working in service occupations, the fraction of individuals
working in production or transportation, the fraction of individuals working in management, arts or science, the fraction of
individuals with a high school degree, some college education and a college degree as well as the fraction of households with
high speed internet. We also include various age-related controls, i.e. the fraction of individuals 18 or younger, between 18
and 24, between 25-34, between 35-44, between 45-54, between 55-64, between 65-74 and above 75. All these control variables
are obtained from the most recent 5-year ACS (2014-2018). In addition, we also control for ventiles of friend-exposure to
other characteristics, namely income, population density (both from 2014-2018 ACS) and urbanity (from 2010 Census), again
interacted with week indicators. Standard errors are clustered at the ZCTA-level. [Return to text]




                                                               71
                            Figure A12: Total Number of Transactions by Week
                                       (a) Total Number of Transactions Made




                                                (b) Total Amount Spent




Note: Figures show variation in spending behavior over time using data from Facteus. In Panel (a) we present a time series
plot of the total number of transactions made by week in millions. In Panel (b) we show a time series plot of the total amount
spent in USD in millions.




                                                             72
C       Logic for Post and Group Classifications
To classify posts and groups in certain analyses, we use regular expression searches. Posts or groups are
flagged if they match one more of the regular expressions described.

C.1       Post Classification
We classify public Facebook posts made between February 3rd and May 3rd according to the regular ex-
pressions in Table B1. Posts that match any of “neutral-lockdwon”, “pro-lockdown”, or “anti-lockdown”
are classified as COVID posts.

                                Table B1: Posts Regular Expression Classification

                                                     Neutral Lockdown
                         %corona%                        %covid%                   %pandemic%
                           %sars%                   %#socialdistancing%            %lockdown%
                       %stay at home%

                                                        Pro Lockdown
                       %#staysafe%                    %#stayhome%              %#bendthecurve%
                     %bend the curve%               %#flattenthecurve%         %flatten the curve%
                     %#crushthecurve%               %crush the curve%           %#safeathome%

                                                        Anti Lockdown
                       %#liberate%                 %#endtheshutdown%   %#endthelockdown%
                       %#reopen%                    %#openamerica%     %#stoptheshutdown%
                   %#stopthelockdown%             %against%quarantine% %end the lockdown%
                   %end the shutdown%                 %open now%            %hysteria%
                    %open the states%               %openthestates%    %lockdown%dictator%
                  %lockdown%oppress%              %lockdown%tyranny%   %lockdown%liberty%
                  %lockdown%freedom%              %shutdown%dictator% %shutdown%oppress%
                  %shutdown%tyranny%               %shutdown%liberty% %shutdown%freedom%
                  %dictator%lockdown%             %oppress%lockdown% %tyranny%lockdown%
                   %liberty%lockdown%             %freedom%lockdown% %dictator%shutdown%
                  %oppress%shutdown%              %tyranny%shutdown% %liberty%shutdown%
                  %freedom%shutdown%

                Note: Table presents the regular expressions used to flag posts about COVID. % is a wildcard
                capturing any number of characters (including 0).


C.2       ‘Reopen Group’ Classification
We classify public Facebook groups as a ‘Reopen Group’ if it was created between March 1st and June
28th, 2020 and has a (case-insensitive) name that matches one of the following regular expressions:29
“%reopen%”, “%liberate%”, “%end%shutdown%”, “%end%lockdown%”, “%against%quarantine%.”
29 %   is a wildcard capturing any number of characters (including 0).


                                                               73
