                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              WHAT MAKES A TAX EVADER?

                                      Marcelo L. Bergolo
                                         Martin Leites
                                     Ricardo Perez-Truglia
                                         Matias Strehl

                                      Working Paper 28235
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28235


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020




We are thankful for excellent comments from colleagues and seminar discussants. We thank the
Direccion General Impositiva de Uruguay and Centro de Estudios Fiscales for their support. This
research project received the financial support from the Laboratorio de Politicas Publicas (OPP,
Uruguay). The survey was pre-registered in the AEA RCT Registry (\#0004108). The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Marcelo L. Bergolo, Martin Leites, Ricardo Perez-Truglia, and Matias Strehl. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What Makes a Tax Evader?
Marcelo L. Bergolo, Martin Leites, Ricardo Perez-Truglia, and Matias Strehl
NBER Working Paper No. 28235
December 2020
JEL No. H24,H26,K42,Z1,Z13

                                         ABSTRACT

Why do some individuals choose to evade taxes while others do not? One popular view is that
some individuals cheat on their taxes because they are more dishonest, selfish, or perceive
different social norms. There is, however, little direct evidence on this matter. In collaboration
with the national tax agency in Uruguay, we address this question using a combination of surveys
and administrative records. Leveraging a unique institutional setting, we measure individual-level
evasion choices. We document significant variation in evasion decisions across individuals. For a
subsample of 6,078 taxpayers, we use survey questions and incentivized laboratory games to
measure traits such as honesty, selfishness, and perceived social norms. We find that these
individual traits have some power to predict who evades taxes, but other factors, such as the
environment, play a much bigger role.

Marcelo L. Bergolo                              Ricardo Perez-Truglia
Instituto de Economia (IECON)                   Haas School of Business
Universidad de La Republica                     University of California, Berkeley
1926 Gonzalo Ramirez                            545 Student Services Building #1900
Montevideo                                      Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
Uruguay                                         and NBER
and IZA                                         ricardotruglia@berkeley.edu
mbergolo@iecon.ccee.edu.uy
                                                Matias Strehl
Martin Leites                                   Instituto de Economia (IECON)
Instituto de Economia (IECON)                   Universidad de La Republica
Universidad de La Republica                     1926 Gonzalo Ramirez
1926 Gonzalo Ramirez                            Montevideo, Uruguay
Montevideo                                      Uruguay
Uruguay                                         matias.strehl@gmail.com
mleites@iecon.ccee.edu.uy




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28235
1     Introduction
Some individuals evade taxes, whereas others do not. What drives these differences in behav-
ior? One popular view is that individual traits, such as dishonesty or selfishness, or individual
beliefs, such as perceived social norms, make some people more likely to evade taxes. There
is, however, little direct evidence on this matter. The lack of evidence is perhaps not surpris-
ing given the data challenges. Measuring evasion choices at the individual level is difficult
enough (Slemrod, 2019). In addition, we need to measure the values and beliefs of the same
taxpayers. We collaborated with Uruguay’s national tax agency and collected all the neces-
sary data to address this question. We provide evidence that values and beliefs have some
power to predict who are the tax evaders, but other factors, such as the environment, play a
much bigger role.
    The first part of the study presents an individual-level measure of tax evasion from a
natural, high-stakes context. Measuring tax evasion is challenging, especially at the indi-
vidual level. With rare exception, the government cannot observe what individuals should
have declared on their tax forms; thus, researchers cannot observe it either (Slemrod, 2019).1
We exploit a unique feature of the institutional setting to observe evasion decisions at the
individual level.
    Our main measure of tax evasion is based on the under-reporting of wages. Taxpayers pay
income taxes for each additional dollar that they report in wages and therefore have incentive
to under-report wages to reduce their tax liability. As in most of the world, individual
taxpayers in Uruguay must file an annual tax return to declare their incomes, deductions, and
tax withholdings. Uruguay also uses a third-party reporting system wherein employers send
information (e.g., wages paid) directly to the tax authority. In some countries, like the United
States, the tax agency automatically corrects any discrepancies between the individual tax
return and the third-party report.2 In developing countries, however, there is more limited
enforcement of third-party reporting (Brockmeyer and Hernandez, 2016; Carrillo et al., 2017).
As a result, even when the information is subject to third-party reporting, taxpayers can still
evade taxes by under-reporting their wages. We compare the information reported by the
taxpayers with the information reported by their employers and use the gaps to identify which
taxpayers under-report their wages and by how much (Best, 2014; Bergolo et al., 2019).
1
  Some exceptions include the subset of individuals who are audited each year, from which one can observe the
  evasion amounts that were detected in the audit. However, only a small, non-random minority of individuals
  are audited, so it is possible that these audits correspondingly uncover only a small and non-random share
  of the amount evaded.
2
  For example, if a U.S. employee under-reports the wage relative to the employer’s third-party report, the
  Internal Revenue Service automatically corrects the individual’s tax form, updates the tax amount, and
  notifies the taxpayer of the correction.



                                                     2
    We study all 151,565 taxpayers in the country who earned wages and filed a tax return in
2016.3 We find that 15.5% of them under-reported their wages by between 1% and 9%. On
average, the individuals who under-reported wages evaded about 17% of their tax liability
(equivalent to U$D 344). We provide evidence that these discrepancies are not due to random
mistakes. For example, we show that income under-reporting is much more likely than over-
reporting: whereas 15.5% of taxpayers under-report wages, only 3.9% over-report their wages.
The disproportionate amount of mistakes in the direction that best serves the taxpayers’
financial interest suggests that wage under-reporting is largely intentional.
    Albeit suggestive, this evidence does not prove that the misreporting corresponds to
tax evasion. For example, it is possible that employees make random mistakes and that
downward mistakes are more likely than upward mistakes. We leverage a unique feature of
the institutional context to rule out this confound. In addition to the incentive to misreport
their wages, employees have incentives to misreport two other items in the tax form: tax
deductions and tax withholdings. However, while employees must under-report wages to
lower their tax liability, they must over-report their deductions and withholdings if they
want to evade taxes. We find systematic over-reporting of deductions and withholdings.
The fraction of individuals who over-report deductions (15.8%) is substantially higher than
the fraction who under-report (2.2%). Likewise, the share of over-reporters of withholdings
(22.7%) is substantially larger than the share of under-reporters (2.9%).4 The fact that
taxpayers under-report wages but over-report deductions and withholdings indicates that
the misreporting is largely due to intentional tax evasion and not just random mistakes.
    While the margin of tax evasion that we study is not the main source of tax evasion
in the country, it is arguably best suited for studying differences in evasion choices across
individuals. For example, business owners can under-report revenues or over-report costs to
evade value added taxes (VAT). However, the decision to evade VAT may be largely related
to the strength of tax enforcement in the industry. For example, businesses selling to final
consumers may have an easier time under-reporting revenue than those selling primarily to
other businesses (Pomeranz, 2015). As a result, the choice to evade VAT probably says more
about the strength of the paper trail in that industry than about the preferences of the
business owner. In contrast, the strength of third-party reporting is arguably the same for
all employees in the country, and thus wage under-reporting is best suited for inter-personal
comparisons.
    One useful feature of our data is that we observe multiple decisions from the same tax-
3
  In Uruguay, workers who earn only wages and salaries are exempt from filing a tax declaration according
  to the tax code. Thus, in 2016, only 16% of all (registered) workers filed a tax return.
4
  For simplicity, these results on deduction and withholding misreporting are based on the sample of taxpayers
  who report their wages truthfully. See Section 3 for more details.


                                                      3
payer. In a given tax form, the taxpayer can choose to misreport on several different items
(wages, deductions, and withholdings). Moreover, the taxpayer must file tax returns annu-
ally and, as a result, faces the same opportunities to misreport year after year. We provide
evidence that these evasion choices are correlated. Individuals who cheat on wages are more
likely to cheat on tax deductions on the same tax form. Moreover, individuals who cheat on
wages one year are more likely to cheat on wages on the next year’s tax form. This evidence
suggests some room for persistent individual traits, such as tax morale, to explain evasion
choices across individuals.
    We designed a survey to measure individual preferences, values, and beliefs that could
explain differences in evasion choices across taxpayers. We collected lab measures and survey
measures. The lab measures include a series of 12 laboratory games with real financial
incentives. The games measure distinct individual traits that could be important for the
decision to evade taxes, including altruism (measured using the variants of the dictator
game), willingness to contribute to public goods (the public goods game), aversion to tax
evaders (a variant of the dictator game), and honesty (the dice game), among others. In turn,
the 12 survey measures include (mostly non-incentivized) questions that are widely used in
the social sciences, such as a standard question on tax morale (i.e., whether it is never,
sometimes, or always justifiable to evade taxes), the perceived rate of evasion, preferences
for redistribution, and trust in government. We validate these lab and survey measures by
showing that, on average, the responses in our survey are consistent with those of benchmark
studies.
    From the universe of 151,565 wage earners, we invited a subset of 68,208 taxpayers to
participate in the survey via email. A total of 6,078 individuals completed the survey, im-
plying a response rate of 8.9%. The survey respondents are similar to non-respondents in
all observable characteristics. Most importantly, survey respondents and non-respondents
are similar in their rates of under-reporting of wages and over-reporting of deductions and
withholdings. By merging the survey responses with data from administrative records, we
can study whether the lab and survey have power to predict who are the tax evaders.
    We find that the lab and survey measures have some power to predict who evaded taxes,
but to a limited extent. Although some of the correlations between tax evasion and the
lab and survey measures are statistically significant, they tend to be economically small
and, in many cases, precisely estimated around zero. Some measures that we expected to
be highly correlated to evasion choices, such as the survey question on tax morale, have
correlation coefficients precisely estimated around zero; other measures, such as altruism,
have significant correlations but not with the expected sign.
    Tax morale is the most widely used variable in the literature on tax evasion, and thus we


                                             4
expected it to be most correlated with actual tax evasion. Around 24.2% of taxpayers say that
it is sometimes or always justifiable to evade taxes (i.e., they have low tax morale), compared
with 75.8% who say it is never justifiable to evade taxes. The administrative data show
similar rates of wage under-reporting for these two groups: 14.0% vs. 13.4%, respectively.
The correlation coefficient between the survey measure of tax morale and actual tax evasion
is close to zero (-0.007), statistically insignificant (p-value=0.613), and precisely estimated:
according to the 95% confidence interval (CI), we can rule out a correlation below -0.032.
     Some of the other lab measures that we expected to be most closely related to tax eva-
sion have correlations that are precisely estimated around zero and are statistically insignif-
icant. The correlation with respect to the measure of aversion to tax evaders is 0.008 (p-
value=0.541), the correlation with respect to the measure of dishonesty based on the dice
game is 0 (p-value=0.981), and the correlation with respect to the measure of cooperation
in the public goods game is 0.003 (p-value=0.812). The only lab measures that correlate
significantly with actual wage under-reporting are the three variants of the dictator game,
corresponding to generosity toward a stranger, a charity, or the government, with correlation
coefficients of 0.040 (p-value=0.002), 0.046 (p-value<0.001), and 0.048 (p-value<0.001), re-
spectively. Although not large in magnitude, these correlations are not negligible. The signs
of these correlations, however, contradict our initial hypothesis: we find that individuals who
are more altruistic are more likely to evade taxes. One potential explanation, although spec-
ulative, is that individuals who evade taxes feel the need to be generous to deal with their
guilt (Gneezy et al., 2014).
     The three survey measures related to wage under-reporting that have the strongest cor-
relation and most statistical significance are the perceived evasion of firms (correlation co-
efficient of 0.067, p-value<0.001), left-right political ideology (-0.062, p-value<0.001), and
desired tax progressiveness (0.058, p-value<0.001). These correlations indicate that individ-
uals who are more likely to evade are those who are politically left-leaning and who think that
firms evade taxes and that taxes should be more progressive. One possible interpretation for
this evidence, although speculative, is that individuals who perceive that the system is unfair
find it easier to justify their tax evasion.
     When considered jointly, the 24 lab and survey measures perform somewhat better than
chance in predicting who under-reported wages (area under the curve [AUC]=0.602). On
the one hand, the model based on lab and survey measures has a bit more predictive power
than a model based on the individual’s evasion choices in the previous year (AUC=0.564).
On the other hand, the lab and survey measures do somewhat worse than a model based
on a handful of demographic characteristics (AUC=0.666) and substantially worse than a
model based on the individual’s context, as proxied by the evasion behavior of coworkers


                                               5
(AUC=0.872).5 Thus, although preferences and beliefs may be somewhat helpful to identify
tax evaders, the taxpayer’s context seems to play a much bigger role.
    One potential interpretation of our evidence is that individual traits, such as dishonesty
or altruism, vary little across individuals and thus are not useful to explain heterogeneity
in tax evasion. Under this interpretation, factors such as tax morale can still be important
to explain aggregate evasion. Indeed, even if lab measures are not good at predicting who
evades more, they seem to do an arguably decent job at predicting aggregate evasion patterns.
For example, the literature on the dice game suggests that a minority of individuals act
dishonestly, and even those who lie prefer not to lie all the way (Abeler et al., 2019). We find
the same patterns when measuring under-reporting of wages and over-reporting of deductions
and withholdings in Uruguay: only a minority of individuals cheat on these items, and even
when they do, they do not take full advantage of the opportunity to cheat.
    An alternative interpretation for our evidence is that lab experiments and survey questions
do a bad job at identifying underlying differences in individual traits (Levitt and List, 2007;
Camerer, 2011), though we discuss some evidence against this interpretation. For example,
the measures of social preferences used in this study have been documented to be remarkably
stable over time (e.g. Chuang and Schechter, 2015). Moreover, the same or similar laboratory
and survey measures of social preferences and social norms have been found to predict other
forms of real-world behavior (e.g. Glaeser et al., 2000; Burks et al., 2016; Hanna and Wang,
2017).
    This study is most closely related to a literature on the role of tax morale in explaining
tax compliance. The hypothesis is that differences in evasion across individuals are driven by
factors such as preferences (e.g., honesty, altruism) and social norms (for a recent literature
review, see Luttmer and Singhal (2014)). Due to the unique challenges with causal identifi-
cation, there is no consensus in this literature. For example, in cross-country regressions, it
is difficult to distinguish the effect of tax morale from that of institutions. In the words of
Kleven (2014), “it is not clear whether the available measures of social and cultural motives
have an independent causal impact on economic outcomes, or if they are simply a byproduct
of those outcomes or of deeper institutions and policies driving the outcomes.”6
    To address the causal identification challenges, a recent but growing literature uses field
experiments that expose taxpayers to certain messages and then measure the effects of those
5
  This finding is consistent with a recent but growing literature documenting that contextual factors are
  important drivers of tax evasion. For example, evidence shows that individuals learn tricks on how to evade
  from their peers and accountants Chetty et al. (2013); Wilson (2020); Battaglini et al. (2020); Boning et al.
  (2020); Drago et al. (2020).
6
  Some attempts at causal identification include DeBacker et al. (2015), who compare the evasion of U.S. firms
  with ownership from more and less corrupt countries, and Halla (2012), who uses an instrumental-variable
  approach based on immigration data.


                                                      6
messages on subsequent tax compliance (Slemrod, 2019). These studies consistently find that
while enforcement messages (e.g., about audits and penalties) have a robust negative effect
on tax evasion, a variety of tax morale messages (e.g., a reminder of the moral obligation to
pay taxes) fail to reduce tax evasion (Slemrod et al., 2001; Blumenthal et al., 2001; Fellner
et al., 2013; Castro and Scartascini, 2015; Bergolo et al., 2017; Perez-Truglia and Troiano,
2018).7 The interpretation of this evidence, however, is highly subjective. On the one hand,
taxpayers may not react to messages of moral appeal because tax morale does not matter.
On the other hand, tax morale could be important, but these isolated moral messages are
just not strong enough to have a significant impact on behavior (Luttmer and Singhal, 2014).
In other words, if an individual’s tax morale is the product of decades of upbringing, culture,
and education, then reading a sentence in a letter about how it is “important to do your
part” is unlikely to make a significant imprint on tax morale and evasion choices.
    We contribute to this literature by taking a third, totally different approach that relies
on the combination of individual-level data on real-world tax evasion and data on taxpay-
ers’ beliefs and values. Our evidence suggests that, contrary to the tax morale hypothesis,
differences in evasion behavior across individuals are largely unrelated to individual prefer-
ences and beliefs. Rather, we find that basic demographic characteristics or the institutional
context do a much better job at identifying tax evaders. While our evidence does not rule
out that tax morale can be an important factor to explain aggregate tax evasion, it does cast
doubt on the ability of tax morale to explain differences in evasion choices across individuals.
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the institutional context.
Section 3 introduces the individual-level measure of tax evasion. Section 4 discusses the
survey design and implementation. Section 5 presents the main results. The last section
concludes.


2        Institutional Context and Data Sources
In this section, we present all the key features of the institutional context that are important
for the analysis.


2.1        Country Context
Uruguay is a typical country in a variety of relevant metrics, such as the size of the gov-
ernment, the prevalence of tax evasion, and social norms around tax evasion. Uruguay is
7
    Despite a lack of evidence of effects on tax evasion, some evidence indicates that moral appeals may affect
    behavior in other forms of tax compliance, such as late tax payments (Hallsworth et al., 2017) and tax
    appeals (Nathan et al., 2020).


                                                        7
a middle-high income country that scores low in corruption and high in human develop-
ment.8 Its tax revenue of 29.2% of the country’s GDP in 2018 is similar to averages for
Latin American (23.1%) and for Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD) (34.3%) countries.9 While cross-country comparisons of tax evasion are difficult,
the available data suggest that tax evasion in Uruguay is not out of the ordinary. For exam-
ple, according Gomez-Sabaini and Jimenez (2012), evasion of VATs was around 26% in 2008
in Uruguay, which is better than most Latin American countries and comparable to some
OECD countries.10 According to survey data, attitudes about tax evasion in Uruguay are
fairly typical. For example, according to the 2010–2013 wave of the World Values Survey,
77.2% of respondents from Uruguay agree that evading taxes is never justified, compared
with 68.2% for the other Latin American countries and 70.9% for the United States.
    The main focus in our paper is on personal income tax (Impuesto a la Renta de las
Personas Físicas, or IRPF, in Spanish), specifically when applied to labor income.11 Like
in most of the world, the schedule of tax rates is progressive: individuals making below
a minimum income have a 0% tax rate, and individuals in the highest tax bracket face a
marginal tax rate of 30%. In 2016, the IRPF represented almost 13% of total tax revenue,
the second-largest source of tax revenue after the VAT.12 Like most developing countries
(Jensen, 2019), personal income tax is characterized by a large income tax exemption floor.
For instance, in 2016, the tax exemption threshold was set at U$D 12,436.13 As a reference,
the minimum annual wage for 2016 was U$D 5,931, and the median labor income was U$D
11,848. Consequently, the burden of personal income tax relies mainly on individuals in
the middle-upper part of the gross labor income distribution (e.g., about 34% of registered
workers paid personal income tax in 2016).14
8
  Uruguay’s annual GDP per capita was U$D 17,278 in 2018 (https://datos.bancomundial.org/
  indicador/NY.GDP.PCAP.CD?locations=UY). Transparency International ranks Uruguay 21st out of 198
  countries (https://www.transparency.org/en/cpi/2019/results), and the United Nations Develop-
  ment Programme ranks Uruguay 57th among 189 countries in terms of human development (http:
  //hdr.undp.org/en/content/2019-human-development-index-ranking).
9
  https://www.oecd.org/tax/tax-policy/global-revenue-statistics-database.htm
10
   Gomez-Sabaini and Jimenez (2012) reports that Uruguay has the third-lowest VAT evasion rate among
   the nine Latin American countries included in the study. (Gomez-Sabaini and Moran, 2014) suggest that
   the corresponding rate for Italy would be about 22%.
11
   In addition to personal income taxes, Uruguay’s tax revenues are collected through other taxes, such as
   VATs and capital gains taxes.
12
   Own calculations based on data from the Central Bank of Uruguay and from the Internal Revenue Service.
13
   This amount and all other dollar amounts discussed in the paper use the purchasing power parity (PPP)-
   adjusted exchange rate from 2018.
14
   This figure was extracted from technical reports by Uruguay’s Tax Authority (https://www.dgi.gub.uy/
   wdgi/page?2,principal,Documentos-Informes,O,es,0,).




                                                    8
2.2     Tax Returns and Third-Party Reporting
Each year, individuals file an annual tax return via an electronic form (1102 form), which is
comparable to the 1040 forms filed by U.S. individuals and on which individuals must declare
all sorts of information. Most relevant for our analysis, individuals must report all sources of
earnings, including wage and self-employment incomes, as well as tax withholding and tax
deductions. Form 1102 then uses those inputs to automatically compute the taxpayer’s total
tax burden and generate the tax due or tax refund. Mainly due to the tax exemption floor,
most individuals are not required to file a tax return, though anyone can choose to do so.15
As a result, a minority of workers file a tax return each year, but these individuals represent
a substantial portion of tax revenues (e.g., in 2016, about 16% of all registered labor income
earners filed a tax return, representing almost 45% of the personal income tax revenues.
    As in the rest of the world, firms play an important role in individual taxation through
third-party reporting. Employers must submit electronic tax form 1144 to the tax agency.
This form includes information on their employees for tax purposes (similar to form W-2 in
the United States). It includes wage earnings, tax withheld, and tax deductions, and it must
be filed once a month.16 Additionally, employers are required to provide their employees
with an annual “income tax summary” that includes information on their total gross income,
tax deductions, and tax withholdings, which employees can use to prepare their tax returns.
Although this income tax summary must be provided by a deadline so that employees have
enough time to prepare their tax returns, the specifics on how the information is shared
are up to each firm. For example, some firms may send the information automatically to
employees, and other firms may require employees to log into a website to consult the tax
summary electronically.


2.3     Tax Deductions and Tax Withholding
Personal income tax is calculated based on two components: a tax part and a deduction
part. The difference between these components determines the personal income tax’s total
liability. The tax part is determined by applying a progressive schedule of tax rates on the
individual’s gross labor income, which includes all items related to wage and self-employment
income received by a taxpayer during a fiscal year. The deduction part includes a relatively
limited set of deductions allowed by the tax code, which are also subject to a progressive
deduction rate schedule. There are two types of deductions: itemized and non-itemized.
15
   Some individuals may choose to file a return to claim itemized deductions, such as rent or mortgage
   expenses. For more details, see Appendix E.2.
16
   The 1102 form and 1144 form reported by the employer must be completed using a unique online processing
   software program called PARS.


                                                    9
Itemized deductions include some personal deductions, such as for child care and housing
expenditures.17 This study focuses on non-itemized deductions, which include all social
security contributions (e.g., payroll taxes and mandatory health insurance contributions)
and which are proportional (i.e., a fixed rate) to the worker’s gross labor income. The rate is
set by law; for instance, the rate for taxpayers with dependent children is 21%.18 Individual
who opt to file an annual tax return must report the amounts of non-itemized components
to be deducted to calculate their tax liability. As previously explained, this information is
available on the income tax summary provided by the employer. For the sake of brevity, in
the rest of the paper we refer to non-itemized deductions as just tax deductions.
    Employers also play an important role in automatic income tax withholdings. Employers
use a pay-as-you-earn (PAYE) tax system to withhold income taxes from monthly wage
earnings.19 Amounts withheld are treated as advance payments of personal income tax due.
To calculate the amounts to be withheld, the employer uses information on monthly taxable
income, non-itemized deductions, and itemized deductions claimed by the employee on the
3100 form. The employer is required to remit the personal income tax withholdings monthly.


2.4     Employee-Employer Matching of Administrative Data
We combine various sources of administrative data provided by Uruguay’s Tax Authority.
We construct a panel of taxpayers in 2015–2016.20 Although we have data on self-employed
individuals, our analysis focuses on individuals who earn wage income because only that
group allows measuring of misreporting through their employers’ third-party reports. The
two main datasets are the individual tax returns (1102 form) and third-party reports from
employers’ statements (1144 form).21 These datasets are matched using (masked) national
identification numbers for individuals and firms. These unique identification numbers allow
us to merge information from other sources of administrative data too. We thus merge
individual-level data on year of birth and gender and firm-level data on number of employees,
sales, and industry activity code, among others. We also identify taxpayers’ coworkers using
the identification numbers of the firms.
17
   Itemized deductions must be voluntarily claimed by the taxpayer, either indirectly through the employer
   using a 3100 form or directly on the annual tax return (1102 form).
18
   This 21% rate is the sum of a 15% rate for payroll taxes and 6% rate for mandatory health insurance
   contributions.
19
   Similar systems are used in other countries, including the United States, Australia, New Zealand, and the
   United Kingdom (Slemrod, 2008).
20
   In the future, we may obtain data for more recent and earlier years.
21
   We merge the tax returns and employers’ third-party reports to obtain the employer and employee decla-
   rations of gross wage earnings, tax type, amount of tax deductions, and amount of income tax withheld
   by employers. We also have information on calculations of the tax part, deduction part, and the final tax
   owed (or credited back) for each taxpayer, which is available from the tax agency.


                                                    10
3     Measuring Tax Evasion at the Individual Level
3.1     Sample of Interest and Descriptive Statistics
Table 1 presents some descriptive statistics. The sample of interest is comprised of 151,565
taxpayers who earned their income purely through wages and who filed a tax form in 2016.22
For this sample, we study tax evasion by comparing the self-reported tax return to the
employer’s third-party report.23 Column (3) of Table 1 presents some descriptive statistics
for these 151,565 taxpayers. This sample is 44.8% female, 44 years old on average, and earns
average annual gross wages of U$D 36,450.24
    Table 1 also illustrates how the sample of interest is constructed and how it compares
to other taxpayers in the country. Column (1) corresponds to the universe of taxpayers in
Uruguay as of 2016. Comparing column (3) to column (1), the demographics (age and gender)
are similar, but the sample of interest (column (3)) is on average substantially richer than
the universe of taxpayers (U$D 36,450 vs. U$D 19,740). Moreover, column (2) corresponds
to the subsample who filed a tax return in 2016, regardless of whether they are employees or
self-employed. Comparing columns (3) and (2), the income differences between our sample
of interest and the universe of taxpayers stems largely from focusing on tax filers, because
only individuals making at least a certain amount are required to file a tax return.


3.2     Wage Under-Reporting
Our first measure of income tax evasion is the under-reporting of wages by employees. Tax-
payers have to pay income taxes for each additional dollar that they report in wages, and
therefore, they have the incentive to under-report wages to reduce their tax liability.25 Third-
party reporting, in contexts of high enforcement capacity, should deter employees from under-
reporting income for tax evasion (Kleven et al., 2011, 2016). For instance, in the United
States, if an employee under-reports the wage relative to the employer’s third-party report,
the Internal Revenue Service would automatically correct the individual’s tax form, update
22
   This sample excludes 24,607 individuals who, in addition to wage income, reported self-employed income.
   We exclude them because the comparison with third-party reports has limitations for this sample.
23
   We exclude 8,556 individuals who reported wage income on the tax return but for whom the information
   from the third-party report is missing in our dataset. By construction, it would be impossible for us to
   measure misreporting for this group.
24
   The average total gross income is slightly higher than the wage income because some individuals earn
   capital gains income.
25
   In addition to the “unilateral” misreporting by employees, employers might have incentives to under-report
   wages to reduce the burden of payroll taxes or social security contributions linked to their employee’s
   wages (and presumably split the savings with the employee). This type of “bi-lateral” under-reporting is
   not picked up by our measure of under-reporting. In this sense, our measure for wage under-reporting
   constitutes a lower bound for the true under-reporting of wages by employees.


                                                     11
the tax amount due, and then notify the taxpayer. Wage income subject to third-party
reporting is heavily enforced in developed countries, such as the United States (Internal
Revenue Service, 2016) and Denmark (Kleven et al., 2011). In developing countries, how-
ever, the effect of third-party reporting on tax compliance is constrained due to a weaker
administrative capacity (Carrillo et al., 2017), even under the presence of tax withholding
at the source (Brockmeyer and Hernandez, 2016).26 In the country we study, Uruguay, the
personal income tax had been introduced recently (in 2008). Thus, the tax administration
was still dealing with all sorts of pressing issues with its implementation. We study a specific
time period (2015–2016) during which the tax authority did not conduct a systematic and
automatic cross-check between the individual tax returns and the third-party reports.27 As
a result, employees could under-report wages to evade taxes during our sample period.28
    Figure 1.a presents the results for the discrepancies in wage reporting in 2016. Around
80.6% of wages reported by individuals coincide perfectly or almost perfectly (i.e., within
1%) with the third-party report of the employer (black bar). Around 15.5% of individuals
under-report their wages (red bars). That is, the reported wage is at least 1% below the
employer’s third-party report. Among those who under-report, the average under-reporting
is 6.1%. These discrepancies could reflect honest mistakes. However, we provide robust
evidence to the contrary. Figure 1.a shows that income under-reporting is much more likely
than over-reporting (blue bars): 15.5% of taxpayers under-report to some extent, but only
3.9% over-report their wages. The fact that taxpayers make disproportionate mistakes in
the direction that best serves their financial interest suggests that under-reporting is largely
intentional.
    That figure also shows that the significant fraction of individuals who under-report their
wages do not do it excessively: the median under-reporting is 4.8%, and the 25th and 75th
percentiles are 3.1% and 7.0%, respectively. One potential interpretation for this behavior
is that individuals engage in “motivated errors” (i.e., subjects may act as if they are making
a mistake, such as rounding a number or reporting the previous year’s wage, to make more
selfish choices (Exley and Kessler, 2019)).
26
   Third-party information also has limits as a compliance mechanism, even in environments with high tax
   enforcement, especially if taxpayers can adjust in margins that tax authorities cannot easily verify (Slemrod
   et al., 2017).
27
   There was a major change in 2017, when the tax authority introduced pre-filled tax returns. On the
   pre-filled return, items such as labor income or personal deductions of taxpayers are pre-filled based on
   information from third-party reports, which may reduce this form of tax evasion by affecting the perceived
   probability of detection by taxpayers or by making unethical behavior more salient. Unfortunately, we do
   not have access to data after 2016 as of now to test this conjecture.
28
   As in other forms of tax evasion, the evasion attempt could backfire. For example, if they were selected for
   an audit, the discrepancy with the third-party report could be detected, in which case the employee would
   have to pay the amount evaded as well as the corresponding fines. The audit probabilities and penalty
   rates, however, tend to be quite low (Bergolo et al., 2017).


                                                      12
    To put these magnitudes in perspective, we estimate how wage misreporting affects the
tax liability. To that purpose, we estimate the amount of tax misreported (i.e., the tax gap)
as the difference between the individual tax liability based on actual tax returns versus what
it would have been if, holding constant all the other items in the tax form, they had reported
exactly the wages reported by the employer. Figure 1.b shows the distribution of the tax
gap relative to the “true” tax liability. According to this analysis, 15.7% of individuals evade
taxes (i.e., they pay less in taxes than they should).29 Moreover, conditional on evading
something, they evade an average of 17% of their tax liability, which corresponds to U$D
344.30
    Finally, we can benchmark our results to other results from Pakistan showed in Best
(2014) in 2007–2012. Similar to our study, Best (2014) compares third-party reports to the
wages reported by the taxpayer in the tax form and classifies them as under-reporters if they
sub-declare by 0.25% or more. Best (2014) reports that 19.3% of employees from Pakistan
under-report wages and, conditional on doing so, they understate them by an average of
15.6%. In comparison, using the same 0.25% threshold, we find that 18.5% of Uruguayan
employees under-report wages by 5.2%, on average. The comparison between the Uruguay
and Pakistan contexts has several caveats, however, including differences in institutional
contexts, subject pools, and even how data are collected and processed. To the extent that
tax compliance tends to be higher in more developed countries, we arguably expect tax
compliance to be higher in Uruguay than in Pakistan. Thus, it is reassuring that despite all
of those differences, the extent of wage under-reporting reported for Uruguay is in the same
order of magnitude reported by Best (2014) for Pakistan.
    In contrast, the extent of wage under-reporting should arguably be much lower in devel-
oped countries than in developing countries. Factors such as automated tax filing systems
(e.g., pre-populated tax returns) and automatic cross-checking should make it difficult for
employees to under-report wages relative to the third-party reports. Consistent with that
conjecture, we observe that the degree of wage under-reporting seems to be much lower in
some developed countries. For example, Kleven et al. (2011) uses data from audits and re-
ports that the fraction of wage under-reporters was 1.4% in Denmark in 2006, which is an
order of magnitude lower than the levels of wage under-reporting in our data for Uruguay.
The evidence suggests that wage under-reporting is rare in the United States too (Johns and
Slemrod, 2010).31
29
   We define taxpayers as tax evaders if their tax gap exceeds 1%.
30
   The median is 11% with an inter-quartile range of [6.9%, 18.4%].
31
   Johns and Slemrod (2010) use data from a 2001 sample of audited taxpayers from the Internal Revenue
   Service national research program and report that the wages subject to third-party reporting and tax
   withholding were under-reported by an average of just 1%.



                                                  13
3.3    Deduction Over-Reporting and Withholding Over-Reporting
Albeit suggestive, this evidence is not proof that individuals under-report their wage earnings
to evade taxes. This under-reporting instead could be due to asymmetrical mistakes (i.e.,
employees may be more likely to make downward errors than upwards errors). We test this
hypotheses by exploiting the institutional context: although employees have incentives to
under-report wages, they also have incentives to over-report tax deductions and tax withheld,
which are both third-party reported. In the case of deductions, our analysis focuses on the
subset of non-itemized deductions (i.e., items that are proportional to the worker’s gross
labor income).
    Figure 1.c shows the results for deduction discrepancies. For the sake of simplicity, we
start with the subjects who report wages within 1% of the third-party report. The results on
deduction discrepancies from Figure 1.c are consistent with the results on wage discrepancies
from Figure 1.a: most individuals correctly report their deductions, but those who misre-
port do it disproportionately in the direction that reduces their tax bill. More specifically,
whereas 15.8% of individuals over-report their tax deductions, only 2.2% under-report them.
Figure 1.d is similar to Figure 1.c but focuses on misreporting of tax withholdings instead
of tax deductions. Like with tax deductions, but contrary to wages, individuals have an
incentive to over-report them. Figure 1.d shows that a significant fraction (22.7%) of indi-
viduals over-report their tax withholdings, but a much smaller share (2.9%) under-report tax
withholdings. In sum, the evidence shows that individuals make a disproportionate number
of “mistakes” in the direction that reduces their tax liability.


3.4    Evasion Choices Within and Across Tax Forms
One interesting feature of our data is that we observe the same taxpayer making multiple
decisions. Within a given year, the taxpayer can choose to lie on different items of the tax
return (e.g., under-report wages and over-report deductions). Moreover, a year later, the
taxpayer files another tax return and thus chooses again whether to evade on the same items
of the tax return. Whether the decision to evade is persistent can provide suggestive evidence
on the underlying roots of tax evasion.
    We start by showing that individuals who cheat on one item (wages) are disproportion-
ately more likely to cheat on the other item (deductions). Figure 2 illustrates the relation-
ship between the decisions to under-report wages and over-report deductions. Figure 2.a
corresponds to deduction misreporting among individuals who report their wages accurately
(reproducing Figure 1.c), and Figure 2.b corresponds to wage under-reporting. A signifi-
cant share of individuals over-report deductions in both samples. However, the probability


                                              14
of deduction over-reporting is much higher (37.3%) in the sample of individuals who under-
report wages (53.2% of under-reporters) than in the sample who accurately report their wages
(15.8%).
    Next, we show that individuals who cheat one year are significantly more likely to cheat
the following year. Figure 3 shows the same evasion decision (wage misreporting) for the same
individual but over different years. This sample is based on the subset of individuals who
filed tax returns and were pure wage earners in both 2015 and 2016. Figure 3.a corresponds
to the subsample (79.6%) of individuals who reported wages accurately in 2015 according
to third-party reports, and Figure 3.b corresponds to the subsample (10.6%) who under-
reported their wage in 2015. The data show a significant persistence in these choices. For
example, among accurate reporters in 2015, 15.2% under-reported wages in 2016; among
under-reporters, however, a substantially higher share (26.5%) under-reported wages the
next year. The difference between these two is large, 11.7 percentage points (pp), and highly
statistically significant (p-value<0.001). The persistence across time and decisions indicates
that evasion choices are not purely random. Moreover, this evidence suggests that there is
some room for persistent individual traits, such as tax morale, to explain evasion choices
across individuals.


4     Survey Data
4.1    Survey Design: Overview
The survey is designed to be implemented with a sample of taxpayers who recently filed a tax
return. The English translation of the full survey instrument is included in Appendix B, and
the original Spanish version is in Appendix D. This survey was pre-registered in the Registry
for Randomized Controlled Trials operated by the American Economic Association (RCT ID
#0004108). The survey starts by collecting some background and demographic information
about the respondent and then elicits the lab and survey measures, described in detail in the
following sections.


4.2    Lab Measures
The respondent completes a series of laboratory games implemented as a series of incen-
tivized survey questions. Right before starting, respondents view a screen explaining how
the incentives work and emphasizing the importance of answering carefully and honestly be-
cause the games offer a real financial incentive: upon completion of the study, 50 respondents
will be randomly selected to have one of their choices “executed”. In other words, for each

                                             15
participant, one of their incentivized decisions will be randomly chosen, and the payouts will
be calculated based on that decision. For example, in the dictator game, if the first player
chooses to split $U1000 equally between herself and the second player, the researchers would
pay $U500 to each of them.32 For those who are not among the 50 chosen respondents, their
decisions remain hypothetical. The method of “executing” a random sample of choices is
a common feature in laboratory experiments. Moreover, there is direct evidence that the
probability with which each choice is “executed” does not matter as long as it is positive
(Carson and Groves, 2007; Charness et al., 2016). To make the real financial consequences
more salient, the following reminder message is displayed at the bottom of the screen for
each of the incentivized questions: “There is a chance that this decision will be executed and
therefore your choice could have real consequences.”
   We include the following adaptations of well-known laboratory games that are designed
to measure specific traits (e.g., altruism, honesty) that could affect the decision to evade
taxes.

         Evasion aversion: We designed this game specifically to measure attitudes towards
         tax evasion in an incentive-compatible way. In this game, the subject (player A) decides
         how to assign money to two random taxpayers (player B and player C). Player A learns
         that player B thinks it is never acceptable to evade taxes and that player C thinks it
         is sometimes acceptable to evade taxes. Player A then decides how much of $U1,000
         to give to player B (with the remainder going to player C), anywhere from $U0 to
         $U1,000 in $U250 increments. Regardless of the decision, player A receives $U1,000.
         The share of the endowment given to player B, who thinks evading taxes is not justified,
         constitutes our incentivized measure of aversion to tax evaders. The hypothesis is that
         individuals who are more averse to tax evaders will be less likely to evade taxes.

         Public good: In the literature on tax compliance, the decision to evade taxes is
         typically modeled as the decision to become a free-rider in the context of a public
         good provision (Cowell and Gordon, 1988). Thus, we include a simple variant of the
         public good game. (player A) is paired with four random taxpayers. Each of the five
         players must decide how much of their $U1,000 endowment to contribute to the public
         good, $U0 to $U1,000 in increments of $U250, knowing that the total contribution will
         be doubled and then divided equally among the five participants. The share of the
         endowment contributed to the common pool measures the willingness to cooperate in
32
     Most games involve two players, but some games have more than two players. In all games, one or two
     players make decisions that affect the final allocation to two or more players. Games for which more than
     one player has choices are played sequentially. In all cases, the players and their choices are anonymous.



                                                       16
the provision of public good. The hypothesis is that individuals who contribute more
to the public good will be less likely to evade taxes.

Honesty: To check whether dishonest people evade taxes, we included a classic lab
measure of honesty: the dice game (Fischbacher and Föllmi-Heusi, 2013). The re-
spondent is asked to report the outcome of a (private) die roll and then receives a
reward that is proportional to the number reported, thus incentivizing to over-report
the number rolled. The hypothesis is that individuals who are more likely to lie in the
dice game are also more likely to evade taxes. Moreover, to serve as a benchmark, we
include a game where individuals can earn more by lying, but they have to lie about
information that is verifiable: we ask subjects whether they were born in an even or
odd year and explain that we will pay $U500 if they answered an odd year or $U2,500
if they answered an even year. Since we observe the year of birth in the administrative
records, we can measure directly whether the subjects are lying or not. The hypothesis
is that individuals would be much less likely to lie about information that is ex-post
verifiable such as the year of birth.

Giving to strangers: Another reason why individuals may choose not to evade taxes
is that they do not want to harm the individuals who benefit from the services that are
financed through those tax revenues. Thus, we include three variants of the dictator
game to measure the respondent’s generosity towards groups that can benefit from
tax revenues. In this first variant, the respondent chooses how much of a $U1,000
endowment to share with a stranger, on a scale from $0 to $U1,000 in increments of
$U250. The hypothesis is that individuals who are more generous will be less likely to
evade taxes.

Giving to charity: One could argue that the tax revenues do not benefit a random
stranger but are disproportionally likely to benefit the neediest in the population. In
this game, respondents can donate part of their endowment to a well-known nonprofit
organization that provides charitable education services. Players choose how much of
their $U1,000 endowment to donate on a scale from $U0 to $U1,000 in increments of
$U250. The hypothesis is that individuals who are more generous will be less likely to
evade taxes.

Giving to government: Some individuals may want to help people in need but do
not want to pay taxes because they believe that those tax dollars are spent inefficiently
(Alm et al., 2012, 1992). For this reason, we include yet another variant of the dictator
game in which the respondent can donate part of their endowments to government or


                                        17
to a nonprofit organization. To make it comparable to the donation to the charity,
the recipient of this donation is a government agency that provides education services
comparable to those provided by the charity. Respondents choose how much of their
$U1,000 endowment to donate on a scale from $U0 to $U1,000 in increments of $U250.
The hypothesis is that individuals who are more generous towards the government will
be less likely to evade taxes.

Trust: An honest taxpayer may mistrust others and suspect that they evade, which
results in the typical free-rider problem (Alm et al., 2012; Fehr, 2009). To capture
this phenomenon, we include the standard trust game (Berg et al., 1995). The subject
(player A) decides whether to invest all or none of a $U1,000 endowment in another
random player (player B). If player A does not invest, then both players get $U1,000
each. If player A invests, then player B receives $U4,000 and must choose how to split
the earnings (i.e., both receive $U2,000 or player B keeps the whole $U4,000). Choosing
to invest would indicate that the subject is willing to trust others. The hypothesis is
that individuals who are more trusting will be less likely to evade.

Ultimatum: Some studies argue that the decision to evade taxes may be related to
social preferences, such as fairness and equality concerns (Alm et al., 1995; Andreoni
et al., 1998). We thus include a series of games related to social preferences. First, we
include a simple version of the ultimatum game. The respondent (player A) is paired
with player 2 (a random taxpayer), who proposes how to split a $U1,000 endowment:
$U800 for player B and $U200 for player A. Player A may accept or reject the offer (in
which case both players get nothing). The choice to reject the offer measures whether
the subject cares about fairness. The hypothesis is ambiguous: depending on whether
the individual thinks that tax evasion increases or decreases fairness, the decision in
the ultimatum game may be positively or negatively correlated to tax evasion. An
individual who believes to have been treated unfairly by society may see tax evasion
as an opportunity to make things fair. On the other hand, an individual could see tax
evasion as intrinsically unfair to fellow citizens. Indeed, the hypothesis is ambiguous not
only for this ultimatum game but for all the following games regarding social concerns.

Inequality aversion: In this game, the respondent (player A) must choose between
two possible allocations for two random taxpayers (players B and C). Player A can
choose $U250 to player B and $U250 to player C, or an unequal split of $U250 to
player B and $U750 to player C. Regardless of the decision, player A receives $U1,000.
Choosing an equal split indicates that the player cares more about equality than about


                                         18
      efficiency. The hypothesis is, again, ambiguous: individuals who care more about
      equality may be more or less likely to evade.

      Inequity aversion: According to a meritocratic fairness view, more productive work-
      ers should receive higher income than less productive ones (Almås et al., 2020). In
      this game, the subject (player A) decides how to split an endowment of $U1,000, in
      increments of $U250, between two random taxpayers (players B and C). Player 1 learns
      that player B performed a simple task on the computer for 15 minutes while player C
      did nothing. Giving a higher share of the endowment to player B (the one who worked)
      would reveal that player A cares more about equity than about equality. The hypoth-
      esis is again ambiguous: individuals who care more about equity may be more or less
      likely to evade.

      Impatience: Because the potential costs of evading taxes (e.g., fines, lower provision
      of public goods) happen in the future, it is possible that less patient individuals are
      tempted to evade more. We measure impatience using the “staircase” procedure for
      intertemporal choice proposed in Falk et al. (2018): the subject makes up to five se-
      quential choices that measure his or her willingness to accept delaying a payment for
      a year (Appendix E.4 presents the full decision tree). The hypothesis is that more
      impatient individuals will be more likely to evade.

      Risk aversion: The standard model of tax evasion views it as a risky investment
      (Allingham and Sandmo, 1972). In this view, evading is akin to a risky lottery that
      has a high probability of paying out the evaded amount but also a certain probability
      of being costly (i.e., paying fines) if caught. Thus, the decision to evade may be me-
      diated by the individual’s degree of risk aversion. We measure risk aversion using the
      staircase procedure proposed in Falk et al. (2018): the subject must makes up to five
      sequential choices that allow us to identify the certainty equivalent for a risky lottery
      (Appendix E.4 presents the full decision tree). The hypothesis is that more risk-averse
      individuals will be less likely to evade.


4.3    Survey-Measures
We include a series of questions used in social science to measure values and beliefs (e.g., tax
morale, preferences for redistribution) that may predict the decision to evade taxes. Each
measure is summarized briefly below:

      Tax morale: We ask, “How justifiable do you think it is to evade taxes?”. Responses
      range from “never,” “sometimes,” and “always”. This type of survey question is the

                                              19
         most widely used in the literature on tax morale (Torgler, 2005; Cummings et al., 2006;
         Frey and Torgler, 2007; Halla, 2012). The hypothesis is that individuals who think it
         is sometimes or always justifiable to evade taxes will be more likely to do so.

         Workers’ evasion: We use a simple measure of descriptive social norms. After a brief
         explanation on how employees may under-report wages, we ask individuals to guess
         the percentage of employees who under-report their wages using bins from “0-10%” to
         “90-100%”. To encourage honest guesses, we include this and the following question
         as part of the incentivized games. Subjects are told that we will compare their guesses
         to the results from a recent academic study, and if they choose the correct option,
         they could win $U1,000. The hypothesis is that individuals who perceive high rates of
         wage under-reporting will be more likely to under-report themselves, presumably due
         to weaker perceived social norms.

         Firms’ evasion: In addition to perceptions about the evasion rates among employees,
         we also elicit the perceived evasion rate among firms. Since the VAT is the largest source
         of taxation for firms, we ask respondents to guess the average VAT that companies
         under-report. As with the previous question, we provide a potential $U1,000 reward
         for an accurate guess. The hypothesis is that individuals who perceive high evasion
         rates among firms will be more likely to evade taxes themselves, due to social norms or
         perhaps fairness concerns.33

         Trust in others: In addition to measuring interpersonal trust with a laboratory game,
         we also include the standard attitudinal survey question in a 3-point-scale used in the
         American General Social Survey and the World Values Survey: “Generally speaking,
         would you say that most people can be trusted, or that one can never be careful enough
         when dealing with others?” The hypothesis is that individuals who are more trusting
         will be less likely to evade taxes.

         Trust in government: Compared with interpersonal trust, trust in the government
         may be more important to foster tax compliance (Feld and Frey, 2002). We thus include
         the following question: “Would you say that the government can generally be trusted
         to act correctly?” The responses on a 5-point scale range from “never” to “always.”
         The hypothesis is that individuals who trust the government more will be less likely to
         evade taxes.
33
     Moreover, after eliciting these prior perceptions about workers and firms, we embed an information-
     provision experiment to create exogenous variation in the posterior beliefs. As we do not yet have access
     to the administrative data for the year after the survey, for now we can measure only the effects of this
     intervention on survey outcomes. Appendix E.8 presents details about the design and preliminary results
     from the information-provision experiment.

                                                       20
Government efficiency: Individuals may trust government but think that tax rev-
enue is wasted due to inefficiency. We thus include the question: “Do you think that
the government is efficient in the way it manages public resources?” The responses on
a 4-point scale range from “very inefficient” to “very efficient.” The hypothesis is that
individuals who think the government is efficient will be less likely to evade taxes.

Preferences for redistribution: Taxation plays a key role in the provision of public
goods and redistribution of income. It is therefore possible that individuals want to pay
their taxes only if they agree with the goal of redistributing income Castañeda et al.
(2020). We elicit the respondent’s agreement with the following statement on a 4-point
scale from “totally agree” to “strongly disagree”: “Governments should take steps to
reduce the income gap between rich and poor.” The hypothesis is that individuals who
support income redistribution should be less likely to evade taxes.

Left-Right Spectrum: It is possible that individuals do not want to evade taxes
for ideological reasons. For example, individuals who believe that taxation is ethically
wrong may not want to pay their taxes Doerrenberg and Peichl (2018). We use the
standard measure of a public opinion research question based on self-reported positions
on an 11-point scale with a middle point of 5: “In politics, we usually speak of left and
right. On a scale where 0 is the left and 10 is the right, where would you be located?”
The hypothesis is that individuals towards the right of the political spectrum may be
more likely to evade taxes.

Perceived progressiveness: Perhaps individuals do not want to pay taxes because
they do not agree with how the tax burden is distributed in the population. We adapt
a question used in Kuziemko et al. (2015) that elicits the average tax rate for three
steps of the economic ladder in the country: “In 2017, what percentage of their gross
personal income do you think that the following social groups actually paid in personal
taxes, on average?” We elicit the tax rate in the lower class (the bottom 20% of the
income distribution), the middle class (the middle 60% of the income distribution), and
the higher class (the top 20% of income distribution). For each group, the responses are
a continuous variable ranging from 0% to 100%. For reference, we inform respondents
that the average tax rate for the whole population is 21%. We define perceived progres-
siveness as the difference between the perceived tax rate paid by the higher class and
the lower class. Based on the model by Doerrenberg and Peichl (2013), the hypothesis
is that individuals who perceive a more progressive tax schedule will be less likely to
evade.


                                        21
         Desired progressiveness: Perhaps what matters the most is not whether individuals
         think that the tax schedule is currently progressive but whether they think it should
         be more progressive or less progressive. We measure the designed progressiveness by
         eliciting the respondent’s agreement with the following statement on a 4-point scale
         (from “totally agree” to “strongly disagree”): “Tax rates should be more progressive
         (that is, higher for the rich and lower for the poor)”.34 According to the model by
         Doerrenberg and Peichl (2013), the hypothesis is that individuals who desire a more
         progressive tax schedule will be less likely to evade.

         Perceived inequality: We include a lab game to assess attitudes towards inequality.
         To complement that measure, we elicit the tolerance for inequality using a question that
         is widely used in the literature on preferences for redistribution: “What do you think
         about income differences between the rich and the poor in Uruguay?” The responses
         use a 3-point scale (“too low,” “about right”, or “too high”). The hypothesis is again
         ambiguous: individuals who care more about equality may be more or less likely to
         evade.

         Role of Luck: To complement the lab game that measures inequity concerns, we
         include a question adapted from Kuziemko et al. (2015) asking whether luck or effort
         is more important to explain why some individuals are poor and some are rich. The
         response takes the value 2 if luck is important for being rich and poor, 1 if luck is
         important for one of the two, and 0 if it is important for neither. The hypothesis is
         ambiguous: individuals who think luck is more important may be more or less likely to
         evade taxes.


4.4        Implementation Details and Descriptive Statistics
We sent invitations by email between April 2019 and June 2019, and all responses were
collected during that same time window. Invitations were sent to the email addresses that
taxpayers reported to the tax agency.35 Appendix A includes an English translation of the
invitation email, and Appendix C includes the original Spanish version. This invitation de-
scribes a short survey for academic purposes conducted by researchers from universities in
Uruguay, Argentina, and the United States. The invitation mentions that the survey re-
34
     This is a simplified version of a question used in Kuziemko et al. (2015) to measure the ideal tax rate.
35
     Taxpayers must file their tax returns in electronic format and submit the file by e-mail or in person at an
     official tax office. During the analysis period, including an e-mail address in the tax return was optional.
     Taxpayers were required to include a postal address and phone number only. Therefore, we collected email
     addresses for taxpayers who either included their email address in the tax return or delivered their tax
     returns by email (i.e., as an attachment).


                                                        22
lates to economic opinions and attitudes but provides no specifics on the hypotheses being
tested. The invitation mentions a small monetary incentive to participate in the 20-minute
survey: 20 raffle prizes of U$D150 each (plus additional potential rewards from the incen-
tivized games).36 The invitation also emphasizes that participation in the survey is voluntary,
that the responses to the questionnaire are confidential and would be used only for academic
purposes. To comply with this promise, after the survey responses were linked to the admin-
istrative records from the tax agency, the individual identifiers were removed. As a result,
the survey responses remained anonymous to both the tax agency and the researchers.
    Table 1 provides descriptive statistics about the survey respondents and non-respondents.
Column (3) corresponds to the relevant sample used for the analysis in Section 3 (i.e., the
wage earners who filed a tax return).37 Columns (4) and (5) further decompose that sample
into individuals who were invited and not invited to the survey. Of the 151,565 taxpayers
who are pure wage earners and filed a tax return, we invited 68,208 to participate in the
survey study.38 Taxpayers who were not invited did not have a valid email address registered
with the tax agency.39 Of the 68,208 invited, 6,078 completed the whole survey, or a response
rate of 8.9%.40
    Table 1 compares the characteristics of individuals who responded to the survey (column
(7)) with those who were invited to the survey but did not respond (column (6)). Due to
the large sample sizes, the differences in average characteristics between the two samples
are almost always statistically significant. However, the differences between survey non-
respondents (column (6)) and respondents (column (7)) are always small in magnitude (e.g.,
52% vs. 58% in the share of women, 44 years vs. 43 years in average age, and U$D42,000
vs. U$D41,000 in annual income.41 This evidence suggests that responding to the survey is
36
   The median respondent took 21.88 minutes to complete the survey.
37
   We sent invitations to individuals outside of this sample, including those with self-employment income.
   However, we do not present the data here because so far, we do not have a measure of tax evasion for the
   self-employed and thus they play no role in the current version of the study.
38
   Additionally, we invited 21,980 taxpayers with self-employment income, 1,828 of whom completed the
   survey. As the only measure of tax evasion in our current data is restricted to individuals who earn
   exclusively wage income, the current version of the study does not use any of these additional survey
   responses.
39
   We excluded invalid email addresses, such as those without an “@”, and e-mail addresses that appeared
   more than once, which likely belonged to a preparer other than the taxpayer, such as a family member or
   accountant). In addition to the first invitation email, subjects who did not complete the survey were sent
   a reminder email, typically a week after the original email.
40
   A survey was considered complete if the respondent completed 100% of the questions. Of the 7,858
   individuals who clicked on the link to the survey and advanced to the first screen, 6,078 finished the whole
   survey and 1,780 finished part of it. In the current version of the study, we exclude partial responses from
   the analysis.
41
   Differences between the universe of taxpayers (column (3) of Table 1) and the survey respondents (column
   (7)) arise entirely from differences between individuals invited and not invited to the survey (columns (4)
   vs. (5)).


                                                      23
largely orthogonal to the observable characteristics.
    One potential concern is that individuals who evade taxes are the type of individuals who
would not respond to surveys. To assess this possibility, the last three rows of Table 1 report
the three measures of tax evasion: under-reporting of wages and over-reporting of deductions
and withholdings. The comparison of columns (6) and (7) indicates that, contrary to the
potential concern, whether an individual responds to our 2019 survey is largely unrelated to
their tax evasion in 2016. For example, the fraction of taxpayers who under-reported wages
in 2016 is 13.5% among survey respondents (column (7)) versus 13.8% among non-survey
respondents (column (6)). This finding is robust if, instead of comparing the fraction of wage
under-reporters, we use the fraction of deduction over-reporters or the fraction of withholding
over-reporters.42
    Last, we provide some direct evidence that the respondents paid close attention and
understood most of the survey questions. We included one question at the end of the survey
to assess the clarity of the survey, and 98% of the respondents reported that they understood
every or almost every question of the survey. We used two methods to check if respondents
paid close attention to the instructions. First, at the end of the questionnaire, we added a
long question as an attention check, asking the respondent to select one specific option among
a large number of options, and 94% responded correctly. This rate is high and consistent
in magnitude with other survey studies using this same question.43 Second, we purposely
included a question asking the subject’s gender and then checked their responses against the
administrative data. Almost all (95.9%) survey respondents reported the same gender as in
the administrative records. In sum, these results indicate that subjects paid close attention
to the questions and did not complete the survey quickly to be eligible for the raffle prizes.


4.5     Variation in Lab Measures
Figure 4 presents the raw distribution of responses for each of the 12 lab measures used in
this study. Each question shows variation in the responses across individuals. For example,
Figure 4.d shows that in the dictator game, around 24.1% of respondents share 0% of the
endowment with their partners, 21.0% of respondents share 25%, 50.9% share exactly half of
the endowment, and 4.0% share more than half. The question with the least variation is the
inequality aversion game (Figure 4.i), in which most subjects (85.3%) choose an even split.
42
   The small differences in the degrees of misreporting between the survey sample (column (7) of Table 1)
   versus the universe of wage earners (column (3)) are explained almost entirely by the differences between
   individuals who were invited or not invited to the survey (columns (4) vs. (5)).
43
   For example, 96.4% of respondents passed this attention check in Bottan and Perez-Truglia (2020). This
   high accuracy is even more remarkable given that it is included at the end of the survey when respondents
   may be subject to survey fatigue.


                                                    24
    One game that deserves special attention is the dice game. Under the null hypothesis
that everyone is honest, we would expect one sixth of the respondents to fall into each option
1 through 6. Figure 4.c, however, shows that this is not the case: while the highest number
(6) is reported almost exactly one sixth of the time, low numbers (1 and 2) are reported less
frequently than one sixth of the time and medium to high numbers (3 to 5) are reported
more frequently than one sixth of the time. Indeed, this distribution of responses mimics
closely what has been reported in other studies based on different populations. The intuition
is that while we can reject that everyone responds honestly, most people seem to be honest.
Moreover, when people are dishonest, they seem to avoid taking full advantage of the lie
(i.e., lying about rolling a 6). We summarize these results by associating the “excess mass”
in numbers 3 to 5 to the probability of lying. For example, 22.6% of respondents pick answer
4, but we only expect 16.7% to actually get that number by chance, so the probability of
having lied conditional on reporting number 4 is 26.3% (= 22.6−16.66
                                                               22.6
                                                                     ). According to this rough
estimate, about 11% of the subjects lied in the dice game. Recall that we include an additional
game to use as a benchmark, in which we give individuals incentives to lie about something
that is ex-post verifiable (whether their year of birth is an even or odd number). Although
individuals who were born on an even year had a strong financial incentive to misreport
that they were born on an odd year, only 3% of respondents do so (for more details, see
Appendix E.4). This result is consistent with findings in the literature that individuals are
much less likely to lie about things that can be observed and verified by others (Crede and
von Bieberstein, 2020).
    We also find that the variation between different lab measures are mostly orthogonal to
each other. For example, the pairwise correlations between lab measures range from -0.140
to 0.260, with an average correlation of 0.016 (see Appendix E.5 for more details, including
a principal component analysis). In other words, rather than measuring the same trait
repeatedly, these games seem to measure different features of individual preferences.
    We also provide a validation test for these lab measures. We benchmark the average
choices in these games against the average responses reported in (arguably) similar laboratory
experiments. Figure 6.a presents the results for all 12 lab measures. For example, the average
subject in our dictator game shares 34.6% of the budget with a partner. In comparison,
Engel (2011) reports that, on average, dictators in their study shared 28.3% of the budget.
Regarding the dice game, 11% of respondents lie in our sample, compared to 21.8% in Gächter
and Schulz (2016). More generally, the average choices in our experiment are significantly
correlated to those in the benchmark studies (correlation coefficient of 0.763, p-value=0.004).
Note that we should not expect the average behavior to be identical between these two studies.
For example, there are differences in population type (e.g., random sample of taxpayers from


                                              25
Uruguay versus undergraduate students from the United States), the stakes involved, and
the language and framing of the game. Despite these differences, it is reassuring that the
average behavior in our sample is largely consistent with the average behavior in those other
studies.


4.6    Variation in Survey Measures
Figure 5 presents the raw distribution of responses to the 12 survey measures, again showing
ample variation across individuals. For example, in response to the question about their
tax morale (Figure 5.a), 75.8% of subjects report that it is never justifiable to evade taxes,
compared with 22.7% who report that it is sometimes justifiable and 1.5% who respond that
it is always justifiable. We again observe that the variations between these different lab
measures are mostly orthogonal to each other, with pairwise correlations ranging from -0.47
to 0.61 and an average correlation of 0.04 (see Appendix E.5 for more details). In other
words, these survey questions seem to measure different features of individual preferences
and beliefs.
    We further validate the survey measures by benchmarking them to other sources of survey
data from Uruguay. For example, in our question of tax morale, 75.8% of subjects report
that it is never justifiable to evade taxes. In the 2011 World Values Survey for Uruguay,
responses to the same question reveal a similar order of magnitude: 76.5% of respondents
declared that it is never justifiable to evade taxes. Other survey data collected in Uruguay
also help to benchmark our answers. Figure 6.b generalizes this validation test for all 12
survey measures for Uruguay. We find that the average survey responses in our experiment
are significantly correlated to those in the benchmark surveys (correlation coefficient of 0.76,
p-value=0.011). The distribution of responses is unlikely to be identical due to differences in
how the surveys were implemented and how respondents were recruited. For example, the
benchmark surveys tried to recruit a representative sample of the whole country, whereas our
survey was directed towards individuals who file tax returns and thus tend to belong to the
upper echelons of the income distribution. However, despite these differences, it is reassuring
that the responses are largely consistent across surveys.


5     Predicting Evasion Choices
5.1    Relationship Between Tax Evasion and Selected Measures
We start by analyzing some selected outcomes that we believe ex-ante to be the most relevant
for the decision to evade taxes. Arguably, the most important candidate for predicting

                                              26
tax evasion due to its central role in the literature is the survey measure of tax morale.
Figure 7.a shows the link between this survey measure (x-axis) and the share of taxpayers
who under-reported their wages relative to third-party reports in 2016 (y-axis). Among the
individuals who say that it is never OK to evade taxes, 13.3% under-reported their wages.
In comparison, among individuals who say that it is sometimes or always OK to evade taxes,
14.0% under-reported their wages. The difference between these two evasion rates is small
(0.7 pp) and statistically insignificant (p-value=0.503). Most important, the difference is
precisely estimated: according to the 95% CI, we can rule out that individuals with low tax
morale evade on average over 2.69 pp more than individuals with high tax morale.
    Next, we turn to the lab-based measure of tax morale, based on the game on evasion
aversion. Figure 7.b splits the sample by respondents with low, medium, and high aversion
to tax evaders. We find that the rates of wage under-reporting are similar across the three
groups (13.3%, 13.4%, and 13.7%, respectively), and these differences are precisely estimated
and statistically insignificant (p-value=0.942).
    Figure 7.c corresponds to contributions in the public good game. We split the sample
into individuals with low contributions to the public good (0–25% of their endowment),
middle contributions (50%), and high contributions (75–100%). We find very small differences
between the shares of wage under-reporters across the three groups: 13.6%, 13.1%, and
13.9%, respectively. These differences are precisely estimated and statistically insignificant
(p-value=0.704).
    Figure 7.d presents the results for the lab measure of dishonesty based on the dice game.
This figure shows the share of wage under-reporters for groups of individuals who report
each number from 1 through 6. Recall that the liars are concentrated among individuals
who report 3, 4, or 5. As a result, we expect higher shares of wage under-reporters among
those respondents. Instead, we find that the share of wage under-reporters is similar among
the individuals who report 1, 2, 6 (13.3%) and those who report 3, 4, 5 (13.7%), and the
difference is statistically insignificant (p-value=0.682). For a more direct comparison, we
estimate a regression of whether the individual under-reported wages on the probability that
he or she lied in the dice game, conditional on the number they reported (defined in Section
4.5). According to this regression, a 1 pp increase in the probability of lying in the dice
game is associated with a decrease (rather than an expected increase) in the probability of
under-reporting wages of just 0.07 pp, which is both economically small and statistically
insignificant (p-value=0.981).
    The first four panels from Figure 7 show that there is no relationship between the lab
and survey measures and wage under-reporting. The last two panels show some significant
correlations. Figure 7.e presents the results for the lab measure of generosity. One hypothesis


                                              27
is that individuals who are more altruistic will evade less because they care about the conse-
quences of tax evasion on the wellbeing of others (i.e., lower provision of public services). On
the contrary, we find that the more the individuals share in the dictator game, the more likely
they are to be wage under-reporters: individuals who share nothing under-report wages at a
rate of 11.5%, those who share a quarter of the endowment under-report wages at a rate of
12.8%, and those who share half or more of their endowment under-report wages at a rate of
14.71%. Moreover, we can reject the null hypothesis that the rates of wage under-reporting
are the same across those three groups (p-value=0.006). While speculative, one potential
explanation for the positive association between generosity and wage under-reporting could
be that individuals who evade taxes feel guilty and thus want to compensate by being more
generous. Indeed, some evidence along these lines has been reported in laboratory settings
(Gneezy et al., 2014).44
    Figure 7.f presents the results for the survey measure of the perceived evasion behavior of
other employees. The hypothesis is that employees who think that other employees under-
report their wages will find it “easier” to evade taxes themselves, presumably because they
feel they are not breaking a social norm. We find some support for that hypothesis. Figure 7.f
shows that the rate of wage under-reporting increases monotonically with the belief about
the evasion behavior of others. The slope of that relationship indicates that for each 1 pp
increase in the perceived share of wage under-reporters, the individual’s own likelihood of
wage under-reporting increases by 0.07 pp (p-value=0.003). This effect is small but not
negligible.


5.2        Pairwise Correlations
The previous analysis focuses on a selected set of measures that are ex-ante expected to be
most related to tax evasion. Here, we extend the analysis to all 24 lab and survey measures.
    Table 2 reports the pairwise correlations between the tax evasion outcome (i.e., a dummy
variable that equals 1 if the individual under-reported wages in 2016) and each of the 24
lab and survey measures (column (2)), jointly with the corresponding confidence intervals
(column (2)) and p-values (column (3)). Because we are evaluating the significance of 24
different correlations, a natural concern is false positives due to multiple hypothesis testing.
To provide an accurate assessment of the statistical significance of each correlation, while
column (3) reports the p-values, column (4) reports the corresponding q-values to account
for multiple hypothesis testing (Benjamini and Yekutieli, 2001).
44
     An alternative interpretation is that some personality traits (e.g., political ideology) are positively cor-
     related to generosity. This interpretation is consistent with the evidence presented below that measures
     related to political ideology have some ability to predict evasion choices.


                                                        28
    Most correlation coefficients from Table 2 are economically small and precisely estimated
around zero. The absolute value of the correlation coefficients ranges from 0 to 0.067. More-
over, due to the large sample sizes, each coefficient is precisely estimated, and the 95% CI
indicates that we can often rule out even small correlations. For example, in the case of tax
morale, the point estimate for the correlation is close to zero (-0.006) and the 95% CI ranges
from -0.032 to 0.019. In other words, we can rule out even small correlations between the
tax morale measure and the actual tax evasion decision. Indeed, in all 24 cases, the 95%
confidence intervals rule out correlations above 0.10 (in absolute value), so we can confidently
reject moderate to large correlations.
    Among the lab measures, the highest correlations are given by the three lab measures re-
lated to generosity: correlations of 0.040 (p-value=0.002, q-value=0.020), 0.046 (p-value<0.001,
q-value<0.001), and 0.048 (p-value<0.001, q-value<0.001) for the decisions to give to strangers,
a charity, and the government, respectively. The survey measures are slightly more corre-
lated with the evasion choices. Seven out of the 12 survey measures have correlations that
are statistically significant after accounting for multiple-hypothesis testing (defined as q-
values below 0.1), although all correlations tend to be small in magnitude. The strongest
correlation is the perception of evasion of firms, with a correlation coefficient of 0.067 (p-
value<0.001, q-value<0.001). The second-highest correlation is with respect to the left-right
political spectrum, with a correlation coefficient of -0.062 (p-value<0.001, q-value<0.001).
The third-highest correlation is with respect to the desired progressiveness, with a correlation
coefficient of 0.058 (p-value<0.001, q-value<0.001). These correlations seem to indicate that
the “type” of individuals who are more likely to evade are those who think that firms evade
taxes, who are politically left-leaning, and who think that taxes should be more progressive.
    In Appendix E.6, we show that these results are similar if we use alternative measures
of tax evasion (e.g., deduction over-reporting instead of wage under-reporting or intensive
margin instead of extensive margin).


5.3    Multivariate Regression Analysis
It is possible that none of the lab and survey measures have much predictive power on
their own but have substantial joint explanatory power. To explore this possibility, Table 3
presents the results from a multivariate Probit regression. Each column corresponds to a
different regression where the dependent variable is always an indicator variable that equals 1
for individuals who, according to third-party reports, under-reported their wages in 2016. At
the bottom of the table, we present a traditional measure of predictive power: the area under
the receiver operating characteristic (AUC). Assume that we randomly select an individual
who evaded and another who did not and that we ask the model to identify the evader. The

                                              29
AUC tells us the probability that the model would guess correctly. A value of 0.5 indicates
that the model does no better than chance (i.e., the same probability as flipping a coin). The
greater the AUC, the better the predictive power, with a maximum value of 1 corresponding
to 100% accuracy. For an alternative measure of goodness-of-fit, the table also reports the
pseudo-R2 .
    In column (1) of Table 3, the independent variables are the 12 lab measures (for their
definitions, see the notes to Table 2). To make the coefficients more directly comparable to
each other, the 24 lab and survey measures used as independent variables are normalized to
have a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1.
    For ease of interpretation, all but one variable is constructed to equal 0 to 1.45 For
example, the variable for giving to strangers is equal to the fraction of the endowment that
the dictator shares with a stranger, with 0 corresponding to nothing and 1 to everything (see
the notes to Figure 6 for a full list of variable definitions).
    Only three coefficients are statistically significant, and they correspond to the same three
variables that have the highest pairwise correlations: giving to strangers (p-value=0.056),
giving to charity (p-value=0.002), and giving to the government (p-value<0.001). The AUC
(0.564) indicates that the lab measures do moderately better than chance at identifying the
tax evader. The conclusions are similar for the alternative measure of goodness-of-fit, the
pseudo-R2 (0.008).
    In column (2) of Table 3, the independent variables are the 12 survey measures (for
their definitions, see the notes to Table 2). Similar to the lab measures, these 12 measures
are standardized. Only three out of 12 have statistically significant coefficients, and they
correspond to the same three variables with the strongest pairwise correlations: perceived
evasion rate among firms (p-value<0.001), left-right political spectrum (p-value=0.046),
and desired progressiveness (p-value=0.032). The predictive power of the survey measures
(AUC=0.587, from column (2)) is a bit larger than the corresponding values for the lab
measures (AUC=0.564, from column (1)) but far from perfect. In column (3) of Table 3, the
independent variables are the combination of the 24 lab and survey measures. Again, the
predictive power is a bit better (AUC=0.602, from column (3)) but still rather small.
    The evidence so far suggests that, even when taken all at once, the measures of values
and beliefs do a bad job at predicting which taxpayers will evade taxes. However, it is often
challenging to interpret the magnitudes of goodness of fit. For example, a low goodness of
fit could imply that the outcome is completely random and thus impossible to predict with
any type of data, not just these survey and lab measures. Thus, columns (4) through (6) of
Table 3 provide results under three alternative models that can serve as benchmarks.
45
     The impatience outcome can take values from 0 to 1.2.


                                                     30
    The first benchmark is past behavior. Column (4) corresponds to a regression that in-
cludes as independent variables a set of dummies about past evasion behavior: whether the
taxpayer under-reported wages in 2015, over-reported deductions in 2015, or over-reported
withholdings in 2015.46 This regression is intended to identify persistence in the evasion
choices. This persistence may reflect a host of time-invariant factors, such as individual
traits (e.g., honesty), information on how to evade, and the opportunity to evade. The sec-
ond benchmark is given by the basic demographics of the taxpayer. Column (5) of Table 3
corresponds to a regression that includes the following demographics as independent vari-
ables: a dummy for gender, a set of 11 dummies for age groups, a set of 10 dummies for the
gross taxable income in 2015, and a set of seven dummies for education level. Finally, the
third benchmark of interest is the employee’s context. Some individuals may find it easier to
evade due to institutional factors. For example, if a firm makes salary information easier to
access or more salient, it may be more difficult for its employees to under-report without feel-
ing guilty. Moreover, the individual’s context may matter due to social learning: employees
may discover from coworkers and the employer’s accountants that they can misreport their
wages, deductions, or withholdings to evade taxes. Indeed, growing evidence indicates that
individuals learn evasion tricks from their peers and accountants.47 To capture all of these
contextual factors, column (6) of Table 3 uses a regression in which the independent variables
correspond to the evasion behavior of coworkers: the share of coworkers who under-reported
wages in 2016, who over-reported deductions in 2016, and who over-reported withholdings
in 2016.48
    The results from Table 3 show that the model that uses all 24 lab and survey measures
does a bit better in terms of predictive power (AUC=0.602 in column (3)) than the model that
uses past behavior alone (AUC=0.564 in column (4)) but somewhat worse than the model
46
   A total of 191 taxpayers in the sample cannot be categorized as wage under-reporters (or deduction or
   withholding under-reporters) in 2015 because they did not file a tax return in 2015 or because they were
   not wage earners in 2015. To adjust for this, we control for a dummy variable that equals 1 for these 191
   taxpayers and 0 otherwise.
47
   For example, Chetty et al. (2013) show significant geographic variation in how firms take advantage of
   the Earned Income Tax Credit for tax evasion, which they attribute to differences in knowledge (e.g.,
   some areas with more accountants have more evasion). See also Wilson (2020). Exploiting quasi-random
   variation in audit policy, Battaglini et al. (2020) document a robust correlation between evasion among
   clients of the same tax practitioner and provide evidence that this is partially due to information spillovers.
   Experimental evidence shows the importance of information diffusion. For example, Drago et al. (2020)
   use a field experiment that varied the content of mailings sent to potential evaders of TV license fees.
   They document a strong treatment spillover: untreated households are more likely to switch from evasion
   to compliance in response to mailings received by their network neighbors. Boning et al. (2020) presents
   results from a field experiment involving in-person visits by revenue officers. They show that these visits
   have a large direct effect on visited firms’ tax deposits and the tax deposits of the firms’ clients, suggesting
   a network effect whereby preparers disseminate information.
48
   These variables are undefined for 82 of the taxpayers who do not have coworkers in 2016. To adjust for
   this, we use a dummy variable that equals 1 for these 82 taxpayers and 0 otherwise.


                                                        31
that uses basic demographics (AUC=0.666 in column (5)) and substantially worse than the
model that uses peer behavior (AUC=0.872 in column (5)). That is, although individual
beliefs and values have some role in explaining who evades taxes, individual context, as
proxied by evasion behavior among coworkers, plays a much bigger role.
    In Appendix E.7, we show that the main results are robust if we use alternative measures of
tax evasion (e.g., deduction over-reporting instead of wage under-reporting, intensive margin
instead of extensive margin).


5.4    Discussion
One potential interpretation of our evidence is that individual traits, such as dishonesty or
altruism, vary little across individuals and thus are useless to explain heterogeneity in tax
evasion. Even under this interpretation, tax morale may still be useful in aggregate to explain
differences in evasion across individuals. Indeed, even if lab measures are not good at predict-
ing who evades more, they arguably do a decent job at predicting aggregate evasion levels. In
the dice game, we estimate that 11% of people lie. This finding is consistent with aggregate
evasion, according to which 11% under-report wages. Moreover, other aggregate patterns in
the dice game seem largely consistent with the distribution of wage under- reporting. First,
in the dice game, even those who lie do not lie all the way. Indeed, the lack of over-reporting
on rolling number 6 suggests that nobody tells the maximum lie. We consistently find that
taxpayers almost never fully under-report wages. Conditional on under-reporting, the av-
erage rate of under-reporting is just 6.1%. This finding also is observed in the dice game,
where players tell only partial lies, not full lies. (Fischbacher and Föllmi-Heusi, 2013) and
other laboratory studies have measured honesty (Mazar et al., 2008). Additionally, the prob-
ability of lying in laboratory studies has not been found to change with the financial stakes
(Duch et al., 2020), which is also true in our data on tax evasion: taxpayers have similar
probabilities of under-reporting wages regardless of their wages or marginal tax rates (see
Appendix E.3).
    Another potential interpretation of our findings is that lab experiments and survey ques-
tions cannot adequately identify meaningful heterogeneity in individual traits. This inter-
pretation is a source of debate in the behavioral economics literature (Levitt and List, 2007;
Camerer, 2011)). For example, evidence against this interpretation argues that the measures
of social preferences used in this study are remarkably stable over time (e.g. Chuang and
Schechter, 2015) and that the same or similar laboratory and survey measures can predict
other forms of behavior in the field, including but not limited to other-regarding behavior
(Burks et al., 2016), dishonesty (Hanna and Wang, 2017; Cohn et al., 2015; Gächter and
Schulz, 2016; Cohn and Maréchal, 2018; Dai et al., 2018; Olsen et al., 2019), trust (Glaeser

                                              32
et al., 2000), risk aversion (Dohmen et al., 2011), and time discounting (Chabris et al., 2008).
However, the correlations reported in the literature, even when statistically significant, are
often economically small.


6    Conclusions
In this paper, we study how social preferences (e.g., dishonesty) and perceived social norms
(e.g., whether others evade taxes) make individuals more prone to evading taxes. We exploit
administrative tax data on wage earners’ tax returns and their employers’ third-party reports
to measure tax evasion of personal income tax in Uruguay. We provide evidence of significant
variation in evasion choices across taxpayers: some employees evade taxes by under-reporting
their wages or over-reporting their tax deductions and tax withholdings. In collaboration with
Uruguay’s tax agency, we conducted a survey with a subsample of 6,078 taxpayers to measure
their preferences and beliefs using survey questions and laboratory games with real financial
incentives. Surprisingly, some of the measures that should in theory be most related to tax
evasion choices, such as the survey measure of tax morale, have no power whatsoever to
identify tax evaders. Other measures have some predictive power. Most notably, taxpayers
who are more likely to under-report wages tend to perceive firms as evaders, to identify
as politically left-leaning, to think that taxes should be more progressive, and to be more
generous. In comparison, basic demographics do a better job at identifying tax evaders, and
individual context, as proxied by the evasion behavior of coworkers, does a much better job
at identifying tax evaders.
    Understanding what makes someone a tax evader offers an interesting exploration of
human behavior. The evidence also can be of interest to policy-makers under the hypothesis
that individual traits are linked to tax evasion. If true, tax agencies could try to identify
individuals with those traits and direct enforcement efforts towards them. However, our
evidence does not support the existence of such individual traits and thus does not support
this policy prescription.
    Our evidence suggests some promising avenues for future research. Although contextual
factors may be important to predict tax evaders, our evidence is unable to ascertain those
factors precisely. For example, employees could learn evasion tricks from other employees or
firm accountants, or perhaps the ways in which firms communicate with their employees (e.g.,
mailing a W-2 form) makes it easier for employees to make “motivated errors” (Exley and
Kessler, 2019). We believe that identifying these contextual factors may help explain why
individuals choose to evade taxes and may suggest ways to redesign the context to reduce
tax evasion.


                                              33
References
Abeler, J., D. Nosenzo, and C. Raymond (2019). Preferences for Truth-Telling. Econometrica 87 (4),
  1115–1153.
Allingham, M. G. and A. Sandmo (1972). Income Tax Evasion: A Theoretical Analysis. Journal
  of Public Economics 1 (3-4), 323–338.
Alm, J., B. Jackson, and M. McKee (1992). Estimating the Determinants of Taxpayer Compliance
  with Experimental Data. National Tax Journal 45 (1), 107–114.
Alm, J., E. Kirchler, and S. Muehlbacher (2012). Combining Psychology and Economics in the
  Analysis of Compliance: From Enforcement to Cooperation. Economic Analysis and Policy 42 (2),
  133–151.
Alm, J., I. Sanchez, and A. De Juan (1995). Economic and Noneconomic Factors in Tax Compliance.
  Kyklos 48 (1), 1–18.
Almås, I., A. W. Cappelen, and B. Tungodden (2020). Cutthroat Capitalism versus Cuddly Social-
  ism: Are Americans More Meritocratic and Efficiency-Seeking than Scandinavians? Journal of
  Political Economy 128 (5), 1753–1788.
Andreoni, J., B. Erard, and J. Feinstein (1998). Tax Compliance. Journal of Economic Litera-
  ture 32 (2), 818–860.
Battaglini, M., L. Guiso, C. Lacava, and E. Patacchini (2020). Tax Professionals and Tax Evasion.
  NBER Working Paper No. 25745 .
Benjamini, Y. and D. Yekutieli (2001). The control of the false discovery rate in multiple testing
  under dependency. Annals of Statistics 29 (4), 1165–1188.
Berg, J., J. Dickhaut, and K. McCabe (1995). Trust, Reciprocity, and Social History. Games and
  Economic Behavior 10 (1), 122–142.
Bergolo, M., G. Burdín, M. de Rosa, M. Giaccobasso, and M. Leites (2019). Tax Bunching at the
  Kink in the Presence of Low Capacity of Enforcement: Evidence From Uruguay. IZA Discussion
  Paper No. 12286 .
Bergolo, M. L., R. Ceni, G. Cruces, M. Giaccobasso, and R. Perez-Truglia (2017). Tax Audits as
  Scarecrows: Evidence from a Large-Scale Field Experiment. NBER Working Paper No. 23631 .
Best, M. C. (2014). The Role of Firms in Workers’ Earnings Responses to Taxes: Evidence From
  Pakistan. Working Paper.
Blumenthal, M., C. Christian, and J. Slemrod (2001). Do Normative Appeals Affect Tax Com-
  pliance? Evidence From a Controlled Experiment in Minnesota. National Tax Journal 54 (1),
  125–138.
Boning, W. C., J. Guyton, R. Hodge, and J. Slemrod (2020). Heard it through the grapevine:
  The direct and network effects of a tax enforcement field experiment on firms. Journal of Public



                                               34
  Economics 190, Article 104261.
Bottan, N. L. and R. Perez-Truglia (2020). Choosing Your Pond: Location Choices and Relative
  Income. The Review of Economics and Statistics, Forthcoming.
Brockmeyer, A. and M. Hernandez (2016). Taxation, information, and withholding : evidence from
  Costa Rica. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 7600 .
Burks, S., D. Nosenzo, J. Anderson, M. Bombyk, D. Ganzhorn, L. Goette, and A. Rustichini (2016).
  Lab Measures of Other-Regarding Preferences Can Predict Some Related On-the-Job Behavior:
  Evidence from a Large Scale Field Experiment. IZA Discussion Paper No. 9767 .
Camerer, C. F. (2011). The Promise and Success of Lab-Field Generalizability in Experimental
  Economics: A Critical Reply to Levitt and List. SSRN Working Paper.
Cappelen, A. W., J. Mollerstrom, B.-A. Reme, and B. Tungodden (2019). A Meritocratic Origin of
  Egalitarian Behavior. Working Paper.
Cardenas, J. C. and J. Carpenter (2008). Behavioural Development Economics: Lessons from Field
  Labs in the Developing World. The Journal of Development Studies 44 (3), 311–338.
Carrillo, P., D. Pomeranz, and M. Singhal (2017). Dodging the Taxman: Firm Misreporting and
  Limits to Tax Enforcement. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 9 (2), 144–164.
Carson, R. T. and T. Groves (2007). Incentive and informational properties of preference questions.
  Environmental and Resource Economics 37 (1), 181–210.
Castañeda, N., D. Doyle, and C. Schwartz (2020). Opting Out of the Social Contract: Tax Morale
  and Evasion. Comparative Political Studies 53 (7), 1175–1219.
Castro, L. and C. Scartascini (2015). Tax Compliance and Enforcement in the Pampas Evidence
  From a Field Experiment. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 116, 65–82.
Chabris, C. F., D. Laibson, C. L. Morris, J. P. Schuldt, and D. Taubinsky (2008). Individual
  laboratory-measured discount rates predict field behavior. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 37 (2-
  3), 237–269.
Charness, G., U. Gneezy, and B. Halladay (2016). Experimental methods: Pay one or pay all.
  Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 131, 141–150.
Charness, G. and M. Rabin (2002). Understanding Social Preferences with Simple Tests. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (3), 817–869.
Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, and E. Saez (2013). Using Differences in Knowledge Across Neighbor-
  hoods to Uncover the Impacts of the EITC on Earnings. The American Economic Review 103 (7),
  2683–2721.
Chuang, Y. and L. Schechter (2015). Stability of experimental and survey measures of risk, time,
  and social preferences: A review and some new results. Journal of Development Economics 117,
  151–170.
Cohn, A. and M. A. Maréchal (2018). Laboratory Measure of Cheating Predicts School Misconduct.

                                                35
  The Economic Journal 128 (615), 2743–2754.
Cohn, A., M. A. Maréchal, and T. Noll (2015). Bad Boys: How Criminal Identity Salience Affects
  Rule Violation. The Review of Economic Studies 82 (4), 1289–1308.
Coller, M. and M. B. Williams (1999). Eliciting Individual Discount Rates. Experimental Eco-
  nomics 2 (2), 107–127.
Cowell, F. A. and J. P. F. Gordon (1988). Unwillingness to pay: Tax evasion and public good
  provision. Journal of Public Economics 36 (3), 305–321.
Crede, A.-K. and F. von Bieberstein (2020). Reputation and lying aversion in the die roll paradigm:
  Reducing ambiguity fosters honest behavior. Managerial and Decision Economics 41 (4), 651–657.
Cummings, R. G., J. Martinez-Vazquez, and M. McKee (2006). Cross Cultural Comparisions of
  Tax Compliance Behavior. Journal of Economic Psychology 27 (2), 224–246.
Dai, Z., F. Galeotti, and M. C. Villeval (2018). Cheating in the Lab Predicts Fraud in the Field:
  An Experiment in Public Transportation. Management Science 64 (3), 1081–1100.
DeBacker, J., B. T. Heim, and A. Tran (2015). Importing corruption culture from overseas: Evidence
  from corporate tax evasion in the United States. Journal of Financial Economics 117 (1), 122–138.
Doerrenberg, P. and A. Peichl (2013). Progressive taxation and tax morale. Public Choice 155 (3-4),
  293–316.
Doerrenberg, P. and A. Peichl (2018). Tax Morale and the Role of Social Norms and Reciprocity.
  Evidence from a Randomized Survey Experiment. CESifo Working Paper No. 7149 .
Dohmen, T., A. Falk, D. Huffman, and U. Sunde (2010). Are Risk Aversion and Impatience Related
  to Cognitive Ability? American Economic Review 100 (3), 1238–1260.
Dohmen, T., A. Falk, D. Huffman, U. Sunde, J. Schupp, and G. G. Wagner (2011). Individual Risk
  Attitudes: Measurement, Determinants, and Behavioral Consequences. Journal of the European
  Economic Association 9 (3), 522–550.
Drago, F., F. Mengel, and C. Traxler (2020). Compliance Behavior in Networks: Evidence from a
  Field Experiment. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 12 (2), 96–133.
Duch, R. M., D. Laroze, and A. Zakharov (2020). The Moral Cost of Lying. Working Paper.
Engel, C. (2011). Dictator games: a meta study. Experimental Economics 14, 583–610.
Exley, C. and J. Kessler (2019). Motivated Errors. NBER Working Paper No. 26595 .
Falk, A., A. Becker, T. Dohmen, D. B. Huffman, and U. Sunde (2018). Global Evidence on Economic
  Preferences. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 133 (4), 1645–1692.
Fehr, E. (2009). On The Economics and Biology of Trust. Journal of the European Economic
  Association 7 (2-3), 235–266.
Feld, L. P. and B. S. Frey (2002). Trust breeds trust: How taxpayers are treated. Economics of
  Governance 3 (2), 87–99.


                                                36
Fellner, G., R. Sausgruber, and C. Traxler (2013). Testing Enforcement Strategies in the Field:
  Threat, Moral Appeal and Social Information. Journal of the European Economic Associa-
  tion 11 (3), 634–660.
Fischbacher, U. and F. Föllmi-Heusi (2013). Lies in Disguise - An Experimental Study on Cheating.
  Journal of the European Economic Association 11 (3), 525–547.
Frey, B. S. and B. Torgler (2007). Tax morale and conditional cooperation. Journal of Comparative
  Economics 35 (1), 136–159.
Gächter, S. and J. F. Schulz (2016). Intrinsic honesty and the prevalence of rule violations across
  societies. Nature 531 (7595), 496–499.
Glaeser, E. L., D. I. Laibson, J. A. Scheinkman, and C. L. Soutter (2000). Measuring Trust.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 115 (3), 811–846.
Gneezy, U., A. Imas, and K. Madarász (2014). Conscience Accounting: Emotion Dynamics and
  Social Behavior. Management Science 60 (11), 2645–2658.
Gomez-Sabaini, J. C. and J. P. Jimenez (2012). Tax structure and tax evasion in Latin America.
  Macroeconomics of Development Series 118.
Gomez-Sabaini, J. C. and D. Moran (2014). Tax policy in Latin America Assessment and guidelines
  for a second generation of reforms. Macroeconomics of Development Series 133.
Halla, M. (2012). Tax Morale and Compliance Behavior: First Evidence on a Causal Link. The
  B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 12 (1), 1–27.
Hallsworth, M., J. A. List, R. D. Metcalfe, and I. Vlaev (2017). The behavioralist as tax collector:
  Using natural field experiments to enhance tax compliance. Journal of Public Economics 148,
  14–31.
Hanna, R. and S.-Y. Wang (2017). Dishonesty and Selection into Public Service: Evidence from
  India. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 9 (3), 262–290.
Internal Revenue Service (2016). Federal Tax Compliance Research: Tax Gap Estimates for Tax
  Years 2008-2010. Research, Analysis & Statistics Publication 1415 .
Jensen, A. (2019). Employment Structure and the Rise of the Modern Tax System. NBER Working
  Paper No. 25502 .
Johns, A. and J. Slemrod (2010). The Distribution of Income Tax Noncompliance. National Tax
  Journal 63 (3), 397–418.
Kleven, H. J. (2014). How Can Scandinavians Tax So Much?            Journal of Economic Perspec-
  tives 28 (4), 77–98.
Kleven, H. J., M. B. Knudsen, T. Kreiner, S. Pedersen, and E. Saez (2011). Unwilling or Unable to
  Cheat? Evidence from a Randomized Tax Audit Experiment in Denmark. Econometrica 79 (3),
  651–692.
Kleven, H. J., C. Kreiner, and E. Saez (2016). Why Can Modern Governments Tax So Much? An

                                                37
  Agency Model of Firms as Fiscal Intermediaries. Economica 83, 2016.
Kuziemko, I., M. I. Norton, E. Saez, and S. Stantcheva (2015). How Elastic Are Preferences
  for Redistribution? Evidence from Randomized Survey Experiments. American Economic Re-
  view 105 (4), 1478–1508.
Levitt, S. D. and J. A. List (2007). What Do Laboratory Experiments Measuring Social Preferences
  Reveal About the Real World? Journal of Economic Perspectives 21 (2), 153–174.
Li, S. X., C. C. Eckel, P. J. Grossman, and T. L. Brown (2011). Giving to government: Voluntary
  taxation in the lab. Journal of Public Economics 95 (9-10), 1190–1201.
List, J. A. (2004). Young, Selfish and Male: Field Evidence of Social Preferences. The Economic
  Journal 114 (492), 121–149.
Luttmer, E. F. P. and M. Singhal (2014). Tax Morale. Journal of Economic Perspectives 28 (4),
  149–168.
Mazar, N., O. Amir, and D. Ariely (2008). The Dishonesty of Honest People: A Theory of Self-
  Concept Maintenance. Journal of Marketing Research 45 (6), 633–644.
Nathan, B., R. Perez-Truglia, and A. Zentner (2020). My Taxes are Too Darn High: Tax Protests
  as Revealed Preferences for Redistribution. NBER Working Paper No. 27816 .
Olsen, A. L., F. Hjorth, N. Harmon, and S. Barfort (2019). Behavioral Dishonesty in the Public
  Sector. Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory 29 (4), 572–590.
Oosterbeek, H., R. Sloof, and G. van de Kuilen (2004). Cultural Differences in Ultimatum Game
  Experiments: Evidence from a Meta-Analysis. Experimental Economics 7 (2), 171–188.
Perez-Truglia, R. and U. Troiano (2018). Shaming Tax Delinquents. Journal of Public Eco-
  nomics 167, 120–137.
Pomeranz, D. (2015). No Taxation Without Information: Deterrence and Self-Enforcement in the
  Value Added Tax. The American Economic Review 105 (8), 2539–2569.
Slemrod, J. (2008). Does It Matter Who Writes the Check to the Government? The Economics of
  Tax Remittance. National Tax Journal 61 (2), 251–275.
Slemrod, J. (2019). Tax Compliance and Enforcement. Journal of Economic Literature 57 (4),
  904–954.
Slemrod, J., M. Blumenthal, and C. Christian (2001). Taxpayer response to an increased probability
  of audit: evidence from a controlled experiment in Minnesota. Journal of Public Economics 79 (3),
  455–483.
Slemrod, J., B. Collins, J. Hoopes, D. Reck, and M. Sebastiani (2017). Does credit-card information
  reporting improve small-business tax compliance? Journal of Public Economics 149, 1–19.
Torgler, B. (2005). Tax morale and direct democracy. European Journal of Political Economy 21 (2),
  525–531.



                                                38
Wilson, R. (2020). The Impact of Social Networks on EITC Claiming Behavior. Review of Economics
  and Statistics, Forthcoming.
World Values Survey Association (2014). World Values Survey Wave 6 (2010-2014) Official Aggre-
  gate v.20180912. Technical report, Asep/JDS, Madrid, Spain.




                                              39
                                                                           Figure 1: Measures of Tax Evasion

                                  a. Wage Discrepancies                                                                                                    b. Tax Gap
                                                              80.60%                                                                                                        84.26%
                80%                                                                                N=151,565                 80%                                                                                 N=133,601

                70%                                                                                                          70%

                60%                                                                                                          60%

                50%                                                                                                          50%
      Percent




                                                                                                                   Percent
                40%
                                                                                                                             40%

                30%
                                                                                                                             30%
                20%             Under−reporters                                   Over−reporters
                                    15.49%                                             3.91%                                 20%               Under−payers                                      Over−payers
                                                                                                                                                 15.74%                                             3.57%
                10%
                                                                                                                             10%
                0%
                                                                                                                             0%
                        9%      −7
                                   %
                                         −5
                                           %
                                                  −3
                                                     %
                                                           −1
                                                             %     1%      3%      5%      7%      9%   >9
                                                                                                          %
                      <−     to       to       to       to     +/−      to      to      to      to
                           %        %        %        %              1%      3%      5%      7%                                    <−9%        %       %       %      %     %       %       %       %
                                                                                                                                         to −77% to −55% to −33% to −1 +/− 1 1% to 3 3% to 5 5% to 7 7% to 9
                                                                                                                                                                                                             %        >9%
                        −9       −7       −5       −3                                                                                −9%     −       −       −
                                              Taxpayer vs. Third−Party Report                                                                               Taxpayer vs. Third−Party Report



                           c. Deductions Discrepancies                                                                                  d. Withholding Discrepancies
                            (for Wage Just-Reporters)                                                                                     (for Wage Just-Reporters)
                                                              81.95%                               N=121,974                                                                                                     N=119,281
                80%                                                                                                          80%
                                                                                                                                                                            74.37%

                70%                                                                                                          70%


                60%                                                                                                          60%

                50%                                                                                                          50%
      Percent




                                                                                                                   Percent




                40%                                                                                                          40%

                30%                                                                                                          30%

                20%             Under−reporters                                   Over−reporters                             20%             Under−reporters                                    Over−reporters
                                    2.24%                                            15.82%                                                       2.90%                                             22.72%
                10%                                                                                                          10%

                0%                                                                                                           0%
                        9%      −7
                                   %
                                         −5
                                           %
                                                  −3
                                                     %
                                                           −1
                                                             %     1%      3%      5%      7%      9%   >9
                                                                                                          %                          9%      −7
                                                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                                                                      −5
                                                                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                                                                               −3
                                                                                                                                                                  %
                                                                                                                                                                        −1
                                                                                                                                                                           %     1%      3%      5%      7%      9%   >9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %
                      <−     to       to       to       to     +/−      to      to      to      to                                 <−     to       to       to       to      +/−      to      to      to      to
                           %        %        %        %              1%      3%      5%      7%                                         %        %        %        %               1%      3%      5%      7%
                        −9       −7       −5       −3                                                                                −9       −7       −5       −3
                                              Taxpayer vs. Third−Party Report                                                                               Taxpayer vs. Third−Party Report



Notes: Panel (a): discrepancies between the wages reported in the taxpayer’s tax return versus the employer’s
third-party report (as the percentage of third-party wage income). Results based on the sample of taxpayers
who were pure wage earners and filed a tax return in 2016. Panel (b): discrepancies between the effective
tax amount of the taxpayers and the counterfactual tax amount they would face if they had reported wages
equal to the third-party report (as a percentage of the latter). We must restrict the sample to taxpayers
with positive counterfactual tax amounts (to avoid dividing by zero). Panel (c): discrepancies between the
automatic deductions reported in the taxpayer’s tax return versus the employer’s third-party report (as a
percentage of the latter). Results based on the subsample of taxpayers who reported their wages within 1%
of their third-party reports (i.e., wage just-reporters). Panel (d): discrepancies between the tax withholdings
reported in the taxpayer’s tax return versus the employer’s third-party report (as a percentage of the latter).
Results based on the subsample of taxpayers who reported their wages within 1% of their third-party reports
(i.e., wage just-reporters).



                                                                                                              40
                                             Figure 2: Correlation between Different Forms of Misreporting
                           a. Deductions Discrepancies                                                                             b. Deductions Discrepancies
                           among Wage Just-Reporters                                                                              among Wage Under-Reporters
                                                            81.95%                               N=121,974                                                                                                  N=23,445
              80%                                                                                                      80%


              70%                                                                                                      70%


              60%                                                                                                      60%

              50%                                                                                                      50%
    Percent




                                                                                                             Percent
                                                                                                                                                                      41.13%
              40%                                                                                                      40%
                                                                                                                                                                                          Over−reporters
              30%                                                                                                      30%                                                                    53.15%

              20%             Under−reporters                                   Over−reporters                         20%             Under−reporters
                                  2.24%                                            15.82%                                                   5.72%
              10%                                                                                                      10%

              0%                                                                                                       0%
                      9%      −7
                                 %
                                       −5
                                          %
                                                −3
                                                   %
                                                         −1
                                                           %     1%      3%      5%      7%      9%   >9
                                                                                                        %                      9%      −7
                                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                                                −5
                                                                                                                                                   %
                                                                                                                                                         −3
                                                                                                                                                            %
                                                                                                                                                                  −1
                                                                                                                                                                     %     1%      3%      5%      7%      9%    >9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %
                    <−     to       to       to       to     +/−      to      to      to      to                             <−     to       to       to       to      +/−      to      to      to      to
                         %        %        %        %              1%      3%      5%      7%                                     %        %        %        %               1%      3%      5%      7%
                      −9       −7       −5       −3                                                                            −9       −7       −5       −3
                                            Taxpayer vs. Third−Party Report                                                                           Taxpayer vs. Third−Party Report


Notes: Discrepancies between the automatic deductions reported in the taxpayer’s tax return versus the employer’s
third-party report (as a percentage of the latter). Results based on the sample of taxpayers who were pure wage
earners and filed a tax return in 2016. Panel (a) is based on the subsample of those taxpayers who reported their
wages within 1% of their third-party reports (i.e., just-reporters), while panel (b) focuses on the sample of taxpayers
who who reported wages below 1% of their third-party reports (i.e., under-reporters).


                                                                         Figure 3: Persistence of Misreporting
                         a. Wage Just-Reporters in 2015                                                                       b. Wage Under-Reporters in 2015
                                                            82.27%
                                                                                                  N=69,062             80%                                                                                      N=9,171
              80%
                                                                                                                                                                      69.71%
                                                                                                                       70%
              70%

              60%                                                                                                      60%

              50%                                                                                                      50%
    Percent




                                                                                                             Percent




              40%                                                                                                      40%

              30%                                                                                                      30%

              20%             Under−reporters                                   Over−reporters                         20%             Under−reporters                                    Over−reporters
                                  15.21%                                             2.52%                                                 26.47%                                              3.82%
              10%                                                                                                      10%

              0%                                                                                                       0%
                      9%      −7
                                 %
                                       −5
                                          %
                                                −3
                                                   %
                                                         −1
                                                           %     1%      3%      5%      7%      9%   >9
                                                                                                        %                      9%      −7
                                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                                                −5
                                                                                                                                                   %
                                                                                                                                                         −3
                                                                                                                                                            %
                                                                                                                                                                  −1
                                                                                                                                                                     %     1%      3%      5%      7%      9%    >9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %
                    <−     to       to       to       to     +/−      to      to      to      to                             <−     to       to       to       to      +/−      to      to      to      to
                         %        %        %        %              1%      3%      5%      7%                                     %        %        %        %               1%      3%      5%      7%
                      −9       −7       −5       −3                                                                            −9       −7       −5       −3
                                            Taxpayer vs. Third−Party Report                                                                           Taxpayer vs. Third−Party Report


Notes: Discrepancies in wages reported by in the taxpayer’s tax return versus the employer’s third-party report.
Results based on the sample of 86,749 taxpayers who were pure wage earners and filed a tax return in both 2015
and 2016. Panel (a) corresponds to the subsample of 69,062 taxpayers who reported their wages within 1% of their
third-party reports (i.e., just-reporters) in 2015, while panel (b) corresponds to the subsample of 9,171 taxpayers
who reported wages below 1% of their third-party reports (i.e., under-reporters) in 2015.


                                                                                                            41
                                                              Figure 4: Distribution of Lab-Measures

             a.Evasion aversion                               b.Public goods                                c.Dishonesty                           d.Giving to strangers
               How much do you want to give                How much do you want to put into         Which number came up on the dice?               How much do you want to share
                    to participant B?                            the common pot?                                                                      with the other participant?
                                                                                              80%
     80%                                            80%                                                                                      80%
                                                                                              70%
     70%                                            70%                                                                                      70%
                                                                                              60%
     60%                                            60%                                                                                      60%
     50%                                            50%                                       50%                                            50%
     40%                                            40%                                       40%                                            40%
     30%                                            30%                                       30%                                            30%
     20%                                            20%                                       20%                                            20%
     10%                                            10%                                       10%                                            10%
      0%                                             0%                                        0%                                             0%
                $0 $250 $500 $750$1000                       $0 $250 $500 $750$1000                     1      2     3     4     5     6              $0 $250 $500 $750$1000


              e.Giving to charity                         f.Giving to government                                   g.Trust                                h.Ultimatum
             How much do you want to donate?               How much do you want to donate                   Do you want to invest in                Do you want to accept the offer?
                                                                 to Government?                                 participant B?
     80%                                                                                                                                     80%
                                                    80%                                       80%
     70%                                                                                                                                     70%
                                                    70%                                       70%
42




     60%                                                                                                                                     60%
                                                    60%                                       60%
     50%                                            50%                                       50%                                            50%
     40%                                            40%                                       40%                                            40%
     30%                                            30%                                       30%                                            30%
     20%                                            20%                                       20%                                            20%
     10%                                            10%                                       10%                                            10%
      0%                                             0%                                        0%                                             0%
                $0 $250 $500 $750$1000                       $0 $250 $500 $750$1000                              Yes      No                                  Yes        No


            i.Inequality aversion                           j.Inequity aversion                             k.Impatience                                l.Risk aversion
           Wich of the two options do you prefer?           How much do you want to give               I’d give up $1000 in a month                I’d give up a safe payment of $1000
                                                                 to participant B?                            in exchange for...                        in exchange for a lottery of...
     80%                                            80%                                       80%                                            80%
     70%                                            70%                                       70%                                            70%
     60%                                            60%                                       60%                                            60%
     50%                                            50%                                       50%                                            50%
     40%                                            40%                                       40%                                            40%
                                                    30%                                       30%                                            30%
     30%
                                                    20%                                       20%                                            20%
     20%                                                                                      10%                                            10%
     10%                                            10%
                                                                                               0%                                             0%
      0%                                             0%                                               $1200 $1400 $1600 $1800 $2000 ≥$2200            $2000   $2500   $3000   $3500 ≥$4000
                     $250−$750 $250−$250                     $0 $250 $500 $750$1000                              ...in a year                                  ...if heads


     Notes: Distribution of the 12 lab-based measures among the 6,078 taxpayers who responded to the survey. For the
     full survey questionnaire, see Appendix B.
                                                                         Figure 5: Distribution of Survey-Measures

                      a.Tax morale                                       b.Workers’ evasion                                                           c.Firms’ evasion                                                         d.Trust in others
                  How justifiable do you think                       What do you think will be the percentage                                What do you think will be the percentage of                                         Would you say that most
                    it is to evade taxes?                             of employees who will under−report                                     Value Added that an average company will                                            people can be trusted?
                                                                              their salary in 2019?                                                   under−report in 2019?
     80%                                                                                                                                                                                                      80%
     70%                                                      80%                                                                     80%                                                                     70%
                                                              70%                                                                     70%                                                                     60%
     60%
                                                              60%                                                                     60%
     50%                                                                                                                                                                                                      50%
                                                              50%                                                                     50%
     40%                                                                                                                                                                                                      40%
                                                              40%                                                                     40%
     30%                                                                                                                                                                                                      30%
                                                              30%                                                                     30%
     20%                                                                                                                                                                                                      20%
                                                              20%                                                                     20%
     10%                                                                                                                                                                                                      10%
                                                              10%                                                                     10%
      0%                                                                                                                                                                                                       0%
                 Always      Sometimes         Never
                                                               0%                                                                      0%                                                                                                Yes     No
                                                                       0−10%10−20%20−30%30−40%40−50%50−60%60−70%70−80%80−90%
                                                                                                                           90−100%              0−10%10−20%20−30%30−40%40−50%50−60%60−70%70−80%80−90%
                                                                                                                                                                                                    90−100%




             e.Trust in government                                   f.Government efficiency                                                  g.Pref. for redistribution                                                 h.Left−Right spectrum
            Would you say that the government can                   Do you think that the government is efficient                           Governments should take steps to reduce the                             On a scale where 0 is the left and 10 is the right,
             generally be trusted to act properly?                   in the way it manages public resources?                                    income gap between rich and poor                                             where would you be located?
     80%                                                      80%                                                                     80%                                                                     80%
     70%                                                      70%                                                                     70%                                                                     70%
     60%                                                      60%                                                                     60%                                                                     60%
                                                                                                                                      50%
43




     50%                                                      50%                                                                                                                                             50%
     40%                                                      40%                                                                     40%                                                                     40%
     30%                                                      30%                                                                     30%                                                                     30%
     20%                                                      20%                                                                     20%                                                                     20%
     10%                                                      10%                                                                     10%
                                                                                                                                                                                                              10%
      0%                                                       0%                                                                      0%
               Almost Sometimes Most of    Almost    Always              Almost    Sometimes Most of            Almost       Always                Tot.    Part.                  Part.            Tot.        0%
               never            the time   always                        never               the time           always                          disagree disagree                 agree           agree                 Left                                    Right


       i.Perceived progressiveness                                  j.Desired progressiveness                                                  k.Perceived inequality                                                             l.Role of luck
           Perceived difference tax rate rich vs. poor                Tax rates should be more progressive                                  What do you think about income differences                                         Is luck relevant in explaining
                                                                                                                                                  between the rich and the poor                                                why a person is poor (rich)?
     80%                                                      80%                                                                                          in Uruguay?
                                                              70%                                                                                                                                             80%
     70%                                                                                                                              80%
                                                              60%                                                                                                                                             70%
     60%                                                                                                                              70%
                                                              50%                                                                                                                                             60%
     50%                                                                                                                              60%
                                                              40%                                                                     50%                                                                     50%
     40%                                                                                                                              40%                                                                     40%
                                                              30%
     30%                                                                                                                              30%                                                                     30%
                                                              20%                                                                     20%
     20%                                                                                                                                                                                                      20%
                                                              10%                                                                     10%
     10%                                                       0%                                                                      0%                                                                     10%
      0%                                                                   Tot.    Part.                 Part.            Tot.                          Very        Adequate           Too                     0%
               <0pp   0−10pp    10−20pp    20−30pp   >30pp              disagree disagree                agree           agree                          low                            high                                    Neither     Rich/Poor      Both



     Notes: Distribution of the 12 survey-based measures among the 6,078 taxpayers who responded to the survey. For
     the full survey questionnaire, see Appendix B.
                                                 Figure 6: Comparison of the Results from Lab- and Survey-Measures to Related Studies

                                                   a. Lab-Measures                                                                                                b. Survey-Measures
                          1




                                                                                                                                          1
                          0.8




                                                                                                                                          0.8
                                                                                           Evasion aversion                                                                                                          Perc. inequality
                                                                                             Inequity aversion                                                                                                  Tax morale
        Benchmark Study




                                                                                                                        Benchmark Study
                          0.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pref. for redistribution




                                                                                                                                          0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                          Trust in government

                                                                    Trust
                                                                                                  Inequality aversion                                                             Left−right spectrum
                                                                    Risk aversion                                                                                                                                         Des. progressiveness
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Role of luck
                          0.4




                                                                                                                                          0.4
                                                                Giving to charity                                                                                    Government efficeincy
                                                                            Public goods
                                                      Giving to strangers
                                                                            Impatience
                          0.2




                                    Dishonesty




                                                                                                                                          0.2
                                                       Giving to government
                                                     Ultimatum                                                                                      Perc. progressiveness         Trust
                          0




                                                                                                                                          0
                                0       0.2            0.4              0.6                0.8              1                                   0        0.2                0.4               0.6                 0.8                 1
  44




                                                             Our Study                                                                                                               Our Study

Notes: Comparison of average responses in our study (N=6,078) vs. in the corresponding benchmark study. Lab-measures: evasion aversion is the share of respondents that give more endowment
to those participants that thinks that evading taxes is never justifiable (benchmark study: Luttmer and Singhal (2014)), public goods is the share of the endowment contributed to the common pool
(List, 2004), dishonesty is the probability of lying, measured as the excess mass of 3, 4 and 5 (Gächter and Schulz, 2016), giving to strangers is the share of the endowment that the respondent gave
to a randomly-chosen individual (Engel, 2011), giving to charity is the share of the endowment that the respondent gave to charity (Engel, 2011), giving to government is the share of the endowment
that the respondent gave to the government ministry of social development (Li et al., 2011), trust is the share of respondents that decided to invest in the other participant (Cardenas and Carpenter,
2008), ultimatum is the share of respondents that rejected the offer (Oosterbeek et al., 2004), inequality aversion is the share of respondents that preferred an egalitarian allocation (Charness and
Rabin, 2002), inequity aversion is the share of respondents that gave a bigger share of the endowment to the participant that had made an effort (Cappelen et al., 2019), impatience is the extra-share
of the payment that must be offered to the respondent in order for them to prefer waiting a year for the payment instead of perceiving the payment next month (Coller and Williams, 1999), risk
aversion is the extra-share of the safe payment that must be offered to the respondent in order for them to prefer a 50-50 lottery instead of the safe payment (Dohmen et al., 2010). Survey-measures:
tax morale is the share of respondents that thinks evading taxes is never justifiable (*), trust in others is the share of respondents that thinks most people can be trusted (*), trust in government
is the share of respondents that thinks always, almost always or most of the time, can trust in the government acting properly (*), government efficiency is the share of respondents that thinks the
government is efficient or very efficient (*), preferences for redistribution is the share of respondents that thinks the government should take steps to reduce the income gap between rich and poor (*),
Left-Right spectrum is the average response to a question about where the individual would be located in a range in which 0 is left and 1 es right (**), perceived progressiveness is the respondents’
perceived difference in tax rate paid between the upper 20% and the bottom 20% of the income distribution (***), desired progressiveness is the share of respondents that are totally or partially agree
with making the tax system more progressive (**), perceived inequality is the share of respondents that thinks that inequality is too high (**), role of luck is the share of respondents that thinks
that luck and other circumstances beyond individual control are more important than individual effort in becoming both rich and poor (*). The benchmarks for the survey measures are based on our
own calculations with the following data sources: (*) World Values Survey Association (2014); (**) 2011 Latinobarometro (https://www.latinobarometro.org/latContents.jsp); (***) 2015/16 ELBU
(http://fcea.edu.uy/datos/bases-de-datos.html).
     Figure 7: Correlation between Actual Tax Evasion Choices and Selected Preferences and
     Beliefs
                  a. Tax morale                         b. Evasion aversion
                                   15%                                                                                                      15%
        Wage Under−Reporters




                                                                                                                     Wage Under−Reporters
                                   10%                                                                                                      10%




                                              5%                                                                                            5%




                                              0%                                                                                            0%
                                                             Always/Sometimes                        Never                                                                     ≤$500                $750                $1000
                                                                   justified                        justified                                                                          How much do you want to give
                                                            How justifiable do you think it is to evade taxes?                                                                              to participant B?



                                                                                                                                                                                        d. Dishonesty
                                                                 c. Public goods
                                                      15%


                                                                                                                                                                    15%
                                                                                                                                             Wage Under−Reporters
                               Wage Under−Reporters




                                                      10%
                                                                                                                                                                    10%




                                                      5%                                                                                                            5%




                                                                                                                                                                    0%
                                                                                                                                                                           1             2         3           4            5       6
                                                      0%
                                                                ≤$250                 $500                  ≥$750                                                                              Which number came up
                                                                         How much do you want to put                                                                                                on the dice?
                                                                           into the common pool?




                                                            e. Giving to strangers                                                                                               f. Workers’ evasion

                                                      15%
                                                                                                                                                                    15%
                                                                                                                                             Wage Under−Reporters
                               Wage Under−Reporters




                                                      10%                                                                                                           10%




                                                                                                                                                                    5%
                                                      5%



                                                                                                                                                                    0%
                                                                                                                                                                          0−10%         10−20%         20−30%         30−40%      >40%
                                                      0%                                                                                                                               What do you think will be the percentage
                                                                 $0                   $250                  ≥$500                                                                        of employees who will under−report
                                                                                                                                                                                                their salary in 2019?
                                                                        How much do you want to share
                                                                          with the other participant?



Notes: Results based on the 6,078 survey respondents. Each bar corresponds to the share of wage under-reporters
(i.e., taxpayers who reported wage income below 1% of the third-party report filed by their employers), with
95% robust confidence intervals. Each panel breaks the same sample of 6,078 taxpayers into subgroups based
on selected lab or survey measures: e.g., panel (a) breaks them down by the responses to the question on tax
morale.


                                                                                                                    45
                                                              Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
                                                                     All      Tax filers   Pure WE         Invited          Responded
                                                                                                         No       Yes       No       Yes
                                                                     (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)      (5)       (6)      (7)

                    Female (%)                                     46.19        46.30         44.84     38.36 52.77 52.24          58.13
                                                                   (0.04)       (0.11)       (0.13)    (0.17) (0.19) (0.20)        (0.63)
                    Age                                            42.39        44.66        44.20      44.81 43.45 43.54          42.54
                                                                   (0.01)       (0.02)       (0.03)    (0.04) (0.04) (0.04)        (0.13)
                    Total income (USD)                             20.84        39.14        37.86      34.54 41.90 41.96          41.36
                                                                   (0.04)       (0.11)       (0.12)    (0.17) (0.17) (0.18)        (0.40)
                    Wage earners (%)                               95.90        83.32        100.00    100.00 100.00 100.00        100.00
                                                                   (0.02)       (0.08)       (0.00)    (0.00) (0.00) (0.00)        (0.00)
                    Wage (USD)                                     19.74        38.63        36.45     33.03 40.64 40.66           40.41
                                                                   (0.03)       (0.09)       (0.09)    (0.11) (0.15) (0.16)        (0.38)
                    Wage Under-reporters (%)                                                 15.49     16.90 13.76 13.78           13.52
46




                                                                                             (0.09)    (0.13) (0.13) (0.14)        (0.44)
                    Autom. Deductions Over-reporters (%)                                     22.04     20.51 23.91 23.59           27.20
                                                                                             (0.11)    (0.14) (0.16) (0.17)        (0.57)
                    Withholding Over-reporters (%)                                           22.88     18.56 28.19 28.16           28.52
                                                                                             (0.11)    (0.14) (0.17) (0.18)        (0.59)
                    Observations                                 1,305,295     209,115      151,565    83,357 68,208 62,130        6,078

 Notes: Average characteristics for the year 2016, with robust standard errors in parentheses. Column (1) corresponds to the whole unvierse of taxpayers.
 Column (2) corresponds to the group of taxpayers that file a tax return. Column (3) corresponds to the group of taxpayers that file a tax return and are pure
 wage earners (i.e do not receive self-employment income). Additionally, column (3) excludes those pure wage earners that have missing wage income data on
 their third-party report. Column (4) to column (7) correspond to sub groups of column (3). Column (4) and (5) correspond to the group of taxpayers that
 were not and were invited to the survey, respectively. Column (6) and (7) correspond to the group of taxpayers that did not respond and did respond to the
 survey, respectively. Female is the percentage of female. Age is the age average in years. Total income is the total annual income average in thousands of 2016
 U$D. Wage earners is the percentage of wage earners. Wage is the average wage in thousands of 2016 U$D. For those that don’t file a tax return, Wage is the
 third-party reported wage including bonus. For those that file a tax return, Wage is the self-reported wage including bonus income. Wage Under-reporters is
 the percentage of taxpayers that under-report their wage. Autom. Deductions Over-reporters is the percentage of taxpayers that over-report their automatic
 deductions. Finally, Withholding Over-reporters is the percentage of taxpayers that over-report their withholding income.
                  Table 2: Pairwise Correlations between Tax Evasion and Lab and Survey Measures
                                                                          Corr.Coef.      95% CI         p-value   q-value
                                                                             (1)            (2)            (3)       (4)
                                         Evasion aversion                    0.008     [-0.017,0.033]     0.541     0.999
                                         Public goods                       0.003      [-0.022,0.028]    0.812     0.999
                                         Dishonesty                         -0.000     [-0.025,0.025]    0.981      0.999
                                         Giving to strangers                0.040       [0.015,0.065]     0.002    0.020
                                         Giving to charity                  0.046       [0.021,0.071]    <0.001    <0.001
                          Lab-Based



                                         Giving to government               0.048       [0.023,0.073]    <0.001    <0.001
                                         Trust                              -0.008     [-0.033,0.017]    0.516     0.999
                                         Ultimatum                          0.026       [0.000,0.051]     0.046    0.321
                                         Inequality aversion                 0.007     [-0.018,0.033]     0.560     0.999
                                         Inequity aversion                  -0.001     [-0.026,0.024]     0.925     0.999
                                         Impatience                         0.021      [-0.005,0.046]    0.108      0.652
                                         Risk aversion                       0.013     [-0.012,0.038]     0.324    0.999

                                         Tax morale                         -0.006      [-0.032,0.019]   0.613      0.999
                                         Workers’ evasion                    0.038       [0.013,0.064]   0.003     0.027
                                         Firms’ evasion                      0.067       [0.042,0.092]   <0.001    <0.001
                                         Trust in others                     0.024      [-0.001,0.049]    0.063     0.408
                          Survey-Based




                                         Trust in government                 0.028       [0.003,0.054]    0.027     0.204
                                         Government efficiency               0.046       [0.021,0.071]   <0.001    <0.001
                                         Preferences for redistribution      0.042       [0.017,0.067]    0.001     0.011
                                         Left-right spectrum                -0.062     [-0.087,-0.037]   <0.001    <0.001
                                         Perceived progressiveness          -0.010      [-0.035,0.015]   0.445      0.999
                                         Desired progressiveness             0.058       [0.033,0.084]   <0.001    <0.001
                                         Perceived inequality                0.029       [0.003,0.054]   0.026     0.204
                                         Role of luck                        0.047       [0.022,0.072]   <0.001    <0.001

Notes: Correlations between tax evasion (and indicator variable that takes the value 1 if the individual under-reported wages in 2016
and 0 otherwise) and each of the the lab and survey measures. Results for the 6,078 wage earners who filed a tax return in 2016
and responded to our survey. The q-values (column (4)) are based on the Yekutieli method. Evasion aversion is the share of the
endowment given to the partner who thinks evading taxes is never justifiable, public goods is the share of the endowment contributed
to the common pool, dishonesty is the probability of having lied conditional on the dice draw that was reported, giving to strangers
is the share of the endowment given to a random stranger, giving to charity is the share of the endowment given the charity, giving to
government is the share of the endowment given to the government program, trust indicates if the respondent invested in the partner,
ultimatum indicates whether the proposer’s offer was rejected, inequality aversion indicates if the respondent preferred the egalitarian
allocation, inequity aversion is the share of the endowment given to the subject who exerted effort, impatience is the premium that
must be offered to the respondent to delay the payment for a year, risk aversion is the premium that must be offered to accept the
risk, tax morale indicates in a 1-3 scale if evading taxes is justifiable with 3 being never justifiable, Workers’ evasion indicates in a
1-10 scale the perceived share of wage earners who evade taxes (10 = 90-100%), Firms’ evasion indicates in a 1-10 scale the perceived
share of value added tax that is evaded by firms (10 = 90-100%), trust in others indicates in a 1-2 scale if most people can be trusted,
trust in government indicates in a 1-5 scale whether one can trust the government in acting properly, government efficiency indicates
in a 1-4 scale the perceived efficiency of the government, preferences for redistribution indicates in a 1-4 scale whether the government
should take steps to reduce the income gap between rich and poor, Left-Right spectrum indicates in a 0-10 scale the respondents’
placement in the left-right spectrum (10 = right), perceived progressiveness indicates the respondents’ perceived difference in tax rate
paid between the upper 20% and the bottom 20%, desired progressiveness indicates in a 1-4 scale whether the tax system should be
more progressive, perceived inequality indicates in a 1-3 scale whether inequality is too high, role of luck indicates in a 0-2 scale if
luck is important to determine incomes.


                                                                            47
                 Table 3: Predicting Tax Evasion Choices with Multivariate Probit Regression
                                                                      (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)     (5)     (6)
                                   Evasion aversion                   -0.002                 0.002
                                                                     (0.021)               (0.023)
                                   Public goods                       -0.007                -0.012
                                                                     (0.022)               (0.022)
                                   Dishonesty                          0.000                 0.000
                                                                     (0.020)               (0.020)
                                   Giving to strangers               0.041*                  0.031
                                                                     (0.021)               (0.022)
                                   Giving to charity                0.067***              0.059***
                                                                     (0.021)               (0.022)
                                   Giving to government             0.072***                 0.037
                    Lab-Based




                                                                     (0.020)               (0.023)
                                   Trust                              -0.025                -0.021
                                                                     (0.021)               (0.021)
                                   Ultimatum                          0.026                 0.021
                                                                     (0.020)               (0.020)
                                   Inequality aversion                 0.004                 0.009
                                                                     (0.021)               (0.021)
                                   Inequity aversion                   0.013                 0.021
                                                                     (0.021)               (0.022)
                                   Impatience                         0.031                 0.028
                                                                     (0.021)               (0.021)
                                   Risk aversion                       0.011                 0.015
                                                                     (0.021)               (0.021)

                                   Tax morale                                    -0.012     -0.021
                                                                                (0.021)    (0.022)
                                   Workers’ evasion                              0.020       0.021
                                                                                (0.026)    (0.026)
                                   Firms’ evasion                              0.092***   0.089***
                                                                                (0.025)    (0.025)
                                   Trust in others                                0.020      0.026
                                                                                (0.021)    (0.021)
                                   Trust in government                           -0.010     -0.011
                                                                                (0.027)    (0.027)
                    Survey-Based




                                   Government efficiency                          0.033      0.022
                                                                                (0.026)    (0.027)
                                   Preferences for redistribution                -0.003     -0.008
                                                                                (0.025)    (0.025)
                                   Left-right spectrum                         -0.051**     -0.039
                                                                                (0.026)    (0.026)
                                   Perceived progressiveness                     -0.004     0.002
                                                                                (0.021)    (0.021)
                                   Desired progressiveness                      0.056**   0.053**
                                                                                (0.026)    (0.026)
                                   Perceived inequality                          0.014       0.011
                                                                                (0.023)    (0.023)
                                   Role of luck                                   0.033      0.029
                                                                                (0.023)    (0.023)
                                   Past evasion                                                       X
                                   Demographics                                                               X
                                   Peer evasion                                                                       X
                                   AUC                               0.564      0.587      0.602     0.564   0.666   0.872
                                   Pseudo R2                         0.008      0.014      0.018     0.011   0.052   0.271
                                   Observations                      6,078      6,078      6,078     6,078   6,060   6,078

Notes: Each column corresponds to a different Probit regression. Raw coefficients with robust standard errors in parentheses.
The dependent variable indicates whether the taxpayer under-reported wages in 2016. All the survey-based and lab-based we
normalized to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1 (for their definitions, see the notes to Table 2). Past evasion corresponds
to a set of three variables on the individual’s own tax evasion in 2015. Demographics correspond to a set of four demographic
variables (gender, age, education and income in 2015). Peer evasion includes a set of three variables on the tax evasion of
coworkers in 2016.
                                                                               48
