                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     LONG-TERM EFFECTS OF EQUAL SHARING:
                  EVIDENCE FROM INHERITANCE RULES FOR LAND

                                      Charlotte Bartels
                                        Simon Jäger
                                     Natalie Obergruber

                                     Working Paper 28230
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28230


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2020




The authors would like to thank Adrian Adermon, Sascha O. Becker, Timm Bönke, Davide
Cantoni, Francesco Cinnirella, Giacomo Corneo, Johannes Eigner, Oliver Falck, Leander
Heldring, Erik Hornung, Thomas Piketty, Cory Smith, Uwe Sunde, and Ludger Wößmann for
helpful comments. Furthermore, we thank participants of the European Macro History Online
Seminar 2020, Verein für Socialpolitik and IIPF 2020. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Charlotte Bartels, Simon Jäger, and Natalie Obergruber. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Long-Term Effects of Equal Sharing: Evidence from Inheritance Rules for Land
Charlotte Bartels, Simon Jäger, and Natalie Obergruber
NBER Working Paper No. 28230
December 2020
JEL No. E02,H24,J24,J43,N13,N14,N23,N24,N33,N34,N53,N54,N93,N94,O3,P42,R52

                                          ABSTRACT

What are the long-term economic effects of a more equal distribution of wealth? We exploit
variation in historical inheritance rules for land traversing political, linguistic, geological, and
religious borders in Germany. In some German areas, inherited land was to be shared or divided
equally among children, while in others land was ruled to be indivisible. Using a geographic
regression discontinuity design, we show that equal division of land led to a more equal
distribution of land; other potential drivers of growth are smooth at the boundary and equal
division areas were not historically more developed. Today, equal division areas feature higher
average incomes and a right-shifted skill, income, and wealth distribution. Higher top incomes
and top wealth in equal division areas coincide with higher education, and higher labor
productivity. We show evidence consistent with the more even distribution of land leading to
more innovative industrial by-employment during Germany's transition from an agrarian to an
industrial economy and, in the long-run, more entrepreneurship.

Charlotte Bartels                                Natalie Obergruber
DIW Berlin                                       CESifo
Mohrenstr. 58                                    Poschingerstraße 5
10117 Berlin                                     München 81679
Germany                                          Germany
and IZA                                          and IZA
cbartels@diw.de                                  nobergruber@gmail.com

Simon Jäger
Department of Economics, E52-454
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and IZA
and also NBER
sjaeger@mit.edu
1    Introduction

One of the oldest debates in economics concerns the effect of inequality on growth and de-
velopment (see, e.g. Kuznets 1955). How would growth prospects change if income or wealth
were counterfactually distributed more evenly? The answer to this question has become partic-
ularly relevant in recent decades due to rising levels of income and wealth inequality (Piketty
& Saez 2014, Alvaredo, Atkinson, Piketty & Saez 2013). Yet, the debate has remained active
due to the scarcity of suitable data and credible research designs that allow for an estimation of
causally interpretable effects, as variations in inequality likely correlate with drivers of growth
(Banerjee & Duflo 2003).

    We contribute to the resolution of this debate by leveraging sharp geographic variation in
institutions that govern how resources are passed from parents to children. Historical inheri-
tance rules for agricultural land varied sharply within Germany and prescribed either equal or
unequal division of land among a decedent's children, also referred to as partible or impart-
ible inheritance, respectively. In unequal division areas, agricultural property was considered
indivisible and had to be passed on to a single heir. In contrast, agricultural land had to be
divided equally among all children in equal division areas. Broadly speaking, equal division of
agricultural land was prevalent in parts of Southern and Western Germany and the boundary
between the two inheritance rule regimes traverses political, linguistic, geological, and religious
borders. Figure 1 shows an example of this geographic variation, depicting a fine-grained map
of inheritance regimes in the South-Western state of Württemberg in 1905-10.

    We analyze historical and long-run effects of these inheritance rules on economic outcomes
and their distribution in a geographic regression discontinuity (RD) design. We digitized and
geocoded data from fine-grained historical surveys on the local prevalence of inheritance rules
across 19th century Germany (see e.g. Sering 1897). We show that predictors of long-term
development and also of a particular inheritance rule regime are smooth at the boundary,
thereby suggesting that the variation in inheritance rules that we analyze is idiosyncratic and
not systematically related to other drivers of growth. At a fine geographic level, the data
therefore show a robust effect of lower levels of landholding inequality in the 19th century ­
caused by the equal division inheritance regime ­ on long-term economic outcomes and allow
us to rule out a variety of potential confounders.


                                                2
      Throughout the 19th century, ownership of land ­ the key store of wealth in an agricultural
society ­ was more evenly distributed in equal division areas with a reduction in the landholding
Gini coefficient by about a third of a standard deviation. Our evidence shows that inheritance
rules indeed affected the inequality of landed wealth during the industrialization period. This
finding is non-trivial: for example, a Coasean argument would suggest that inter vivos land
transactions may lead to concentrated land ownership in equal division areas, e.g., if transaction
costs were low and concentrated ownership were optimal.

      The core result of our paper is that equal division of land has generated persistent effects
until today: modern income and GDP levels are 6 to 14 percent higher in equal division areas.
The more even distribution of land in the 19th century triggered a greater variety of activities
during industrialization resulting in a more dispersed distribution today. Higher top incomes,
higher top income shares and higher top wealth coincide with higher education, and higher
labor productivity in equal division areas today.

      Why might a more even wealth distribution spur long-term growth? Previous work has
argued that the small and fragmented peasant holdings in equal division areas created both
the incentive and the opportunity for extensive engagement in industrial by-employments as
compensatory strategies which in turn provided the breeding ground for Germany's Mittelstand
today (Herrigel 2000).1 An influential body of literature hypothesizes that the distribution of
wealth affects long-term growth through its effect on investment decisions and the occupational
choice of individuals (see, e.g., Galor & Zeira 1993, Banerjee & Newman 1993, Ghatak & Nien-
Huei Jiang 2002, Galor & Moav 2004). In such models, individuals have the choice between, e.g.,
subsistence farming and becoming a skilled worker or entrepreneur. Compared to a situation
in which a large part of the population has essentially no wealth, a more even distribution of
wealth can alleviate credit constraints in parts of the population or provide a buffer to absorb
the potential risks of innovating, investing in human capital, or becoming an entrepreneur, all
of which have favorable consequences for growth.

      Historical accounts provide evidence consistent with inheritance rules affecting long-term
growth through an occupational choice mechanisms. For example, the Finance Minister in the
Kingdom of Württemberg argued that Württemberg's economic strength at the time, in 1823,
  1
    Mittelstand refers to the segment of Germany's economic landscape shaped by small- and medium-sized
firms.



                                                  3
was "the unconditionally permissible division of landed property. On property of paltry size,
the industriousness, thrift and ingenuity of the owner blossoms. He nourishes himself in the
character of a businessman [Gewerbsmann], indeed, he becomes [. . . ] a business man. [. . . ] No
matter where one looks, one finds everywhere industrious artisans, highly skilled manufacturers
and thoughtful merchants. That is the character of industry in this land. [. . . ] Supported by their
small farms they are at least able to salvage a meager existence until luck or genius brings to
them better times " (see Herrigel 2000, p.56). The assessment is consistent with the hypothesis
that occupational choice and entrepreneurship could be mechanisms through which a more even
distribution of landed wealth contributed to long-term growth.

    We investigate the hypothesized mechanism empirically drawing on our RD design and
find that occupational choice indeed differed between equal and unequal division areas during
Germany's industrialization as predicted by the models. Specifically, we find that higher shares
of the population in equal division areas­with a more even land distribution­worked in manu-
facturing as well as in trade and services. The additional employment in manufacturing is fully
accounted for by employment in particularly innovative sectors with high patenting activity
(defined following Streb, Baten & Yin 2006), which command a 36 percent higher employment
share in equal division areas. We also find that self-employment out of agriculture is slightly
higher in equal division areas as well as the density of middle schools which addressed students
who want to become an apprentice. Finally, patenting activity itself was also higher in equal
division areas. Overall, the data suggest that a more even distribution of wealth enabled work-
ers to take up new opportunities during the transition from an agricultural to an industrial
economy, and ultimately, become entrepreneurs. We find no evidence of more advantageous
starting conditions for equal division areas before the Industrial Revolution with respect to
agricultural productivity, general education, urban population or population density.

    Our findings support several models in which landholding inequality may inhibit economic
growth by restricting occupational choice. Galor, Moav & Vollrath (2009) formalize in a the-
oretical model that a more equal land distribution supports the rise of a new entrepreneurial
elite during industrialization. The entrepreneurial elite then supports education of the former
unskilled labor force. Data on education spending during the high-school movement in the US
delivers evidence for that model. Similarly, Cinnirella & Hornung (2016) find for Prussia a
negative cross-sectional relationship between large landholdings and primary school enrollment

                                                 4
rates throughout the 19th century. With our findings that equal division counties are character-
ized by higher innovative activity and more self-employed people out of agriculture, we deliver
evidence that a more equal land distribution fosters the rise of a new entrepreneurial elite and,
perhaps, economic growth.

    More broadly, our study builds on several additional strands of the literature. We add causal
evidence to the literature on the long-term effects of historical conditions on the economic de-
velopment (see, e.g., La Porta, Lopez-de Silanes, Shleifer & Vishny 1998, Acemoglu, Johnson &
Robinson 2001, Glaeser, La Porta, Lopez-de Silanes & Shleifer 2004, Nunn 2009, Alesina, Giu-
liano & Nunn 2013) and show that an inclusive institution, leading to a more equal distribution
of landed wealth, fostered long-term growth. More directly, we build on the literature study-
ing the economic and political consequences of landholding inequality (see, e.g., Gerschenkron
1966, Banerjee, Iyer & Somanathan 2005, Banerjee & Iyer 2005, Acemoglu, Bautista, Querubín
& Robinson 2007, Ziblatt 2008, Becker, Cinnirella & Woessmann 2010, Bleakley & Ferrie 2016,
Smith 2019). In addition, our study builds on previous research on industrialization in Ger-
many (see, e.g., Gerschenkron 1989, Tilly 1969, Eichengreen & Ritschl 2009, Herrigel 2000).
Furthermore, our findings are consistent with Doepke & Zilibotti (2008) who argue that occu-
pational choice plays a crucial role during the Industrial Revolution and posit a concomitant
downfall of the landed elite. Related to our work, Duranton, Rodríguez-Pose & Sandall (2009)
correlate the regional prevalence of particular medieval family types with long-run outcomes
across European regions. Contrary to our findings, they observe lower GDP levels, higher levels
of manufacturing, and lower levels of service sector employment in what we would classify as
equal division areas. These differences in the results might arise from differences in methodol-
ogy as their analysis relies on a broader, cross-regional comparison. Habakkuk (1955) analyzes
the role of family structures focusing primarily on population growth. He hypothesizes that
single-heir systems slow population growth whereas equal division rules foster it. With regard
to mobility, Habakkuk (1955) argues that unequal division areas faced more out-migration as
non-inheriting children had fewer ties to the parental home. Analyzing micro-data from 19th
century Hesse-Cassel, Wegge (1998) finds some support for this hypothesis. In addition, our
study is most directly related to work by Rink & Hilbig (2019) who find a long-term associa-
tion between equal division in Germany and more political equality today, e.g., more women



                                               5
in political councils and fewer aristocrats in the social elite. Finally, our study speaks to the
historical origins of entrepreneurial activity (Glaeser & Kerr 2009, Fritsch & Wyrwich 2014).

        Our paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 discusses the history and the hypothesized origins
of agricultural inheritance rules in Germany. Section 3 gives an overview of the different data
sets we use. We present and discuss our empirical strategy in Section 4. Section 5 shows the
estimated effects of Equal Division and historical and modern inequality measures and on
modern measures of economic well-being. Further, we discuss correlations between equal division
and potential confounders. Section 6 provides evidence for mechanisms through which equal
division might have affected modern outcomes. Section 7 concludes.



2        Historical Background of Inheritance Rules

Historically, two main rules of inheritance for farms and agricultural land existed in Ger-
many, prescribing equal division ('Realteilung') and unequal division of land ('Anerbenrecht')
(Rösener 2012).2 Under unequal division inheritance, agricultural property is considered indivis-
ible and has to be passed on to a single heir. The most common unequal division rule prescribed
"primogeniture", i.e. making the oldest son the designated heir. Historically, daughters and last-
borns did not have a claim to the parental land and received little or no compensation in most
unequal division areas. As a consequence, the non-inheriting children typically became landless
and worked as farmhands on the inheriting brother's farm (Cole & Wolf 1995) or in factories
(Becker 1998), unless they married into a landed family. Under equal division inheritance, land
holding is divided equally among all children including daughters.

        Eliminating equal division had been a recurring topic in the political debate since the
19th century (Rouette 2003, Eheberg 1883). Again and again, equal division was argued to
represent a threat to the productivity of agriculture and the existence of farmers. The Nazis
implemented such a reform through the 'Reichserbhofgesetz' (State Hereditary Farm Law) of
1933 introducing unequal division all over Germany (Rouette 2003). However, Röhm (1957)
and Röhm (1961) later finds evidence that equal division rules persisted regionally until the
    2
    Variations in inheritance rules are also present in other parts of Europe. In England, for example, non-
partible inheritance is traditionally applied (Alston & Schapiro 1984) while in France (Crouch 2005) as well as
the Netherlands (Alston & Schapiro 1984) people divided farms equally. Spain applies partible inheritance in
the South (Andalusia) and non-partible inheritance in the other parts (Tur-Prats 2018).


                                                      6
1950s. Even today, inheritance of farms is locally regulated by the states.3 The state-specific
rules still suspend equal division of the inheritance among a community of heirs as prescribed
by the German Civil Law Code (BGB §§1922). Bavaria, Saarland, Thuringia, Saxony, Saxony-
Anhalt, Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, Brandenburg, and Berlin follow BGB §2049 and §2312
(Landgüterrecht) which in general prescribes equal division but regulates that farms are assessed
at a lower value than other property. The aim remains to secure productivity of agriculture.

      In order to prevent the infinite parcellation of arable land below subsistence levels, farmers
in equal division areas undertook different measures. First, parental property was sold to the
child to whom ownership and control was passed on exclusively. The price could be paid either
to the parents or to the other siblings as a one-off payment or as a regular rent. Second, land was
bought and sold, primarily within family networks, with the aim of stabilizing farm sizes in the
long-run. The land market has developed earlier and has been more dynamic in equal division
areas since the 18th century. In this context, intermarriage started to play an increasing role
(Rouette 2003). But still, we find significantly more small farms in equal division areas than in
unequal division areas, suggesting that the consequences of inheritance rules for land allocation
were not fully undone by other mechanisms (see Section 5.1).

      Since we use geographic variation in the historical prevalence of inheritance rules, the
question of which factors lead to the adoption of a particular inheritance rule in a locality
arises naturally. This question remains debated among historians, who concur that the rules
had been in place since at least the Middle Ages: Two of the first written codices, the Lex
Salica of 507 AD and the Sachsenspiegel of 1220 AD, regulated agricultural inheritance. The
Lex Salica prescribed equal division among male offspring in Frankish lands (South-Western
Germany) (Behrend 1897), whereas the Sachsenspiegel prescribed a single heir in parts of the
North-East (Blanckmeister 1913).

      A hypothesis dating back to at least Weber (1924) is that unequal division was established
where local feudal lords or the state had the power and incentives to prohibit the division
of land as it was thought that larger land plots could be taxed more easily (Rösener 2012).
Other scholars have suggested that features of the terrain or the soil were conducive to the
  3
    Hamburg, North Rhine-Westphalia, Lower Saxony, and Schleswig-Holstein introduced unequal division in-
heritance by the the Höfeordnung (HöfeO from 26 July 1976, BGBl. 1, S. 1933). Baden-Württemberg applies
the Badisches Hofgütergesetz and Württembergisches Anerbengesetz. Hesse follows the Hessische Landgüterord-
nung, Rhineland-Palatinate the Rheinland-Pfälzische Höfeordnung, and Bremen the Bremisches Höfegesetz.


                                                    7
adoption of one inheritance rule over the other (Schröder 1979). Following Boserup (1965) and
Fastenmayer (2009) soil quality in combination with crops that support plough use would give
an advantage to unequal division rules. Finally, Chu (1991) argued that impartible inheritance,
in the form of primogeniture, may arise as family's optimal policy to the reduce the lineal
extinction probability in a dynastic model.

       For our application, we illustrate the fine-grained and idiosyncratic nature of the variation in
inheritance rules based on a historic map from Krafft (1930) in Figure 1. The variation we exploit
traverses political, linguistic, geological, and religious borders. Figure 1 illustrates variation in
the prevalence of equal vs. unequal division of land from one village to the next within the
same county. Moreover, the border between inheritance rules does not generally follow political
boundaries. Similarly, the figure also illustrates that the inheritance rule variation also traverses
a linguistic boundary between Swabian and East Franconian German dialects.

       Figure 2 Panel (a) shows the overall spatial distribution of different inheritance rules in
19th century Germany that we exploit for our analysis.4 We distinguish equal division (green)
from unequal division areas (blue). Unequal division is prevalent in a majority of regions. With
several exceptions, equal division is predominantly found in the southwest of Germany. The map
is a combination of various sources in form of maps and texts from the late 19th century: The
first comprehensive overview of the geographic distribution of inheritance rules in Prussia was
created in 1894 when the Prussian government conducted a survey among judges and county
administrators to inquire into the nature and history of inheritance rules in their jurisdiction
(Rouette 2003). Around the same time, similar surveys were conducted in the other kingdoms
of the German Empire by Verein für Socialpolitik (1883), Grossherzogliches Ministerium des
Inneren (1883), Miaskowski (1884), Fick (1895), and Krafft (1930). Several decades later, the
geographers Hartke & Westermann (1940) created an overview map that depicted the local
prevalence of particular inheritance rules based on the results published by Sering (1897) and
others. These surveys allow a very fine-grained categorization of inheritance rules by locality,
   4
    We stick to the maps provided by the sources in the late 19th century, because local inheritance regimes were
not necessarily stable over time. Rouette (2003) points to two changes in the 19th century: The industrialized
Ruhr area switched from unequal to equal division while the area around Paderborn increasingly practiced
unequal division.




                                                       8
typically at the village level.5 In our samples the inheritance rule of each county is classified by
the inheritance rule of the majority of the area of a county.



3       Data

This section provides a detailed description of our data sources and shows summary statistics
of how equal and unequal division counties differed. The unit of observation throughout is a
rural county in Germany at different points in time.6 The counties' locations are indicated by
historical and modern maps of German counties provided by MPIDR [Max Planck Institute
for Demographic Research] and CGG [Chair for Geodesy and Geoinformatics, University of
Rostock] (2011) and the German Federal Institute for Research on Building, Urban Affairs, and
Spatial Development (BBSR). We link our historical sample, consisting of 900 rural German
counties in 1895, either spatially, via official county codes, or via county names to our modern
sample of 397 counties in 2014.


3.1     Data Sources

Our main outcome variables stem from censuses, national accounts and tax records of the
Federal Statistical Office of Germany or its predecessors from the late 19th century onward. In
order to measure income inequality within and between regions in the 19th century and today,
we draw on income tax records and compute top income shares following the standards of
the World Inequality Database (https:\\wid.world), i.e., we apply the Pareto interpolation
method as established by Piketty (2003). Our regional income inequality series for Germany
represents a new and unique contribution to international inequality data, because existing
    5
     Where possible, we follow the original sources rather than Hartke & Westermann (1940), whose work was
published during the Nazi regime and might have been influenced by the propaganda similar to Huppertz (1939).
For counties for which we could not identify the prevalent inheritance rule from the original sources we filled
the gaps from the comprehensive map of Hartke & Westermann (1940).
   6
     Sample restrictions exclude independent cities from our analysis for several reasons. First, agriculture played
a minor role in cities. Second, urbanization triggered migration into cities at a large scale and brings people with
unequal division origin into areas of equal division and vice versa. Migrants' behavior influences the outcome
variables of cities and we cannot distinguish if this is driven by people with equal or unequal division background.




                                                         9
long-run inequality series measure inequality at the national level ­ with one regional exception
for the United States.7


Historical Outcomes Historical data on farm sizes and occupations stem from the first
comprehensive agricultural census for the German Empire (Kaiserliches Statisisches Amt 1912)
and from two censuses on occupations and businesses (Kaiserliches Statisisches Amt 1897,
Kaiserliches Statisisches Amt 1910) that we digitized. These statistics allow us to calculate
average farm sizes, the share of farms across size categories, the population per county and
employment shares in agriculture, manufacturing, and trade and services. Within occupations,
we can identify innovative branches in manufacturing as specified in Streb et al. (2006). We
enrich agricultural information by data on landholding inequality from 1895 provided by Ziblatt
(2008). The distribution of height in Bavarian conscripts in the 19th century serves as individual
data on inequality (Baten 1999, Baten 2000). Patent data from Streb et al. (2006) which includes
all valuable patents filed in Germany between 1877 and 1914 serves as a second measure for
innovative activity.8 For the estimation of income inequality within and between counties, we
use county-level income tax tabulations that provide information on income bins, including
the mean income and the number of taxpayers within each bin. We digitized historical county-
level income tax tabulations from Baden, Hesse and Württemberg (see Table A3 for data
sources).9 Further measures of economic development come from the census on occupations and
businesses from 1925 which allows us to distinguish between employees and laborers (Fritsch
& Wyrwich 2016).10


Modern Outcomes Income, education, and industry structure on the county level are from
the INKAR 2014 data set, which includes official aggregated information and is provided by
the BBSR. For finer measures of income and labor productivity, we incorporate county-level
national accounts and income tax records provided by the German Federal Statistical Office
   7
     Bartels (2019) provides the WID series for Germany. The Pareto interpolation method additionally draws
on population statistics for the total number of potential taxpayers and national accounts for total income as
income tax statistics are restricted to the taxpaying part of the population. See Bartels (2019) for a detailed
description of the method and its application to German income tax statistics 1871 to 2014.
   8
     We thank Jochen Streb for kindly sharing his data.
   9
     Bavaria did not publish county-level income tax information before World War I. Prussia only published
tax tabulation on the more aggregate level of the Regierungsbezirk.
  10
     We thank Michael Wyrwich for kindly sharing their data.



                                                      10
and the Statistical Offices of the Laender. Our between-county inequality measures are the log
mean income of the top 10% and the top 1% as well as the share of households in each county
belonging to the bottom 40% or bottom 20% of the national income distribution.11 For the
measurement of wealth, we draw on wealth data from the last collection of the German wealth
tax in 1995, that lists wealth taxpayers and millionaires per 10.000 inhabitants by county.


Pre-Industrial Development For agricultural productivity before and after 1500 we use
data on caloric output of land by Galor & Özak (2016). Another measure of pre-industrial
economic development is population data, which we obtain from Bairoch, Batou & Chevre
(1988) and the Statistical Office of the German Empire, which published the population of
1375 German towns and cities in 1867, 1871, and 1875 (Kaiserliches Statistisches Amt 1877).
Additionally, we use data from the iPEHd on Prussia provided by Becker, Cinnirella, Hornung &
Woessmann (2014) to evaluate pre-industrial development. Tables A1 and A2 in the Appendix
provide a brief overview of the variables we use from these data sets.


Control Variables We use three types of control variables: geographical variables, cultural
and institutional variables, and controls for the location. The geographic control variables come
from GIS raster data depicting current information on soil, climate, elevation, and navigable
waterways. We rely on data from the European Soil Data Base, the free climate data from
WorldClim.org and navigable waterways from Kunz (2004). The calculation of average elevation
of a county is based on data from Jarvis, Reuter, Nelson & Guevara (2006). Cultural and
institutional control variables come from various sources: The share of protestants in a county
stems from Konversationslexikon (1905) and the general law type stems from a map by Schröder
(1870). Hanseatic involvement is inferred from a map by Helmolt (1902) as is an indicator for
belonging to the Frankish territory from Shepherd (1911). We include controls for location in
the form of longitude and latitude of the centroid of a county as well as an indicator for the
historical state the county belongs to.
  11
    Income tax records today exclude a third of the population which is tax exempt. Using the Socio-Economic
Panel (SOEP), we estimate that the bottom 40% of potential tax households in Germany earned less than
e20.000 and the bottom 20% earned less than e10.000. The SOEP allows us to rank potential tax households
by their gross income according to tax law definitions so that we can identify income thresholds of the bottom
40% and bottom 20%, respectively, and then estimate their population share.




                                                     11
3.2    Summary Statistics

Table 1 shows summary statistics for equal and unequal division counties, which illustrate to
what extent the two groups differed in their control characteristics. Panel A lists the geographic
controls. In equal division areas, the average temperature and elevation are slightly higher.
Unequal division areas have a significantly higher share of sand, silt, and loam in the soil,
while the share of loess, which is favorable for agriculture, does not differ significantly between
the two groups. Panel B shows the summary statistics of the cultural and institutional control
variables. While Frankish territory and Napoleonic Code mainly appear in equal division areas
and the Hanseatic League and Prussian Law in unequal division areas, the share of protestants
does not differ significantly between inheritance rules. We conclude that equal and unequal
division areas are not completely balanced but differ in some aspects; therefore, we include the
geographic and cultural control variables later on in our analyses and use geographic regression
discontinuity models with counties close to the boundary as our preferred specification.



4     Empirical Strategy

We apply two empirical strategies to estimate the effect of equal division on inequality and
economic development. First, we estimate OLS regressions with a rich set of control variables,
including flexible controls for the location of the county. Second, we view the location where un-
equal division changes to equal division as a boundary and discontinuous jump in inheritance
rules which is determined by longitude and latitude. In this framework we apply a multidi-
mensional, semi-parametric regression discontinuity (RD) approach similar to Dell (2010) to
identify the effect of equal division. Our estimation model is:


         Yc =  +  · Equal Divisionc + Xc  + f (Geographic Locationc ) + s(c) + c .             (1)


    The outcome Yc is a specific outcome measure of county c. Equal Division is an indicator
variable for equal division inheritance in county c. The coefficient of interest  measures the
effect of equal division and the outcome variable Yc . The matrix Xc contains control variables
for county c. The term s(c) determines the state in which county c is located. Independent cities



                                                12
of one state are clustered locally. Therefore, the state dummies divide the border of inheritance
rule into nine different segments.12

      The polynomial f (Geographic Locationc ) is a linear function of longitude and latitude in
the OLS specification. Our RD specification additionally includes distance to the boundary
and an interaction term of treatment and distance to the border to allow the slope to vary on
either side of the border. As a robustness check, we use a quadratic polynomial that controls
for squared longitude, latitude, and distance to the boundary, as well as interactions between
longitude and latitude, longitude and distance to border and, finally, latitude and distance to
border. Our main results are qualitatively and quantitatively robust to using the quadratic
polynomial instead.

      We use the full sample of all rural counties in Germany in a specific year for the OLS
specification. For the RD specification, we reduce the sample to counties with a centroid in a 35
km radius of the border as Figure 2 Panel (b) shows. We test the robustness of the RD results by
varying the distance to border (see Figures 5 to 7). Standard errors are clustered at the district
level which is one aggregation level above the county level.13 We also present HAC standard
errors following Conley (1999) to account for spatial autocorrelation. Counties are weighted
by the number of their inhabitants in order to allow a population-related interpretation of our
results. Independent cities are excluded in our historical analysis. In our analysis of modern
outcomes, independent cities with more than 100.000 inhabitants are excluded.


4.1      Identification Assumption

The RD approach relies on the identification assumption that the characteristics between the
two groups - i.e. across the border - vary smoothly. In order to test this assumption, we test
whether predictors of inheritance rules or of long-term development differ discontinuously at
the boundary between the two regimes. We predict each relevant outcome based on a linear
specification using all our control variables as potential predictors.

      Figure 3 Panel (a) plots the predicted equal division against the distance of a county to the
border of inheritance rule. No jump or discontinuity in the outcome variable at the boundary can
 12
     The segments including both inheritance rules are: Prussia, Bavaria, Baden, Württemberg, Hessia,
Schwarzburg Rudolstadt, Sachsen Weimar Eisenach, Sachsen Meinigen Gotha, Sachsen Coburg Gotha.
  13
     There are 51 districts i.e. clusters in a 35 km radius to the inheritance rule border.


                                                 13
be detected. Moreover, Figure 3 reveals that the relationship between controls and inheritance
rule in a range of 35 km left and right of the border can be well approximated with a linear
specification. Taken together, this evidence supports the identification assumption and suggests
that, close to boundary, equal and unequal division areas did not differ discontinuously in the
characteristics that determine particular inheritance rules in the cross-section.

    We next check the continuity of indicators of predicted long-term development at the bound-
ary in Figure 3 Panels (b) and (c). If counties sorted into equal division based on unobserved
characteristics, which are positively correlated with income today, Figure 3 Panels (b) and (c)
would reveal a positive discontinuity with respect to GDP per capita and household income
per household member, respectively. The evidence does not support such a conclusion. For a
measure of predicted GDP per capita, no large positive discontinuity at the boundary is dis-
cernible. For predicted household income, we find an economically small change at the boundary,
with equal division areas having features that are associated with, if anything, slightly lower
long-term household income levels. Taken together, the results in Figure 3 lend support to a
geographic discontinuity strategy.



5     Results

Our analysis proceeds in two parts: First, we provide evidence on the historical effects of equal
division and inequality before and throughout the Industrial Revolution. Second, we assess the
long-term effects of historical inheritance rules on modern outcomes and their distribution.


5.1    Effects of Equal Division at the Turn of the 19th Century

The first step of our empirical analysis is to assess if, historically, equal division of land re-
sulted in lower inequality. We investigate landholding inequality, individual height inequality
and income inequality at the turn of the 19th century. While we find significantly more land-
holding and height equality in equal division areas, there are no significant differences in income
inequality.




                                                14
Landholding Inequality Table 2 shows regression results for landholding inequality in 1897.
Landholding Gini coefficients are significantly lower by about a third of a standard deviation
(SD) in our RD specification.14 The distribution of farms sizes in equal division areas is shifted
to the left. There are significantly more small farms below 5 hectares and less large farms
between 5 and 20 hectares or between 20 and 100 hectares.15 This higher share of small farms
in equal division is also visible in pre-industrial Prussian census data of 1816 (see Appendix
Table A5). Landholding inequality and farm size effects are robust to including geographic and
cultural controls (Panel B), to the restrictions of the RD approach (Panel C), to allowing to
the slope to vary on either side of the inheritance regime border (Panel D) and to varying the
distance to border (Figure 5).

       The snapshot in 1895 does not reveal whether equal division was still performed at the end
of the 19th century. Differences might have emerged hundreds of years ago and may not have
faded away by 1895. Appendix Table A6 shows that equal division was indeed still performed:
a difference-in-differences analysis between 1895 and 1907 shows that within 12 years farms in
equal division areas became significantly smaller and the share of small farms increased even
more.

       Our results on landholding inequality establish two core facts: First, until the end of the
19th century, equal division affected the distribution of land. Second, although people could
have sold their inherited land and moved to cities or abroad, this was not common practice. A
Coasean argument would suggest that inter vivos land transactions should have concentrated
land ownership in equal division areas if transaction costs were low and if concentrated land
ownership were optimal for agricultural productivity. Yet, the evidence shows persistent differ-
ences in landholding inequality at the boundary between the two inheritance regimes, contrary
to a Coasean argument.


Height Inequality To complement our analysis of landholding inequality, we also study
inequality in height, a well established measure of individual well-being in terms of nourishment
and health (van Zanden, Baten, d'Ercole, Rijpma, Smith & Timmer 2014, Fogel 1986). We
  14
    This finding is robust to including the quadratic polynomial instead, as shown in Column 2.
  15
    The census also includes a category for farms above 100 hectares. There are no significant differences between
equal and unequal division counties in the share of farms above 100 ha. It is likely that church land and feudal
estates which existed in both inheritance regimes fall in that category and were not affected by inheritance
rules.


                                                       15
calculate the SD of individual height of 20-year-old conscripts in Bavarian counties in the
19th century combined with information on their county of origin.16 We find significantly less
variation in height in equal division counties (see Appendix Table A13).17 Hence, at least in
the context of Bavaria for which we have height data, it appears that not only the production
factor land but also inputs into physical development like food were distributed more equally
in equal division counties.


Income Inequality We draw on county income tax tabulations in 1895 and 1907 to compute
the top 10% and top 1% income share as a measure of income inequality. Table A7 shows that
income inequality did not significantly differ between equal and unequal division areas, neither
in 1895 nor in 1907. However, we find evidence for differences in the income composition. While
total average incomes reveal no significant differences (columns 4 and 8 of Table A7), average
business incomes were significantly higher in equal division areas (column 1 in Appendix Table
A15). This already points to our suggested occupational choice mechanism, which we explore in
more detail in Section 6: Farmers with small landholdings in equal division areas compensated
their smaller agricultural incomes with income from industrial by-employment. As we will
demonstrate in the following, the entrepreneurial activities emerging in equal division areas
during the transition phase from an agricultural to industrial economy provided the ground for
more dynamic economic activities in the long-run.


5.2      Long-Term Effects of Equal Division: Modern Outcomes

Here, we show that the equal division of land had persistent effects on income, education, and
the accumulation of wealth. Higher average incomes in equal division go along with a more
widespread distribution of skill, income and wealth.
  16
      See           http://www.uni-tuebingen.de/fakultaeten/wirtschafts-und-sozialwissenschaftliche-fakultaet/
faecher/wirtschaftswissenschaft/lehrstuehle/volkswirtschaftslehre/wirtschaftsgeschichte/data-hub-height.html
as well as Baten (1999) and Baten (2000) for more information on the context and the data.
   17
      To check weather Bavaria is a good case study for the effect of equal division, we estimated the same
regressions as in Table 2 but only for Bavaria. Table A9 in the Appendix shows the results. As the number of
observations is strongly reduced, the effects are hardly significant. The effects of the Gini coefficient are positive
but become very small at the border. The percentages of farms in specific size categories are similar to our
findings for whole Germany, indicating that Bavaria qualifies as an appropriate sample of the whole population.




                                                         16
Income Today's income and GDP per capita is, on average, higher in equal division counties
than in unequal division counties. Table 3 shows that inheritance rules have persistent effects on
average income, which are positive, highly statistically significant, and robust across all specifi-
cations. Further, the effects are robust to using the quadratic polynomial including interactions
between longitude, latitude and distance to border (see Appendix Figure A4). The results are
robust to allowing the slope to vary on either side of the inheritance regime border (Panel D)
and to varying the distance to border (Figure 6). The magnitudes for all income measures are
around 45 percent of a SD (except for median income at about 27 percent). Equal division
counties have 6-14 percent higher income and GDP levels today.


Top Incomes Top incomes are significantly higher in equal division counties, as shown in
Table 4. We find that the top decile and the top percentile in equal division counties earn 9-
14 percent more than their counterparts in unequal division counties. This implies substantial
income inequality between equal and unequal division counties. Hence, we document a income
gap between equal and unequal division both for average incomes (Table 3) and for top average
incomes.


Top Income Shares Income concentration within equal division counties is significantly
higher than in unequal division counties. This is shown by the income shares of the top decile
and the top percentile in total county income. On average, 37 percent of total income accrues
to the top decile, and 11 percent of total income accrues to the top percentile. In equal division
areas, the top 10% income share is about 2 percentage points higher and the top 1% income
share is about one percentage point higher. These magnitudes are around 30 percent and 45
percent of a SD, respectively.18


Top Wealth Drawing on data from the last collection of the German wealth tax in 1995, we
find that top wealth is significantly higher in equal division counties (see the last two columns
of Table 4). There are about 35 more wealth taxpayers and about seven more millionaires per
10.000 inhabitants in equal division counties, on average. The magnitudes correspond to around
  18
     The share of low-income households is lower in equal division counties. More precisely, there are fewer
households in equal division counties who belong to the bottom 40% (< e20.000) or bottom 20% (< e10.000)
of the national income distribution, respectively. This suggests that higher income concentration at the top in
equal division countries does not come at the expense of lower bottom incomes.


                                                      17
60 percent of a SD. Hence, the initially more equal distribution of wealth during the transition
phase from an agrarian to an industrial economy resulted in a more dispersed distribution of
wealth in the long-run.


Human Capital and Productivity Results on educational outcomes, productivity and
industry structure (Table 5) provide a first hint as to why these large differences in income
might have emerged. In equal division counties, the percentage of the population with a college
degree is about 50 percent of a SD higher (see Table 5). Simultaneously, the share of people
with a vocational degree is lower, while the share of people without a degree does not differ (not
shown). Additionally, equal division counties have higher employment in the trade and service
sector and particularly in creative industries. Equal division countries reveal significantly higher
labor productivity measured as GDP per hour worked. There are also more firms present
(particularly small firms) in equal division counties. These differences suggest that human
capital and industry structure contribute to the large income differences today. In the following
sections, we will discuss these and further potential channels and, in particular, shed light on
the importance of industry structure in dimensions of innovation and structural change.


5.3       Robustness Checks

We next assess whether the long-term relationship between equal division inheritance and long-
term outcomes might be spurious and driven by other long-term differences between equal and
unequal division inheritance counties. We first show that equal division counties did not have
significant advantages in economic development before industrialization started. The large in-
come gaps between equal and unequal division counties today might be driven by unobserved
characteristics which have made equal division counties better off ever since. As measures for
pre-industrial wealth and development are rare and hardly available at a geographically disag-
gregated level for the whole German territory19 , we draw on different data sets and subsamples
that provide evidence that equal division counties were not better off until the end of the 19th
century. Our analysis includes four observable determinants of long-term growth: (1) agricul-
tural productivity measured directly by potential caloric output per hectare per year, average
farm sizes, and Prussian grain yields; (2) population density, used as a long-run measure of
 19
      Germany was split into independent kingdoms and principalities until German unification in 1871.


                                                      18
development; (3) early economic progress, which is examined by Prussian census data on early
industrialization, employment, and wages; (4) human capital development as covered by Prus-
sian educational censuses.


Agricultural Productivity We test whether equal division counties had more favorable
conditions for agriculture that might have contributed to different long-term development tra-
jectories. An index of caloric output per hectare per year before the year 1500 constructed by
Galor & Özak (2016) is the outcome variable in column 1 of Table 6. Although the coefficient
is positive, it is not robust to the inclusion of controls and vanishes in the RD specification. In
addition to differences in land, there might be discrepancies between potential productivity of
land and realized output. In column 2 we draw on data on grain yields from Prussia in 1878
which show slightly lower yields in equal division counties, although the difference is far from
being economically or statistically significant. These results provide evidence for the hypothesis
that agricultural productivity was similar in equal division and unequal division counties.


Population Density Long-term data with direct evidence on levels of economic development
is scarce so we draw on urban population data from year 1500 onwards based on (Bairoch
et al. 1988) to assess measures of development before the Industrial Revolution in equal and
unequal division areas. We find that the density of urban population developed similarly in
equal and unequal division areas (Figure 4). If anything, population density is slightly lower
throughout in equal division areas. A potential objection to the use of urban population data
in the context of our study might be that rural population density could be a better measure
for development in the context of agricultural inheritance rules. As shown in Table 7, the
population density in Prussia in 1816 was not higher in equal division counties. For the sample
of the whole German territory we show that the density is still not significantly higher in equal
division counties by 1895 but we can detect relative increases by 1907. This increase in the
population density from 1895 to 1907 is significantly higher in equal division counties than in
unequal division counties which is, however, driven by counties which surround independent
cities. Excluding these counties from the sample eliminates statistical significance.




                                                19
Early Industrialization, Employment, Income, and Wages Drawing on Prussian data,
we can assess the relationship between inheritance regimes and measures of early industrial-
ization. Prussian censuses are available from 1816 on and cover disaggregated data at the level
of historical counties.20 Although Prussia had only very few equal division counties, Table A8
shows that our main results on inequality also hold in a subsample of (historical) Prussia. Data
on the number of factories, mills, and looms in 1821 shed light on the economic situation of
equal division counties before industrialization started. Self-employment out of agriculture, and
employment in manufacturing in 1882 as well as income and county taxes in 1878 and daily
wages in 1892 show if industrialization had a positive effect in equal division counties very
quickly.

      Table 8 shows that there are hardly any significant differences between equal and unequal
division counties in Prussia. If anything, coefficients are negative for the density of factories,
mills, and looms, suggesting that adoption of new technologies must have started later than
1821. In 1882, there are also no differences in the percentage of people who are self-employed
(outside of agriculture) and in the percentage of people working in manufacturing.

      For income and wages, Table A10 shows that there are no significant positive effects of equal
division and various measures of revenues from income and local county taxes. The difference
in daily wages for males is also very small and insignificant.


Human Capital We rely on Prussian educational censuses which document the number of
schools, students, and literacy rates early on to shed light on the human capital stock and
development in equal and unequal division counties. Table A11 reveals that the percentage of
people who could read and write and the percentage of illiterate people were not significantly
different between equal and unequal division counties in 1871 when including our controls or
RD approach. There are no differences between equal and unequal division counties in school
density or pupils in pre-industrial 1816 or at the onset of industrialization in 1886.

      Bringing the results on agricultural productivity, population, early industrialization, in-
come, and education together, reveals that equal division counties did not have more advanta-
geous starting conditions than unequal division counties before the Industrial Revolution. This
 20
      More information about Prussian census data is given in Becker et al. (2014).




                                                       20
allows us to rule out a broad class of potential confounders that could have contributed to the
large differences in outcomes we observe in 2014.



6     Potential Mechanisms

Why are equal division counties featuring higher income, wealth and education levels today? In
this section, we further investigate the potential pathways through which inheritance rules may
have affected long-term outcomes in equal and unequal division areas. Throughout the first
half of the 20th century, agricultural income lost importance in relation to industrial income.
But the joint production of manufacturing and agricultural products under one roof remained
a widespread phenomenon until the 1950s, particularly in equal division areas (Lerner 1965,
p.326). This industrial by-employment proved crucial for the long-run industrial geography of
Germany: new factories were set up in equal division areas to employ workers from those small
domestic workshops. This phenomenon occurred first in traditional industries like the tobacco,
textile or furniture and later in automotive, automotive supplier, chemical, pharmaceutical
and electronics industries (Kistler 1954, Lerner 1965). We argue that inheritance rules created
both an incentive and an opportunity for farmers to engage in industrial by-employment and,
ultimately, become entrepreneurs. The entrepreneurial businesses or the cultures they created
may have, in turn, provided the ground for long-term economic growth.


6.1    Incentives for Industrial By-Employment

The small and fragmented peasant holdings in equal division areas created an incentive to
engage in industrial by-employment as compensatory strategy (Herrigel 2000). According to
Eiler (1984, p.81), families with farms smaller than 3 ha were forced to engage in by-employment
in order to nourish the family. As shown in Table 2, equal division areas had significantly more
farms with less than 2 ha or with 2-5 ha. We find a significant effect of farm size and soil
quality on (innovative) manufacturing interacting our equal division indicator with farm size
and soil quality. The smaller the average farm in an equal division county, the higher was
employment in (innovative) manufacturing in equal division areas (Columns 3 (6) of Table
10). Further, the lower the soil quality in equal division areas, the higher was employment in


                                              21
(innovative) manufacturing in equal division areas (see columns 2 (5) of Table 10). Finally,
innovative activity measured by patents is higher in equal division areas if soil quality is lower
(see columns 2, 4 and 6 of Table 11). The patent effect is only significant for the reduced sample
of our RD specification. We will discuss the role of innovation in more detail in the following
Section 6.2.


6.2     The Role of Entrepreneurship

A class of models hypothesizes that a more equal distribution of wealth may increase long-
term growth by giving broader parts of the population the chance to become skilled workers or
entrepreneurs (see, e.g., Galor & Zeira 1993, Banerjee & Newman 1993, Ghatak & Nien-Huei
Jiang 2002, Galor & Moav 2004). Compared to a situation in which a large part of the population
has essentially no wealth, a more even distribution of wealth can provide a buffer to absorb the
potential risks of becoming an entrepreneur, investing in human capital, or innovating, or it can
alleviate credit constraints in parts of the population, all of which have favorable consequences
for growth. Additionally, a more equal wealth distribution might induce individuals to take
greater risks if they care for their relative status (Robson 1992). We discuss the evidence for
more entrepreneurship, higher innovation and less credit constraints in equal division areas.


Entrepreneurship Our results support an occupational choice mechanism, through which
landholding inequality may have affected long-term outcomes. First, we find that per capita
business incomes are significantly higher in equal division areas in Baden and Württemberg in
1907, whereas per capital real estate income, capital income and labor incomes are not signifi-
cantly different in equal and unequal division areas (see Table A15). Second, considering a rough
proxy for entrepreneurial activity, we find that equal division countries have a higher percentage
of self-employed people out of agriculture in 1925 (see Table A16). These entrepreneurial activ-
ities in equal division areas may have provided the foundation for more firms, higher incomes
and higher productivity observed today.21
  21
    Additionally, there is some weak evidence that the density of middle schools and the share of middle-school
pupils is slightly higher in equal division counties. These schools were primarily attended by students who wanted
to become an apprentice in a particular trade. These additional results are not robust across specifications and
the effects are only imprecisely estimated but are broadly consistent with landholding inequality affecting longer-
term outcomes through occupational choice.



                                                        22
Innovation Employment in innovative branches of manufacturing was higher in equal division
areas. We distinguish between 163 occupations in manufacturing in 1907 and follow Streb et al.
(2006) who categorize metal working, industry of machines and instruments, chemical industry,
printing, and photography as innovative branches based on the number of patents between
1877 and 1914. Table 10 shows the effect of equal division and employment in innovative
manufacturing occupations. The coefficient is nearly identical to that in Table 9, which leads
us to the conclusion that the additional employment in manufacturing comes almost entirely
from occupations in innovative branches.

       Patent data of Streb et al. (2006) provide further evidence that innovative activity was
higher in equal division counties from 1877 to 1914 (see Table 11). The positive correlation
holds when using an indicator variable for having filed a patent in that time, using a log of
the total number of patents22 to include only counties with patenting activity, and when using
the log total number of patents including the counties with no patenting activity as zeros. The
magnitude is quite large at about a third of a SD.


Credit Constraints People may be able to borrow only limited amounts because of capital
market imperfections. Theoretically, it is not clear if inequality or equality creates growth in
models with credit constraints. Small land holdings serving as collateral could have alleviated
credit constraints for the large number of small peasants in equal division areas. On the other
hand, larger estates could have been the precondition to fund costly investments that then
generate growth, as opposed to the situation where all economic agents do not have enough
funds for the costly investment.

       The financial market in 19th century Germany was still in its infancy. On average, ev-
ery fifth person held a savings account at a savings bank in 1895, which increased to every
fourth person until 1907 (see Table A14). In 1907, average deposits at savings banks amounted
to less than a third of average annual income. Accordingly, we find no significant differences
between equal and unequal division areas in loans granted by savings banks (Sparkassen ) or
credit associations (Kreditvereine ) in 1895 and 1907 (see Table A14). The absence of higher
formal credits does not necessarily imply that reduced credit constraints did not play a role
  22
    Using the log is necessary as there are some counties with extreme outliers in patenting activity compared
to the other counties. While the 50th percentile of filed patents is 1, the 99th percentile lies at 123 patents and
the maximum is 913 filed patents between 1877 and 1914.


                                                        23
for entrepreneurs in equal division areas. Most of the literature on industrialization in South-
West Germany stresses the enduring importance of private, informal lending (see Fischer 1972).




Summary As a result of the above factors, we observe an earlier industrial take-off in equal
division counties: While there were no significant differences in employment in agriculture and
manufacturing in 1882 (see Table A12), equal division areas exhibit significantly lower agri-
cultural employment and higher manufacturing employment in 1895. This gap between equal
and unequal division areas opens even further until 1907. Table 9 reveals that the coefficient of
manufacturing amounts to about a quarter of an SD and increased by 35 percent of a SD from
1895 to 1907. At the same time, the coefficient of equal division for employment in agriculture
decreased by almost the same magnitude from 1895 to 1907.

    Our evidence highlights the importance of small firms, which is another long-term result
of industrial by-employment in equal division areas. Today, firms in equal division areas are
smaller, on average (see column 9 of Table 5), while being more productive at the same time
(see column 7 of Table 5). According to Herrigel (2000), small- and medium-sized German firms
proved able to adapt to the accelerating pace of product and technological change of the new
world market conditions in the 1980s, when the era of mass production in post-war Germany
came to an end. Smaller firms can adjust more flexibly to changing economic environments and
may, by this, ensure long-term economic growth.

    Higher long-term growth has resulted in a more widespread distribution of income and
wealth. The income share of the top 10% and the top 1% is significantly higher in equal division
areas. Also, the number of millionaires per capita is significantly higher. Taken together with the
observation that top incomes in Germany mostly stem from family businesses (Bartels 2019),
the above findings imply that high income comes from and wealth is invested in family firms.
At least two channels may have contributed to turn a more even historical distribution into a
more uneven distribution today. First, family firms are unlikely to be equally divided among
siblings. The desire to leave the business intact in the hands of a single descendant may induce
firm owners to give a higher portion of the firm to one child that will take over control of
the firm. A larger portion assigned to the controlling heir of the family firm alleviates credit
constraints if capital markets are imperfect and, thereby, expand the firm's ability to invest

                                                24
(Ellul, Pagano & Panunzi 2010). Second, large inheritances ­ here in the form of businesses ­
are more likely to persist over time, while smaller inheritances are depleted through increased
consumption (Nekoei & Seim 2019).



7    Conclusion

We have studied long-term consequences of spatial variation in a historical institution, namely
agricultural inheritance rules, which regulated the distribution of land since the Middle Ages in
Germany. Agricultural inheritance rules vary between unequal division where land is indivisible
and is passed on to a single heir and equal division of land among all siblings. We have found
that equal division counties had historically lower landholding inequality. This lends support to
the canonical theoretical models on inheritance rules and inequality predicting less inequality
under an equal division regime than under primogeniture (Stiglitz 1969, Blinder 1973, Pryor
1973, Menchik 1980). We found no evidence for advantages conferred by equal division before
the advent of industrialization, which occurred relatively late in Germany. In sharp contrast, we
find positive effects of equal division on long-term productivity and income. We find evidence
indicating that the equal division of land spurred industrial by-employment, in particular in
innovative and entrepreneurial activities. Our evidence suggests that the more equal distribution
of land ­ the key store of wealth for broad parts of the population in 19th century Germany
­ contributed to today's innovative Mittelstand and long-term productivity. Equal division of
land proved to be an inclusive economic institution in the long run. Our evidence further lends
support to models in which a more equitable distribution of wealth can spur occupational
upgrading and the decision to become an entrepreneur (see, e.g., Galor & Zeira 1993, Banerjee
& Newman 1993, Ghatak & Nien-Huei Jiang 2002, Galor & Moav 2004).

    We close with several reflections on the institutional context and potential limitations of our
study. Our evidence lends support to the idea that the long-term consequences of institutions
are context-dependent and may be particularly important at critical junctures (Acemoglu,
Johnson & Robinson 2005): while equal division and a more equitable distribution of land did
not appear to confer advantages before industrialization, they turned out to be an important
mediator of the path of industrialization across German regions. A limitation of our study is that
while geographic variation in inheritance rules is sharp and local, the origins of differences in

                                                25
inheritance rules are not fully understood and institutional differences have existed for centuries
before we observe crucial differences in the paths of industrialization.




                                                26
References
Acemoglu, D., Bautista, M. A., Querubín, P. & Robinson, J. A. (2007), `Economic and political
    inequality in development: The case of Cundinamarca, Colombia', NBER Working Paper
    No. 13208 .

Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S. & Robinson, J. A. (2001), `The colonial origins of comparative
    development: An empirical investigation', American Economic Review 91(5), 1369­1401.

Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S. & Robinson, J. A. (2005), `Institutions as a fundamental cause of
    long-run growth', Handbook of Economic Growth 1, 385­472.

Alesina, A., Giuliano, P. & Nunn, N. (2013), `On the origins of gender roles: Women and the
     plough', The Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(2), 469­530.

Alston, L. J. & Schapiro, M. O. (1984), `Inheritance laws across colonies: Causes and conse-
     quences', The Journal of Economic History 44(2), 277­287.

Alvaredo, F., Atkinson, A., Piketty, T. & Saez, E. (2013), `The top 1 percent in international
    and historical perspective.', Journal of Economic Perspectives 27(3), 3­20.

Bairoch, P., Batou, J. & Chevre, P. (1988), The population of European cities. Data bank and
    short summary of results: 800-1850, Geneva Switzerland Librairie Droz 1988.

Banerjee, A. & Iyer, L. (2005), `History, institutions, and economic performance: The legacy of
    colonial land tenure systems in india', American Economic Review 95(4), 1190­12133.

Banerjee, A., Iyer, L. & Somanathan, R. (2005), `History, social divisions, and public goods in
    rural India', Journal of the European Economic Association 3(2-3), 639­647.

Banerjee, A. V. & Duflo, E. (2003), `Inequality and growth: What can the data say?', Journal
    of Economic Growth 8(3), 267­299.

Banerjee, A. V. & Newman, A. F. (1993), `Occupational choice and the process of development',
    Journal of Political Economy 101(2), 274­298.

Bartels, C. (2019), `Top incomes in Germany, 1871-2014', Journal of Economic History
    79(3), 669­707.

Baten, J. (1999), Nutrition and economic development in Bavaria, 1730-1880, PhD thesis,
    München.

Baten, J. (2000), `Height and real wages in the 18th and 19th centuries: An international
    comparison', Jahrbuch für Wirtschaftsgeschichte 41(1), 61­76.

Becker, H. (1998), Allgemeine Historische Agrargeographie, Teubner.

Becker, S., Cinnirella, F., Hornung, E. & Woessmann, L. (2014), `iPEHD - The ifo Prussian
    Economic History Database', Historical Methods: A Journal of Quantitative and Interdis-
    ciplinary History 47(2), 57­66.


                                              27
Becker, S. O., Cinnirella, F. & Woessmann, L. (2010), `The trade-off between fertility and
    education: Evidence from before the demographic transition', Journal of Economic Growth
    15(3), 177­204.

Behrend, J. F. (1897), Lex Salica, Weimar.

Blanckmeister, F. (1913), Sachsenspiegel, Dresden Sturm.

Bleakley, H. & Ferrie, J. P. (2016), `Shocking behavior: Random wealth in antebellum Georgia
    and human capital across generations', Quarterly Journal of Economics 131(3), 1455­1495.

Blinder, A. (1973), `A model of inherited wealth', Quarterly Journal of Economics pp. 608­628.

Boserup, E. (1965), The Conditions of Agricultural Growth. The Economics of Agrarian Change
    under Population Pressure, George Allen & Uniwin Ltd., London.

Chu, C. Y. C. (1991), `Primogeniture', Journal of Political Economy 99(1), 78­99.

Cinnirella, F. & Hornung, E. (2016), `Landownership concentration and the expansion of edu-
    cation', Journal of Development Economics 121(Supplement C), 135­152.

Cole, J. W. & Wolf, E. R. (1995), Die unischtbare Grenze. Ethnizität und Ökologie in einem
     Alpental, Filio Wien, Bozen.

Conley, T. (1999), `GMM estimation with cross-sectional dependence', Journal of Econometrics
    92, 1­45.

Crouch, D. (2005), The birth of nobility: Social change in England and France: 900-1300, Pear-
    son Education Limited.

Dell, M. (2010), `The persistent effects of Peru's mining mita', Econometrica 78(6), 1863­1903.

Doepke, M. & Zilibotti, F. (2008), `Occupational choice and the spirit of capitalism', Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 123(2), 747­793.

Duranton, G., Rodríguez-Pose, A. & Sandall, R. (2009), `Family types and the persistence of
    regional disparities in europe', Economic Geography 85(1), 23­47.

Eheberg, T. (1883), Bäuerliche Verhältnisse in Niederbayern, Oberpfalz und dem bayerischen
    Franken, in `Bäuerliche Zustände in Deutschland. Band III', Duncker and Humblot,
    pp. 113­207.

Eichengreen, B. & Ritschl, A. (2009), `Understanding West German economic growth in the
    1950s', Cliometrica 3(3), 191­219.

Eiler, K. (1984), Hessen im Zeitalter der industriellen Revolution, Insel.

Ellul, A., Pagano, M. & Panunzi, F. (2010), `Inheritance law and investment in family firms',
     American Economic Review 100(5), 2414­2450.

Fastenmayer, B. (2009), Hofübergabe als Altersversorgung. Generationenwechsel in der Land-
     wirtschaft 1870 bis 1957, Klostermann Vittorio.

                                               28
Fick, L. (1895), `Die bäuerliche Erbfolgen im rechtsrheinischen Bayern: Nach amtlichen Quellen
     dargestellt', Münchner volkswirtschaftliche Studien 8.

Fischer, W. (1972), Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft im Zeitalter der Industrialisierung, Vanden-
     hoeck & Ruprecht.

Fogel, R. (1986), Human growth: a comprehensive treatise, in F. Falkner & J. Tanner, eds,
    `Physical growth as a measure of the economic well-being of populations: the eighteenth
    and nineteenth centuries.', New York, Plenum Press, pp. 263­81.

Fritsch, M. & Wyrwich, M. (2014), `The long persistence of regional levels of entrepreneurship:
     Germany, 1925­2005', Regional Studies 48(6), 955­973.

Fritsch, M. & Wyrwich, M. (2016), `The effect of entrepreneurship on economic development - an
     empirical analysis using regional entrepreneurship culture', Journal of Economic Geography
     17, 157­189.

Galor, O. & Moav, O. (2004), `From physical to human capital accumulation: Inequality and
    the process of development', Review of Economic Studies 71(4), 1001­1026.

Galor, O., Moav, O. & Vollrath, D. (2009), `Inequality in landownership, the emergence of
    human-capital promoting institutions, and the great divergence', The Review of Economic
    Studies 76(1), 143­179.

Galor, O. & Özak, Ö. (2016), `The agricultural origins of time preference', American Economic
    Review 106(10), 3064­3103.

Galor, O. & Zeira, J. (1993), `Income distribution and macroeconomics', The Review of Eco-
    nomic Studies 60(1), 35­52.

Gerschenkron, A. (1966), Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective: A Book of Essays,
    Harvard University Press.

Gerschenkron, A. (1989), Bread and Democracy in Germany, Cornell University Press.

Ghatak, M. & Nien-Huei Jiang, N. (2002), `A simple model of inequality, occupational choice,
    and development', Journal of Development Economics 69(1), 205­226.

Glaeser, E. L. & Kerr, W. R. (2009), `Local industrial conditions and entrepreneurship: How
    much of the spatial distribution can we explain?', Journal of Economics & Management
    Strategy 18(3), 623­663.

Glaeser, E. L., La Porta, R., Lopez-de Silanes, F. & Shleifer, A. (2004), `Do institutions cause
    growth?', Journal of Economic Growth 9, 271­303.

Grossherzogliches Ministerium des Inneren (1883), `Erhebungen über den Stand der Land-
    wirtschaft im Grossherzogtum Baden'.

Habakkuk, H. J. (1955), `Family structure and economic change in nineteenth-century europe',
    The Journal of Economic History 15(01), 1­12.


                                              29
Hartke, W. & Westermann, E. (1940), `Die Vererbung der bäuerlichen Liegenschaften in
    Deutschland bis zum Erlass des Reichserbhofgesetzes', Petermanns Geographische Mit-
    teilungen 86.

Helmolt, H. (1902), The extent of the Hansa about 1400, in `History of the World', Vol. 7,
    Heiemann, Friedrich Graf.

Herrigel, G. (2000), Industrial constructions: The sources of German industrial power, Struc-
     tural Analysis in the Social Sciences (Book 9), Cambridge University Press.

Huppertz, B. (1939), Räume und Schichten bäuerlicher Kulturformen in Deutschland: Ein
   Beitrag zur deutschen Bauerngeschichte, Röhrscheid.

Jarvis, A., Reuter, H., Nelson, A. & Guevara, E. (2006), `Hole-filled seamless SRTM data v3,
     international centre for tropical agriculture', Cali Columbia .

Kaiserliches Statisisches Amt (1897), Berufsstatistik der kleineren Verwaltungsbezirke: Berufs-
    u. Gewerbezählung vom 14. Juni 1895, Statistik des Deutschen Reichs, Technical report.

Kaiserliches Statisisches Amt (1910), Berufsstatistik: Berufs- und Betriebszählung vom 12. Juni
    1907: Kleinere Verwaltungsbezirke, Statistik des Deutschen Reichs, Technical report.

Kaiserliches Statisisches Amt (1912), Statistik des Deutschen Reichs: Landwirtschaft Betrieb-
    sstatistik, Technical report.

Kaiserliches Statistisches Amt (1877), Statistik des Deutschen Reichs, Band XXV: Zur
    Eisenbahn- und Bevoelkerungs, Statistik des Deutschen Reichs in der Periode 1867 bis
    1875, Technical report.

Kistler, F. (1954), Die wirtschaftlichen und sozialen Verhältnisse in Baden 1849-1870, Albert.

Konversationslexikon, M. G. (1905), Verteilung der Konfessionen im Deutschen Reich, in `Mey-
    ers Grosses Konversationslexikon', Meyers.

Krafft, K. (1930), Anerbensitte und Anerbenrecht in Württemberg, Kohlhammer.

Kunz, A. (2004), Navigable Waterways in the German Reich, 1903, Institute of European His-
    tory.

Kuznets, S. (1955), `Economic growth and income inequality', American Economic Review
    45(1), 1­28.

La Porta, R., Lopez-de Silanes, F., Shleifer, A. & Vishny, R. W. (1998), `Law and finance',
    Journal of Political Economy 106(6), 1113­1155.

Lerner, F. (1965), Wirtschafts- und Sozialgeschichte des Nassauer Raumes 1816-1964, Nas-
    sauische Sparkasse.

Menchik, P. L. (1980), `Primogeniture, equal sharing, and the U.S. distribution of wealth', The
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 94(2), 299­316.



                                              30
Miaskowski, A. v. (1884), Das Erbrecht und die Grundeigenthumsvertheilung im Deutschen
    Reiche: Ein socialwirthschaftlicher Beitrag zur Kritik und Reform des deutschen Erbrechts,
    Schriften des Vereins für Socialpolitk, Duncker & Humblot.
MPIDR [Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research] and CGG [Chair for Geodesy and
   Geoinformatics, University of Rostock] (2011), `MPIDR Population History GIS Collec-
   tion', Rostock .
Nekoei, A. & Seim, D. (2019), How do inheritances shape wealth inequality? Theory and evi-
    dence from Sweden.
Nunn, N. (2009), `The importance of history for economic development', Annual Review of
   Economics 1, 65­92.
Piketty, T. (2003), `Income inequality in France, 1901-1998', Journal of Political Economy
     111(5), 1004­1042.
Piketty, T. & Saez, E. (2014), `Inequality in the long run', Science 344(6186), 838­843.
Pryor, F. (1973), `Simulation of the impact of social and economic institutions on the size
    distribution of income and wealth', American Economic Review 63, 50­72.
Rink, A. & Hilbig, H. (2019), `Do inheritance customs affect political and social inequality?',
    American Journal of Political Science 63(4), 758­773.
Robson, A. (1992), `Status, the distribution of wealth, private and social attitudes to risk',
    Econometrica 60(4), 837­857.
Röhm, H. (1957), Die Vererbung des landwirtschaftlichen Grundeigentums in Baden-
   Württemberg, Vol. 102, Bundesanstalt für Landeskunde.
Röhm, H. (1961), `Geschlossene Vererbung und Realteilung in der Bundesrepublik Deutsch-
   land', Abhandlungen des Deutschen Geographentages in Köln pp. 288­304.
Rösener, W. (2012), `Vererbungsstrategien und bäuerliche Familienwirtschaft in der vormoder-
    nen Agrargesellschaft', Zeitschrift für Agrargeschichte und Agrarsoziologie 60(2), 14­34.
Rouette, S. (2003), Erbrecht und Besitzweitergabe: Praktiken in der ländlichen gesellschaft
    Deutschlands, Diskurse in Politik und Wissenschaft, in `Ländliche Gesellschaften in
    Deutschland und Frankreich, 18.-19. Jahrhundert', Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, pp. 145­
    166.
Schröder, K.-H. (1979), Zur Frage geographischer Ursachen der Realteilung in der alten Welt,
    in `Fragen geographischer Forschung, Festschrift des Instituts für Geographie zum 60.
    Geburtstag von Adolf Leidlmair', pp. 467­482.
Schröder, R. (1870), Rechtskarte von Deutschland zur Veranschaulichung der auf dem Gebiete
    des Privatrechts herrschenden Rechtssysteme im Jahre 1870, in `Petermanns geographische
    Mitteilungen', Perthes.
Sering, M. (1897), Die Vererbung des ländlichen Grundbesitzes im Königreich Preussen, Paul
     Parey.

                                              31
Shepherd, W. (1911), Map of the rise of Frankish empire, from 481 to 814, in `Historical Atlas',
    Henry Holt and Company, New York.

Smith, C. (2019), `Land concentration and long-run development: Evidence from the frontier
    united states', MIT Working Paper .

Stiglitz, J. E. (1969), `Distribution of income and wealth among individuals', Econometrica
     37(3), 382­397.

Streb, J., Baten, J. & Yin, S. (2006), `Technological and geographical knowledge spillover in
     the German empire 1877-1918', Economic History Review 59(2), 347­373.

Tilly, R. H. (1969), German industrialization, in M. Teich & R. Porter, eds, `The Industrial Rev-
     olution in National Context: Europe and the USA', Cambridge University Press, pp. 95­
     125.

Tur-Prats, A. (2018), `Family types and intimate-partner violence: A historical perspective',
    Review of Economics and Statistics 101(5), 878­891.

van Zanden, J., Baten, J., d'Ercole, M. M., Rijpma, A., Smith, C. & Timmer, M. (2014), `How
    was life? Global well-being since 1820', OECD Publishing .

Verein für Socialpolitik (1883), Bäuerliche Zustände in Deutschland I-III, Duncker & Humblot.

Weber, M. (1924), Abriss der universalen Sozial- und Wirtschaftsgeschichte, Duncker & Hum-
   blot.

Wegge, S. A. (1998), `Chain migration and information networks: Evidence from nineteenth-
   century Hesse-Cassel', Journal of Economic History 58, 957­986.

Ziblatt, D. (2008), `Does landholding inequality block democratization? A test of the "bread
     and democracy" thesis and the case of Prussia', World Politics 60(04), 610­641.




                                               32
Figures and Tables
       Figure 1: Illustration: Prevalence of Inheritance Rules in Württemberg, 1905-1910




Source: The figure illustrates the local variation of inheritance rules for agricultural land in the South-Western German region
of Württemberg. Areas depicted in white feature equal division rules, areas in red unequal division. The figure illustrates the
fine-grained nature of the variation in inheritance rules, which traverses geographic boundaries, e.g., from one village to the next
within the same county, as well as linguistic borders. To illustrate, the red line denotes the linguistic border between Swabian
and East Franconian German. The figure is taken from Krafft (1930).
              Figure 2: Prevalence of Inheritance Rules: Equal and Unequal Division
                                                   (a) German Empire




      (b) Regression Discontinuity Sample: Areas Within 35 km of Inheritance Regime Border




The figure shows a map of the prevalence of inheritance rule in the German Empire. Dark blue denotes areas with unequal
sharing or indivisibility of land. Green denotes areas with equal sharing of land among children. Panel (b) plots areas less than
35 km away from the nearest border with the opposite inheritance regime; the corresponding counties constitute our regression
discontinuity sample.
Figure 3: Predictors of Equal Division and Long-Term Development Are Smooth at the Border
                        (a) Outcome: Equal Inheritance Predicted Based on Covariates




                                                                                             .8
                                      predicted equal splitting
                                    .2         .4         .6                                 0




                                                                                                   -40   -20                 0                 20    40
                                                                                                           distance to inheritance border in km

                                                                                                             unequal division      equal divison




                  (b) Outcome: Ln GDP Per Capita (2014) Predicted Based on Covariates
                                                                                             3.7
                                    predicted GDP per capita (logs)
                                     3.3      3.4    3.5        3.6                          3.2




                                                                                                   -40   -20                 0                 20    40
                                                                                                           distance to inheritance border in km

                                                                                                             unequal division      equal division




           (c) Outcome: Modern Ln Income Per Capita (2014) Predicted Based on Covariates
                                                                                        6.8
                                    predicted household income per household member (logs)
                                                                                        6.75
                                                                                        6.7
                                                                                        6.65
                                                                                        6.6




                                                                                                   -40   -20                  0                 20   40
                                                                                                            distance to inheritance border in km

                                                                                                            unequal division      equal division




Note: The figures plot regression discontinuity specifications using binned scatter plots and local polynomial specification in a 35
km bandwidth. The running variable is distance to the nearest inheritance regime change border. The outcome variables are
predicted based on the control variables reported in Table 1. The outcome variable in panel (a) is an indicator for a county having
an equal division inheritance regime, the outcome variable in panel (b) is the logarithm of GDP per capita in 2014, the outcome
variable in panel (c) is average log household income per household member in 2014.
                                                               Figure 4: Urban Population Density (1500 to 1907)
                                                  2.5
               Total Urban Pop. (logs) per 1000 sqkm
                                                  2
                                                  1.5
                                                  1
                                                  .5




                                                        1500            1600               1700         1800        1900
                                                                                            year

                                                                               unequal division    equal division



Source: The figure reports urban population density in cities by inheritance regime based on the data in Bairoch et al. (1988).
The density measure is log population per 1000 km2 .
                    Figure 5: RD Results by Distance to the Border: Historical Inequality

                              Landholding Gini 1895                                                                     % of Farms <2ha
       0
                                                                              10


  -.02

                                                                               5
  -.04


  -.06
                                                                               0

  -.08


   -.1                                                                        -5
           5   10   15   20      25     30     35    40   45   50   55                 5    10        15        20      25     30     35    40     45    50    55
                              Distance to the Border                                                                 Distance to the Border


                                % of Farms 2-5ha                                                                        % of Farms 5-20ha
  15                                                                               0




  10                                                                           -5




   5                                                                          -10




   0                                                                          -15

           5   10   15   20      25     30     35    40   45   50   55                 5        10        15    20       25     30     35    40    45    50    55
                              Distance to the Border                                                                  Distance to the Border


                              % of Farms 20-100ha                                                                         Farm Size
    0                                                                    1



   -5                                                                    0



  -10                                                                    -1



  -15                                                                    -2



  -20                                                                    -3
           5   10   15   20      25     30     35    40   45   50   55         5           10        15        20      25     30     35    40     45    50    55
                              Distance to the Border                                                                Distance to the Border


Note: The figure plots the effect of equal division on the outcome reported in the title of the figure. The sample is reduced to
counties near the border of the inheritance rule varying distance to the border.
                  Figure 6: RD Results by Distance to the Border: Income Measures 2014

                            Log Household Income                                                         Log Taxaxable Income
                                                                             .15
    .1



                                                                              .1
  .05




                                                                             .05
    0




  -.05                                                                        0
         5   10   15   20      25     30     35    40   45   50   55               5    10    15    20      25     30     35    40    45    50    55
                            Distance to the Border                                                       Distance to the Border


                             Log Median Income                                                               Ln GDP p.c.
    .1                                                                 .3



                                                                       .2

  .05

                                                                       .1


    0
                                                                        0



                                                                       -.1
  -.05
         5   10   15   20      25     30     35    40   45   50   55           5       10    15    20      25     30     35    40    45    50    55
                            Distance to the Border                                                      Distance to the Border


Note: The figure plots the effect of equal division on the outcome reported in the title of the figure. The sample is reduced to
counties near the border of the inheritance rule varying distance to the border.
            Figure 7: RD Results by Distance to the Border: Inequality Measures 2014 and 1995

                             Top 10% Income Share                                                            Top 1% Income Share
                                                                             3
  4


  3                                                                          2


  2
                                                                             1

  1

                                                                             0
  0


  -1                                                                         -1
        5     10   15   20      25     30     35    40   45   50   55                 5    10    15    20      25     30     35    40    45    50    55
                             Distance to the Border                                                         Distance to the Border


                        Log Top 10% Mean Income                                                            Log Top 1% Mean Income
   .2
                                                                             .3


  .15
                                                                             .2

   .1

                                                                             .1
  .05



   0                                                                         0


        5     10   15   20      25     30     35    40   45   50   55                 5    10    15    20      25     30     35    40    45    50    55
                             Distance to the Border                                                         Distance to the Border


                        Wealth taxpayers per 10.000                                                        Millionaires per 10.000
  60                                                                    15




  40                                                                    10




  20                                                                     5




                                                                         0
   0
        5     10   15   20      25     30     35    40   45   50   55             5       10    15    20      25     30     35    40    45    50    55
                             Distance to the Border                                                        Distance to the Border


Note: The figure plots the effect of equal division on the outcome reported in the title of the figure. The sample is reduced to
counties near the border of the inheritance rule varying distance to the border.
                                             Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                                               Summary statistics                                T-test
                                                           unequal division        equal division      difference          se

Geographic Controls
temperature in  C                                 mean             8.125                8.820            0.241         0.142*
                                                  sd              (0.784)              (0.903)
precipitation in mm                               mean            59.769               61.940            -3.594           2.313
                                                  sd             (12.345)              (8.543)
elevation in m                                    mean           249.349              313.408           -45.241       23.185*
                                                  sd            (223.019)            (159.704)
roughness: difference in elevation                mean             3.820                6.347            0.643            0.469
                                                  sd              (3.172)              (3.352)
distance to navigable waterway in km              mean            25.840               20.704            -3.930           2.912
                                                  sd             (21.606)             (16.831)
soil characteristics
soil: share of sand                               mean            0.219                 0.012            -0.096       0.033***
                                                  sd             (0.274)               (0.074)
soil: share of loam, sand, silt                   mean            0.609                 0.300            -0.145       0.053***
                                                  sd             (0.340)               (0.269)
soil: share of loess                              mean            0.098                 0.130            -0.014           0.042
                                                  sd             (0.189)               (0.202)

Cultural Controls
Frankish territory in 507 AD                      mean            0.093                 0.473            0.275        0.075***
                                                  sd             (0.291)               (0.500)
protestants in %                                  mean           65.272                47.368            -8.317           6.709
                                                  sd            (38.008)              (33.602)
Hanseatic league                                  mean            0.404                 0.103            -0.249       0.074***
                                                  sd             (0.491)               (0.304)
general law
common law                                        mean            0.449                 0.433            -0.100           0.120
                                                  sd             (0.498)               (0.497)
Prussian                                          mean            0.453                 0.076            -0.236       0.085***
                                                  sd             (0.498)               (0.265)
Saxonian                                          mean            0.040                 0.000
                                                  sd             (0.196)               (0.000)
Code Napoleon                                     mean            0.015                 0.371            0.329        0.095***
                                                  sd             (0.121)               (0.484)
Badish                                            mean            0.043                 0.121            0.007            0.005
                                                  sd             (0.203)               (0.326)

observations                                      obs              676                   224
The table shows summary statistics for our control variables in rural German counties in 1895. Column 1 gives the mean and
standard deviation of the control variables in unequal division counties while column 2 shows means and standard deviation for
equal division counties. Column 3 and 4 show the difference between these groups and test if the difference is equal to zero. The
difference and the standard errors stem from a regression which includes longitude, latitude, state-fixed effects, clusters standard
errors on the district (Regierungsbezirk) level and weighs observations by population. Notes: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
                                                  Table 2: Equal Division and Landholding Inequality 1895

                                     Landholding Gini 1895                          % of Farms in Size Category                   Farm Size        Number of Farms
                                   (1)                    (2)                (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)             (7)                (8)
                             Linear RD Poly.        Quad. RD Poly.          <2 ha        2-5 ha       5-20 ha      20-100 ha         in ha       per 1000 Inhabitants
        Panel A. OLS
        Equal Division            -0.0382                -0.0353           7.280        11.87          -1.863      -17.89         -1.866                  4.787
                                   (0.0181)              (0.0198)           (1.346)      (1.502)      (2.125)       (2.168)        (0.545)               (7.004)
                                   [0.0131]              [0.0143]           [0.964]      [1.581]      [2.324]       [1.646]        [0.293]               [4.985]
        Observations                 931                    931               930          930          930           929            927                   931
        Panel B. With Controls
        Equal Division     -0.0537                      -0.0505            6.835        11.07         -3.830       -13.36         -1.573                  8.756
                            (0.0124)                     (0.0126)           (1.019)      (1.546)      (2.104)       (1.691)        (0.269)               (6.618)
                            [0.00995]                    [0.0103]           [0.969]      [1.589]      [2.048]       [1.436]        [0.240]               [5.204]
        Observations           931                          931               930          930          930           929            927                   931
        Panel C. Distance to Border
        Equal Division      -0.0459                     -0.0500            5.798        9.512        -5.046        -10.29         -1.246                  5.874
                             (0.00939)                   (0.00986)          (1.021)      (1.592)      (1.683)       (1.618)        (0.164)               (5.750)
                             [0.00919]                   [0.00891]          [1.003]      [1.582]      [1.855]       [1.492]        [0.194]               [4.917]
        Observations            397                         397               394          394          394           393            391                   397
        Panel D. Distance to Border × Equal Division
        Equal Division      -0.0323          -0.0337                       3.287        6.445        -4.510         -4.355         -0.708                 6.111
                             (0.0119)         (0.0121)                     (1.505)       (1.929)      (2.105)        (2.004)        (0.265)              (6.583)
                             [0.0111]         [0.0114]                     [1.220]       [1.920]      [2.302]        [1.583]        [0.207]              [6.288]
        Observations            397              397                         394           394          394            393            391                  397
        mean outcome                0.716                  0.716            8.242         13.34        33.84         27.08           5.997                127.7
        SD outcome                  0.123                  0.123            7.031         10.69        15.04         16.06           3.318                45.65
Notes: Share of farms in 5 size categories as stated in `Statistik des Deutschen Reichs' Vol. 109. Panel A includes longitude, latitude, and state-fixed effects. Panel B additionally
includes geographic and cultural controls as specified in summary statistics. Panel C reduces the sample to counties in 35 km distance to the border of the inheritance rule.
Independent cities are excluded. Panel D additionally includes an interaction term between distance to the border and treatment allowing the slope to vary on either side of the
border. Regressions are weighted by population. Standard errors clustered at the district (Regierungsbezirk) level. Conley standard errors in square brackets. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05,
*** p<0.01
                             Table 3: Equal Division and Income Measures 2014

                               (1)                           (2)                         (3)                       (4)
                       Log Household Income           Log Taxable Income          Log Median Income           Log GDP p.c.
 Panel A. OLS
 Equal Division                 0.0690                       0.0726                      0.0499                    0.133
                                 (0.0236)                     (0.0205)                   (0.0186)                 (0.0562)
                                 [0.0174]                     [0.0211]                   [0.0142]                 [0.0324]
 Observations                       397                         374                         397                      397
 Panel B. With Controls
 Equal Division         0.0617                               0.0637                      0.0446                   0.144
                         (0.0193)                             (0.0195)                    (0.0103)                (0.0379)
                         [0.0145]                             [0.0177]                    [0.0138]                [0.0369]
 Observations               397                                 374                          397                     397
 Panel C. Distance to Border
 Equal Division         0.0572                               0.0663                      0.0438                   0.143
                         (0.0167)                             (0.0168)                   (0.00986)                (0.0481)
                         [0.0146]                             [0.0179]                    [0.0127]                [0.0452]
 Observations               198                                 178                          198                     198
 Panel D. Distance to Border × Equal Division
 Equal Division          0.0463                               0.0492                     0.0317                    0.112
                         (0.0242)                             (0.0221)                   (0.0147)                 (0.0573)
                         [0.0192]                             [0.0221]                   [0.0134]                 [0.0576]
 Observations               198                                  178                        198                     198
 Mean Outcome                     6.719                         3.461                      7.956                   3.447
 SD Outcome                       0.115                         0.146                      0.162                   0.336
Notes: The table reports the effect of equal division on the outcomes reported in the column headers. The unit of observation is a
county. Data on income and GDP per capita stem from the Federal Statistical Office of Germany and INKAR of 2013/14. Panel
A includes longitude, latitude, and state-fixed effects. Panel B additionally includes geographic and cultural controls as specified
in summary statistics. Panel C reduces the sample to counties in 35 km distance to the border of the inheritance rule. Panel
D additionally includes an interaction term between distance to the border and treatment allowing the slope to vary on either
side of the border. Independent cities with more than 100.000 inhabitants are excluded. Regressions are weighted by population.
Standard errors clustered at the district (Regierungsbezirk) level. Conley standard errors in square brackets. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05,
*** p<0.01
                                            Table 4: Equal Division and Inequality Measures 2014 and 1995

                          (1)              (2)                 (3)                  (4)                   (5)                      (6)                    (7)                    (8)
                     top 10% inc.      top 1% inc.          log mean             log mean              share with               share with          Wealth taxpayers        Millionaires
                      share (%)         share(%)        income top 10%        income top 1%       inc. < 10.000Euro        inc. < 20.000Euro          per 10.000            per 10.000
Panel A. OLS
Equal Division          2.282              0.847            0.105                  0.102                 -1.433                   -1.523                  34.92               6.258
                        (0.874)           (0.566)           (0.0324)              (0.0580)               (0.809)                  (0.769)                  (8.454)             (1.990)
                        [0.579]           [0.368]           [0.0299]              [0.0401]               [0.785]                  [0.781]                  [8.863]             [1.605]
Observations              395               395                395                   395                   395                      395                      319                 319
Panel B. With Controls
Equal Division    2.071                  1.141              0.0954                 0.131                 -1.235                   -1.331                  35.16               7.504
                   (0.629)               (0.485)             (0.0268)             (0.0514)               (0.705)                  (0.682)                  (10.55)             (1.945)
                   [0.618]               [0.368]             [0.0266]             [0.0391]               [0.716]                  [0.738]                  [8.482]             [1.579]
Observations         395                   395                  395                  395                   395                      395                      319                 319
Panel C. Distance to Border
Equal Division      1.656                1.158              0.0861                0.135                  -1.443                   -1.525                  30.97               6.403
                    (0.751)              (0.541)             (0.0217)             (0.0466)               (0.817)                  (0.783)                  (10.78)             (1.774)
                    [0.789]              [0.455]             [0.0258]             [0.0416]               [0.803]                  [0.808]                  [10.01]             [1.870]
Observations          196                  196                  196                  196                   196                      196                      172                 172
Panel D. Distance to Border × Equal Division
Equal Division      2.102        1.518                      0.0744                 0.137                  -0.422                   -0.610                 16.21               4.466
                    (1.030)      (0.758)                    (0.0308)              (0.0670)               (1.205)                  (1.115)                 (9.154)             (2.141)
                    [0.920]      [0.596]                    [0.0298]              [0.0528]               [0.954]                  [0.971]                 [10.89]             [2.473]
Observations          196          196                         196                   196                   196                      196                     172                 172
Mean Outcome             37.37             10.98              11.69                12.76                  36.71                    50.90                   150.4                22.14
SD Outcome               5.034             2.613              0.224                0.306                  7.239                    8.051                   54.17                10.12
Notes: The table reports the effect of equal division on the outcomes reported in the column headers. The unit of observation is a county. Income inequality measures calculated
from 2014 income tax statistics, national accounts and population statistics of the Federal Statistical Office of Germany. Income bins are available with aggregate income per bin
and number of people in that bin. Wealth inequality measures calculated from 1995 wealth tax statistics of the Federal Statistical Office of Germany. Panel A includes longitude,
latitude, and state-fixed effects. Panel B additionally includes geographic and cultural controls as specified in summary statistics. Panel C reduces the sample to counties in 35
km distance to the border of the inheritance rule. Panel D additionally includes an interaction term between distance to the border and treatment allowing the slope to vary on
either side of the border. Independent cities with more than 100.000 inhabitants are excluded. Regressions are weighted by population. Standard errors clustered at the district
(Regierungsbezirk) level. Conley standard errors in square brackets. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
                                 Table 5: Equal Division and Education, Industry Structure and Productivity 2014

                                      Education                                                           Employment                                                     Firms
                            (1)                    (2)                   (3)          (4)                (5)                    (6)                (7)             (8)            (9)
                      College Degree       Vocational Training          Agric.       Manuf.       Trade and Services        Creative Ind.       Lab. prod.       Per Pop          Size
Panel A. OLS
Equal Division            3.343                  -3.819               -0.259        -4.613               4.882                 1.266             5.149           0.00127          -0.387
                           (0.734)                (0.940)              (0.0913)      (1.365)              (1.381)               (0.343)           (1.345)       (0.000715)       (0.387)
                           [0.734]                [0.851]              [0.0850]      [1.473]              [1.495]               [0.286]           [1.131]       [0.000514]       [0.300]
Observations                 397                    397                  397           397                  397                   397               395             380            380
Panel B. With Controls
Equal Division     2.789                         -2.759                -0.397        -2.902              3.300                 1.187             3.698          0.00205         -0.907
                    (0.696)                       (0.608)               (0.155)      (1.608)             (1.630)                (0.357)           (1.084)       (0.000594)       (0.401)
                    [0.788]                       [0.695]               [0.123]      [1.528]             [1.540]                [0.304]           [0.970]       [0.000615]       [0.366]
Observations           397                          397                   397          397                 397                    397               395             380            380
Panel C. Distance to Border
Equal Division       2.388                       -2.371               -0.326          -1.539              1.870                1.088             3.317          0.00195          -0.706
                      (0.729)                     (0.634)              (0.104)       (1.970)             (1.976)                (0.388)           (1.131)       (0.000612)       (0.385)
                      [0.789]                     [0.658]              [0.154]       [1.962]             [2.024]                [0.349]           [0.888]       [0.000673]       [0.406]
Observations            198                         198                  198           198                 198                    198               196             183            183
Panel D. Distance to Border × Equal Division
Equal Division       1.866              -1.183                         -0.328        -0.0733              0.433                 0.934              1.744         0.00148          -0.550
                     (1.087)           (0.885)                          (0.139)      (2.220)             (2.259)                (0.456)           (1.414)       (0.000819)       (0.485)
                     [0.829]            [0.772]                         [0.187]      [2.185]             [2.261]                [0.411]           [1.029]       [0.000806]       [0.494]
Observations           198                198                             198          198                 198                    198               196             183            183
Mean Outcome               11.19                    64.51               1.052         32.40                66.55                 2.645             47.22          0.0261         14.41
SD Outcome                 4.873                    6.396               1.260         10.49                10.66                 2.090             8.504         0.00355         1.983
Notes: The table reports the effect of equal division on the outcomes reported in the column headers. The unit of observation is a county. Data on education and industry structure
stem from INKAR data of 2013/14. Labor productivity is measured as GDP per working hour and stems from National Accounts of the Laender (www.vgrdl.de). Panel A includes
longitude, latitude, and state-fixed effects. Panel B additionally includes geographic and cultural controls as specified in summary statistics. Panel C reduces the sample to counties
in 35 km distance to the border of the inheritance rule. Panel D additionally includes an interaction term between distance to the border and treatment allowing the slope to vary
on either side of the border. Independent cities with more than 100.000 inhabitants are excluded. Regressions are weighted by population. Standard errors clustered at the district
(Regierungsbezirk) level. Conley standard errors in square brackets. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
                          Table 6: Equal Division and Agricultural Productivity

                                                         (1)                         (2)
                                                  Mean Caloric Output          Prussia: Grain
                                                       Pre 1500                 Yields kg/ha
                             Panel A. OLS
                             Equal Division               68.12                     -3.112
                                                           (25.39)                 (7.277)
                             Observations                    935                     415
                             Panel B. With Controls
                             Equal Division                 3.323                   -3.392
                                                           (16.63)                 (5.004)
                             Observations                    935                     415
                             Panel C. Distance to Border
                             Equal Division           10.50                         -2.065
                                                     (9.863)                       (4.951)
                             Observations              396                           190
                             Mean Outcome                  2211.4                   74.77
                             SD Outcome                    152.1                    24.44
The table uses in column 1 an index of caloric output per hectare per year before the year 1500 as outcome variable which is
constructed by Galor & Özak (2016). In column 1 we use the whole sample of the German Empire in 1895. In column 2 grain
yields in kilogram per hectare from Prussia in 1878 is the outcome variable. The sample is reduced to the 415 Prussian counties.
Panel A includes longitude, latitude, and state-fixed effects. Panel B additionally includes geographic and cultural controls as
specified in summary statistics. Panel C reduces the sample to counties in 35 km distance to the border of the inheritance rule.
Regressions are weighted by population. Standard errors clustered at the district (Regierungsbezirk) level. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05,
*** p<0.01
                               Table 7: Equal Division and Population Density

                                                                   Population Density
                                                          (1)              (2)         (3)        (4)
                                                      Prussia 1816        1895        1907        DID
                       Panel A. OLS
                       Equal Division                     1.507          63.73       117.5       75.86
                                                         (9.257)        (88.75)     (115.1)     (95.07)
                       Equal Division x 1907                                                     31.33
                                                                                                (22.75)
                       Observations                        318             937        948        1885
                       Panel B. With Controls
                       Equal Division                   -14.65           76.68      131.9        91.42
                                                         (6.754)        (58.79)     (70.90)     (58.54)
                       Equal Division x 1907                                                     28.08
                                                                                                (21.03)
                       Observations                        318             937        948        1885
                       Panel C. Distance to Border
                       Equal Division             2.608                  55.48      101.8        56.08
                                                 (4.080)                (44.05)     (51.91)     (42.45)
                       Equal Division x 1907                                                    47.76
                                                                                                (20.85)
                       Observations                         95             398        406         804
                       Mean Outcome                       58.80          169.2       220.5       196.3
                       SD Outcome                         35.89          283.9       369.3       332.6
Notes: The table reports the effect of equal division on the outcomes reported in the column headers. The unit of observation
is a county. The tables uses population density as outcome measure. In column 1 the sample stems from Prussian counties
in 1816. In column 2 and 3 from the whole sample of the German Empire in 1895 and 1907, respectively. Column 4 shows a
DID approach estimating the change in population density in rural German counties between 1895 and 1907. Panel A includes
longitude, latitude, and state-fixed effects. Panel B additionally includes geographic and cultural controls as specified in summary
statistics. Panel C reduces the sample to counties in 35 km distance to the border of the inheritance rule. Regressions are weighted
by population. Standard errors clustered at the district (Regierungsbezirk) level. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
                   Table 8: Equal Division and Technological Progress 1821 - 1882

                                          Technological Progress 1821            Employment 1882
                                            (1)       (2)       (3)                 (4)           (5)
                                         Factories   Mills   Looms              Self Empl.       Manuf.
                                              (per 1000 People)                out of Agric.
                    Panel A. OLS
                    Equal Division         -0.0895      0.105      -5.217          -0.143         -1.237
                                          (0.0878)     (0.286)     (2.926)        (0.553)        (1.626)
                    Observations             318         318         318            415            415
                    Panel B. With Controls
                    Equal Division   0.00689            0.231      -7.419          -0.640         0.237
                                    (0.0731)           (0.320)     (4.044)        (0.728)        (1.675)
                    Observations       318               318         318            415            415
                    Panel C. Distance to Border
                    Equal Division   -0.0703    -0.207              -0.633        0.0254          0.778
                                     (0.0329) (0.185)              (4.690)        (0.532)        (1.353)
                    Observations         95       95                  95            190            190
                    Mean Outcome            0.254       1.111       5.492          5.557          8.227
                    SD Outcome              0.238       0.986       12.83          2.385          5.591
Notes: The table reports the effect of equal division on the outcomes reported in the column headers. The unit of observation
is a county. The tables uses a sample of Prussian counties in 1821 and in 1882 with different proxies for technological progress.
Column 1 uses factories column 2 mills and column 3 looms per 1000 people as outcome variable. In column 4 self-employed
people out of agriculture as percent of total population is the outcome variable. In column 5 percent of population in the
manufacturing sector is the outcome variable. Panel A includes longitude, latitude, and state-fixed effects. Panel B additionally
includes geographic and cultural controls as specified in summary statistics. Panel C reduces the sample to counties in 35 km
distance to the border of the inheritance rule. Regressions are weighted by population. Standard errors clustered at the district
(Regierungsbezirk) level. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
                                             Table 9: Equal Division and Sectoral Employment 1895 and 1907

                                                               Employment 1895                                     Employment 1907
                                                    (1)         (2)               (3)                   (4)          (5)               (6)
                                                   Agric.      Manuf.      Trade and Services          Agric.       Manuf.      Trade and Services
                            Panel A. OLS
                            Equal Division         -2.489       0.304              0.165               -3.998        1.130              0.277
                                                  (2.085)      (1.427)            (0.174)             (2.729)       (1.507)            (0.214)
                                                  [1.354]      [0.917]            [0.152]             [1.807]       [0.973]            [0.179]
                            Observations            889          889                889                 900           900                900
                            Panel B. With Controls
                            Equal Division  -2.578              1.040             0.220               -4.104        2.253              0.309
                                            (1.296)            (1.036)            (0.130)              (1.694)      (1.067)            (0.184)
                                             [1.256]           [0.881]            [0.130]              [1.585]      [0.907]            [0.153]
                            Observations       886               886                886                  897          897                897
                            Panel C. Distance to Border
                            Equal Division -2.109 1.577                           0.273              -3.832        2.624               0.312
                                             (1.001) (0.767)                      (0.120)             (1.308)       (0.810)            (0.154)
                                              [1.046]   [0.730]                   [0.135]             [1.395]       [0.804]            [0.154]
                            Observations        382       382                       382                 390           390                390
                            Panel D. Distance to Border × Equal Division
                            Equal Division    -1.729    2.031           0.111                         -3.503       3.434               0.00949
                                             (1.223) (1.079)          (0.193)                         (1.759)       (1.256)            (0.289)
                                              [1.292]   [0.927]        [0.219]                        [1.730]       [1.073]            [0.262]
                            Observations        382       382            382                            390           390                390
                            Mean Outcome           19.190      14.560              3.428               20.359       16.471               4.208
                            SD Outcome             8.941       6.783               2.174               11.893       7.376                2.721
Notes: The table reports the effect of equal division on the outcomes reported in the column headers. The unit of observation is a county. Employment in sectors and occupations
as stated in 'Statistik des Deutschen Reichs' Vol. 109 for 1895 and 209 for 1907 as percent of total population in each district. Panel A includes longitude, latitude, and state-fixed
effects. Panel B additionally includes geographic and cultural controls as specified in summary statistics. Panel C reduces the sample to counties in 35 km distance to the border
of the inheritance rule. Panel D additionally includes an interaction term between distance to the border and treatment allowing the slope to vary on either side of the border.
Independent cities are excluded. Regressions are weighted by population. Standard errors clustered at the district (Regierungsbezirk) level. Conley standard errors in square
brackets. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Table 10: Equal Division and Innovation and Entrepreneurship I: Employment in Innovative
Manufacturing

                                                        in % of Total Pop.              in % of Manufacturing Pop.
                                                  (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)      (5)        (6)
   Panel A. OLS
   Equal Division                               2.125         -1.004     4.783         3.048        -0.904      7.180
                                                (0.938)      (1.372)     (1.533)       (1.383)     (1.772)       (2.512)
                                                [0.854]      [1.180]      [1.657]      [1.269]     [1.759]       [2.600]
   Equal Division × Low Soil Quality                        8.249                                 11.11
                                                             (2.276)                               (3.264)
                                                             [2.380]                               [3.161]
   Equal Division × Farm Size                                            -1.261                                -1.411
                                                                          (0.321)                               (0.522)
                                                                          [0.306]                               [0.491]
   Observations                                   900          900          896          900         900          896
   Panel B. With Controls
   Equal Division                              2.358          -0.451     5.441         3.299        -0.629      7.627
                                                (0.766)      (1.119)     (1.569)       (1.368)     (1.785)       (2.717)
                                                [0.794]      [1.096]      [1.626]      [1.282]     [1.722]       [2.597]
   Equal Division × Low Soil Quality                        7.787                                 10.89
                                                             (2.157)                               (3.307)
                                                             [2.056]                               [2.897]
   Equal Division × Farm Size                                            -1.215                                 -1.302
                                                                          (0.367)                                (0.583)
                                                                          [0.312]                                [0.485]
   Observations                                   897          897          893          897         897           893
   Panel C. Distance to Border
   Equal Division                              2.493          -0.874      3.933        3.207        -2.030       4.699
                                                (0.843)      (1.273)      (1.624)      (1.461)     (2.117)      (3.039)
                                                [0.797]      [1.247]      [2.088]      [1.353]     [2.058]      [3.375]
   Equal Division × Low Soil Quality                        9.186                                 14.29
                                                             (2.658)                               (4.242)
                                                             [2.399]                               [3.713]
   Equal Division × Farm Size                                            -0.849                                  -0.746
                                                                          (0.392)                               (0.602)
                                                                          [0.428]                               [0.673]
   Observations                                   390          390          388          390         390          388
   Panel D. Distance to Border × Equal Division
   Equal Division                      2.201      -0.885                  3.789         1.690       -3.045       3.381
                                       (1.260)   (1.408)                  (1.954)      (2.206)     (2.508)      (3.612)
                                       [1.075]   [1.429]                  [2.060]      [1.884]     [2.511]      [3.611]
   Equal Division × Low Soil Quality            9.184                                             14.09
                                                 (2.718)                                           (4.276)
                                                 [2.392]                                           [3.693]
   Equal Division × Farm Size                                            -0.852                                  -0.774
                                                                          (0.392)                               (0.617)
                                                                          [0.427]                               [0.677]
   Observations                                   390          390          388          390         390          388
   Mean Outcome                                  6.874        6.874        6.865       16.177      16.177        16.168
   SD Outcome                                    5.664        5.664        5.666       8.639       8.639         8.645
Notes: The table reports the effect of equal division on the outcomes reported in the column headers. The unit of observation
is a county. Soil quality is measured by the share of loam, sand and silt. Panel A includes longitude, latitude, and state-fixed
effects. Panel B additionally includes geographic and cultural controls as specified in summary statistics. Panel C reduces the
sample to counties in 35 km distance to the border of the inheritance rule. Panel D additionally includes an interaction term
between distance to the border and treatment allowing the slope to vary on either side of the border. Independent cities are
excluded. Regressions are weighted by population in 1907. Standard errors clustered at the district (Regierungsbezirk) level.
Conley standard errors in square brackets. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
   Table 11: Equal Division and Innovation and Entrepreneurship II: Patents 1877 to 1914

                                                     Dummy                   Log Patents           Log Patents w/ Zero
                                                  (1)     (2)               (3)       (4)            (5)        (6)
  Panel A. OLS
  Equal Division                                0.0837        0.142      0.646          0.329      0.739          0.671
                                               (0.0744)      (0.132)      (0.231)      (0.366)     (0.317)       (0.494)
                                               [0.0591]     [0.0786]      [0.189]      [0.297]     [0.221]       [0.294]
  Equal Division x Low Soil Quality                         -0.0997                     0.873                     0.393
                                                             (0.229)                   (0.604)                   (0.838)
                                                             [0.167]                   [0.507]                   [0.661]
  Observations                                    899          899          499          499         899           899
  Panel B. With Controls
  Equal Division                                0.138         0.167      0.561          0.318      0.888          0.910
                                               (0.0837)      (0.116)     (0.226)       (0.355)     (0.344)       (0.511)
                                               [0.0553]     [0.0636]     [0.193]       [0.278]     [0.196]       [0.255]
  Equal Division x Low Soil Quality                         -0.0841                     0.680                    -0.0627
                                                             (0.169)                   (0.600)                   (0.793)
                                                             [0.128]                   [0.398]                   [0.499]
  Observations                                    899          899          499          499         899           899
  Panel C. Distance to Border
  Equal Division                                0.105       0.00365      0.472        -0.00934     0.623         0.0495
                                               (0.0582)     (0.0748)     (0.224)       (0.254)     (0.246)       (0.298)
                                               [0.0533]     [0.0640]     [0.165]       [0.264]     [0.163]       [0.239]
  Equal Division x Low Soil Quality                          0.275                     1.337                     1.566
                                                             (0.134)                   (0.558)                   (0.587)
                                                             [0.134]                   [0.347]                   [0.512]
  Observations                                    390          390          228          228         390           390
  Distance to Border × Equal Division
  Equal Division                       0.168                 0.0714        0.529        0.102      0.644          0.114
                                      (0.0938)               (0.103)      (0.348)      (0.352)     (0.358)       (0.385)
                                      [0.0686]              [0.0780]      [0.249]      [0.300]     [0.205]       [0.255]
  Equal Division x Low Soil Quality                         0.288                      1.376                     1.578
                                                             (0.133)                   (0.582)                   (0.595)
                                                             [0.134]                   [0.357]                   [0.513]
  Observations                                    390          390          228          228         390           390
  Mean Outcome                                  0.669         0.669        1.979        1.979       1.994         1.994
  SD Outcome                                    0.471         0.471        1.542        1.542       1.886         1.886
Notes: The table reports the effect of equal division on the outcomes reported in the column headers. The unit of observation
is a county. The outcome in columns 1 and 2 is an indicator which is 1 if a patent was filed in a county between 1877 and
1914 and 0 otherwise. The outcome in columns 3 and 4 is the log of the number of patents filed in a county between 1877
and 1914 turning all 0 to missings. The outcome in columns 5 and 6 is 0 if no patent was filed in county between 1877 and
1914 and the log of the number of patents +1 otherwise. Soil quality is measured by the share of loam, sand and silt. Panel A
includes longitude, latitude, and state-fixed effects. Panel B additionally includes geographic and cultural controls as specified
in summary statistics. Panel C reduces the sample to counties in 35 km distance to the border of the inheritance rule. Panel D
additionally includes an interaction term between distance to the border and treatment allowing the slope to vary on either side
of the border. Independent cities are excluded. Regressions are weighted by population in 1907. Standard errors clustered at the
district (Regierungsbezirk) level. Conley standard errors in square brackets. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Additional Figures and Tables
                                                 Table A1: Overview of Main Historical Outcome Variables

         Outcome                                        mean (sd)      min     max      Explanation                               Source
         income          top 10% income share 1895         30.3        17.4     48.4    Pareto interpolation using                statistical offices of Baden and Hesse
         inequality                                         5.6                         income tax tabulations and wages
                         top 1% income share 1895           8.9         5.0     21.4    Pareto interpolation using                statistical offices of Baden and Hesse
                                                            3.3                         income tax tabulations and wages
                         ratio 1/90 1895                   13.3         6.0     41.6    top 1% share/(100-top 10% share)          statistical offices of Baden and Hesse
                                                            6.6
                         log mean income 1895               6.8         6.5     7.3                                               statistical offices of Baden and Hesse
                                                           0.14
                         mean income 1895                  900         681     1504     total income/total population             statistical offices of Baden and Hesse
                                                           144
                         top 10% income share 1907         36.8        21.6     52.4    Pareto interpolation using                statistical offices of Baden,
                                                            8.0                         income tax tabulations and wages          Hesse and Wuerttemberg
                         top 1% income share 1907          11.0         4.8     20.4    Pareto interpolation using                statistical offices of Baden,
                                                            3.3                         income tax tabulations and wages          Hesse and Wuerttemberg
                         ratio 1/90 1907                   18.2         6.3     38.6    top 1% share/(100-top 10% share)          statistical offices of Baden,
                                                            7.0                                                                   Hesse and Wuerttemberg
                         log mean income 1907               6.8         6.5     7.5                                               statistical offices of Baden,
                                                           0.25                                                                   Hesse and Wuerttemberg
                         mean income 1907                  896         694     1755     total income/total population             statistical offices of Baden,
                                                           245                                                                    Hesse and Wuerttemberg
         landholding     landholding gini 1895             0.716       0.426   0.948    For more information about                Ziblatt (2008)
         inequality                                        0.123                        this measure see Ziblatt (2008).
         distribution    <2 ha                             8.242       0.65    41.86    Percentage of farms below 2 ha            Kaiserliches Statistisches Amt (1898)
         of farm sizes                                     7.031                        number stated in source
                         2-5 ha                           13.336       0.76    61.71    Percentage of farms between 2-5 ha
                                                          10.692                        number stated in source
                         5-20 ha                          33.843       3.03    70.54    Percentage of farms between 5-20 ha
                                                          15.044                        number stated in source
                         20 -100 ha                       27.081        0.3    82.17    Percentage of farms between 20-100 ha
                                                          16.055                        number stated in source
                         > 100 ha                         17.483         0      80.8    Percentage of farms above 100 ha
                                                          19.319                        number stated in source
Notes: This table gives an overview of the outcome variables used in Tables 2 and 3 which are our main historical tables. Column 3 shows means and standard deviations in
parentheses. Column 4 and 5 show the minimum and the maximum of the variable. The construction of the variables is described in column 6 and the sources are given in column
7. The precise reference for some of the sources can be found in the bibliography. See Table A3 for more details on the data sources used for the computation of top income shares.
                                                  Table A2: Overview of Main Modern Outcome Variables

Outcome                                      mean (sd)       min         max       Explanation                                              Source
income       log household                      6.719        6.448       7.46      Log of household income                                  Bundesamt für Bauwesen und Raumforschung,
             income                              0.115                                                                                      INKAR Indikatoren und Karten zur Raum- ,
             household income                  833.531       631.6     1737.281    The average monthly household income                     und Stadtentwicklung, from www.inkar.de
                                                103.02                             in Euro in 2013 divided by the average
                                                                                   household size in 2012
             log taxable income                  3.46        3.107      4.022      Log of average taxable income                            Federal Statistical Office of Germany,
                                                0.146                                                                                       from https://www.destatis.de

             taxable income                    32.181       22.352      55.808     Average taxable income                                   Bundesamt für Bauwesen und Raumforschung,
                                                4.809                              in thousand Euro                                         INKAR Indikatoren und Karten zur Raum-
             log median                         7.956        7.555      8.383      Log of median income                                     und Stadtentwicklung, from www.inkar.de
             income                              0.162
             median income                    2889.439       1910        4371      Median monthly income
                                               455.414                             in Euro in 2013
             log GDP p.c                         3.447       2.674      4.964      Log of GDP p.c.
                                                0.336
             GDP p.c                            33.494       14.5       143.1      GDP p.c. in 2013
                                               14.404                              in thousand Euro
income       top 10% income share                36.9        26.7        63.1      Pareto interpolation using income tax tabulations,       Federal Statistical Office of Germany and
inequality                                        5.1                              national accounts and population statistics              statistical offices of the Laender
             top 1% income share                 10.9         6.7        33.6      Pareto interpolation using income tax tabulations,
                                                  2.8                              national accounts and population statistics
             log mean income top 10%              6.8         6.5         7.3
                                                 0.14
             mean income top 10%               119,534      72,247     318,532     total income of top 10% in Euro/10% of population
                                                29,452
             log mean income top 1%              12.7        12.1        14.4
                                                 0.32
             mean income top 1%                357,066      178,810   1,844,190    total income of top 10% in Euro/10% of population
                                               144,362
             share with income < 10.000          36.7        22.1        64.5      no of tax units with income <10.000/total population
                                                  7.1
             share with income < 20.000          51.2        35.1        77.3      no of tax units with income <20.000/total population
                                                  8.0
wealth       wealth taxpayers per 10.000        149.7         40         418       no of wealth taxpayers/total population in 10.000        Federal Statistical Office of Germany,
inequality                                       54.9                                                                                       Fachserie 14, Reihe 7.4, Vermögensteuer
                                                                                                                                            Hauptveranlagung 1995, p.119-127.
             millionaires per 10.000             21.4          7          89       no of tax units with wealth
                                                 10.5                              > 1 Mio. DM/total population in 10.000

Notes: This table gives an overview of the outcome variables used in Tables 4 and 5 which are our main long-run tables. Column 3 shows means and standard deviations in
parentheses. Column 4 and 5 show the minimum and the maximum of the variable. The construction of the variables is described in column 6 and the sources are given in column
7. The precise reference for some of the sources can be found in the bibliography. See Table A3 for more details on the data sources used for the computation of top income shares.
                                                    Table A3: Sources for Income Inequality Measures

area              data year     explanation                                            source
Baden                 1895      income tax tabulations                                 Statistik der badischen Einkommensteuer 1896, p.52-53
                     1907       income tax tabulations                                 Statistisches Jahrbuch für das Großherzogtum Baden 1909, p.634-635
Hesse                 1894      income tax tabulations                                 Mittheilungen der Großherzoglich Hessischen Centralstelle für die Landesstatistik 1895, p.226-231
Hesse                 1907      income tax tabulations                                 Mittheilungen der Großherzoglich Hessischen Centralstelle für die Landesstatistik 1909, p.4-13,20,27
Wuerttemberg          1906      income tax tabulations                                 Württembergische Jahrbücher für Statistik und Landeskunde 1908, Vol. 1, p.24-28; Vol. 2, p.110-115
German Empire         1895      total population (=total no. of potential taxpayers)   Kaiserliches Statisisches Amt (1897)
German Empire         1907      total population (=total no. of potential taxpayers)   Kaiserliches Statisisches Amt (1910)
German Empire         1873      wages                                                  Kuczynski, J. (1947): Die Geschichte der Lage der Arbeiter in Deutschland
                     -1913                                                             von 1789 bis in die Gegenwart, Band 1. Tribüne.
Germany               2013      income tax tabulations                                 Lohn- und Einkommensteuerstatistik: Kreise (Code 73111-02-01-4),
                                                                                       Federal Statistical Office of Germany, from https://www.regionalstatistik.de
Germany              2013       primary income                                         Volkswirtschaftliche Gesamtrechnungen der Länder (Code R2B1, R2B2,R2B3 )
                                                                                       statistical offices of the Laender, from https://www.vgrdl.de
Germany              2011       marital status                                         Census 2011 (Code 12111-05-01-5), Federal Statistical Office of Germany
                                                                                       from https://www.regionalstatistik.de
Germany              2013       population by age                                      Population update (Code 12411-02-03-4), Federal Statistical Office of Germany
                                                                                       from https://www.regionalstatistik.de

Notes: This table gives an overview on the data sources for our inequality measures used in Tables 5. Column 3 shows the area covered by the data source. Column 4 shows the
data year. The content of the data source is described in column 6 and the respective publications are given in column 7.
       Table A4: Equal Division and Income Measures 2014 - Quadratic RD Polynomial

                               (1)                           (2)                         (3)                      (4)
                       Log Household Income           Log Taxable Income          Log Median Income          Log GDP p.c.
 Panel A. OLS
 Equal Division                0.0700                        0.0739                     0.0501                    0.133
                                (0.0223)                      (0.0209)                   (0.0181)                (0.0554)
                                [0.0161]                      [0.0189]                   [0.0152]                [0.0359]
 Observations                      397                          374                         397                     397
 Panel B. With Controls
 Equal Division         0.0569                               0.0573                     0.0424                   0.136
                         (0.0186)                             (0.0177)                   (0.0109)                (0.0362)
                         [0.0143]                             [0.0170]                   [0.0139]                [0.0368]
 Observations               397                                 374                         397                     397
 Panel C. Distance to Border
 Equal Division          0.0488                              0.0506                     0.0434                    0.146
                         (0.0187)                             (0.0159)                   (0.0123)                (0.0539)
                         [0.0175]                             [0.0211]                   [0.0149]                [0.0600]
 Observations               198                                 178                         198                     198
 Panel D. Distance to Border × Equal Division
 Equal Division           0.0377                              0.0318                      0.0238                  0.0981
                         (0.0262)                            (0.0236)                    (0.0142)                (0.0690)
                         [0.0157]                            [0.0176]                    [0.0139]                [0.0521]
 Observations               198                                 178                         198                    198
 Mean Outcome                     6.719                        3.461                       7.956                  3.447
 SD Outcome                       0.115                        0.146                       0.162                  0.336
Notes: Data on income and GDP per capita stem from the Federal Statistical Office of Germany and INKAR of 2013/14. In
comparison to table 3 this table includes a quadratic RD polynomial in all panels. Panel A includes longitude, latitude, and state-
fixed effects. Panel B additionally includes geographic and cultural controls as specified in summary statistics. Panel C reduces
the sample to counties in 35 km distance to the border of the inheritance rule. Panel D additionally includes an interaction
term between distance to the border and treatment allowing the slope to vary on either side of the border. Counties with
more than 100.000 inhabitants are excluded. Regressions are weighted by population. Standard errors clustered at the district
(Regierungsbezirk) level. Conley standard errors in square brackets. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
                        Table A5: Equal Division and Farm Sizes in Prussia 1816

                                         (1)                        (2)                           (3)
                                 Small Landholdings         Medium Landholdings           Large Landholdings
                                                             (per 1000 People)
            Panel A. OLS
            Equal Division              26.32                         13.47                        -0.291
                                         (7.614)                     (7.969)                      (0.264)
            Observations                   305                         305                          305
            Panel B. With Controls
            Equal Division         21.33                              7.484                       0.0333
                                    (5.706)                          (5.465)                      (0.178)
            Observations              305                              305                          305
            Panel C. Distance to Border
            Equal Division         8.472                              2.327                       0.0550
                                   (4.666)                           (6.067)                      (0.166)
            Observations             123                               123                          123
            Mean Outcome                  50.10                       40.42                        1.340
            SD Outcome                    37.12                       21.96                        1.496
Notes: This table uses the earliest available measure of the distribution of farm sizes of German lands from Prussia in 1816.
Column 1 shows the percent of small landholdings per 1000 people. Column 2 the percent of medium landholdings and column
3 the percent of large landholdings per 1000 people. Panel A includes longitude, latitude, and state-fixed effects. Panel B
additionally includes geographic and cultural controls as specified in summary statistics. Panel C reduces the sample to counties
in 35 km distance to the border of the inheritance rule. Regressions are weighted by population. Standard errors clustered at the
district (Regierungsbezirk) level. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
                          Table A6: Change in Farm Sizes and Their Distribution

                                         (1)                   (2)           (3)         (4)             (5)             (6)
                                 Average Farmsize ha          < 2 ha       2-5 ha      5-20 ha        20-100 ha       > 100 ha
  Panel A. OLS
  Equal Division x 1907                 -0.288                1.018         0.212     -3.068            0.869              0.935
                                         (0.105)              (0.434)      (0.351)     (0.538)         (0.777)            (0.566)
  Observations                            1870                 1873         1873        1873            1871               1739
  Panel B. With Controls
  Equal Division x 1907                 -0.279                1.027         0.275     -2.987            0.716              0.850
                                         (0.103)              (0.423)      (0.310)     (0.524)         (0.710)            (0.596)
  Observations                            1870                 1873         1873        1873            1871               1739
  Panel C. Distance to Border
  Equal Division x 1907                 -0.221                1.513         0.155     -3.112           1.624              0.0294
                                        (0.0959)               (0.511)     (0.354)     (0.665)         (0.793)            (0.644)
  Observations                             795                   798         798         798             796                715
  Mean Outcome                            5.818                8.607        13.60         35.05           26.49           17.46
  SD Outcome                              3.403                7.636        10.95         15.07           16.02           18.68
Notes: Average farm size and shares of farms in 5 size categories as stated in 'Statistik des Deutschen Reichs' Vol. 109(1895) and
Vol. 209(1907). The regressor is the interaction term of 'equal division' (compared to 'unequal division') and year 1907 (compared
to 1895). The results show the change in farm sizes between 1895 and 1907. Panel A includes besides main effects longitude,
latitude, and state-fixed effects. Panel B additionally includes geographic and cultural controls as specified in summary statistics.
Panel C reduces the sample to counties in 35 km distance to the border of the inheritance rule. Independent cities are excluded.
Regressions are weighted by population. Standard errors clustered at the district (Regierungsbezirk) level. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05,
*** p<0.01


                    Table A7: Equal Division and Income Inequality 1895 and 1907

                          (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)             (5)           (6)               (7)          (8)
                       top 10%        Top 1%         Ratio      Log Mean        Top 10%        Top 1%             Ratio      Log Mean
                      Inc Share      Inc Share       1/90        Income         Inc share     Inc Share           1/90        Income
                         1895          1895          1895         1895            1907          1907              1907         1907
Panel A. OLS
Equal Division          0.872          0.275         0.581        0.0380          0.154            -0.110     -0.0882          0.0507
                       (1.864)        (1.102)       (2.130)      (0.0410)        (1.365)          (0.856)     (1.724)         (0.0412)
Observations              70            70             70           70             133              133         133              133
Panel B. With Controls
Equal Division    -0.835               -0.378        -1.031       -0.0171         -1.227           -0.899      -1.716          -0.0107
                 (2.455)              (1.524)       (2.878)      (0.0505)        (1.603)          (1.071)     (2.087)         (0.0436)
Observations        70                   70            70            70            133              133         133              133
Panel C. Distance to Border
Equal Division     0.587               0.160         0.191        0.0224          -0.388           -0.526      -0.866          0.0161
                  (2.424)             (1.626)       (3.059)      (0.0483)        (1.357)          (0.984)     (1.868)         (0.0355)
Observations         64                 64             64           64             119              119         119              119
Mean Outcome             33.00          10.43        16.42         6.857          37.59           11.95           19.87        6.844
SD Outcome               7.096          4.042        8.552         0.187          7.403           3.520           7.356        0.301
Notes: The table reports the effect of equal division on the outcomes reported in the column headers. The unit of observation is
a county. County income tax tabulations are from the annual publications of the statistical offices of Baden (1895,1907), Hesse
(1894,1907) and Württemberg (1907). Panel A includes longitude, latitude, and state-fixed effects. Panel B additionally includes
geographic and cultural controls as specified in summary statistics. Panel C reduces the sample to counties in 35 km distance
to the border of the inheritance rule. Independent cities are excluded. Regressions are weighted by population. Standard errors
clustered at the district (Regierungsbezirk) level. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
                              Table A8: Landholding Inequality 1895 in Prussia

                              Landholding Gini Coeff. 1895                          % Farms in Size Category...
                                (1)                     (2)                 (3)           (4)         (5)           (6)
                         Linear RD Polyn.         Quad. RD Polyn.          < 2 ha       2-5 ha      5-20 ha      20-100 ha
   Panel A. OLS
   Equal Division             -0.0612                  -0.0562            5.268        9.776          1.841      -14.61
                               (0.0290)                (0.0314)            (1.856)      (2.065)      (2.465)      (2.781)
   Observations                  490                      490                488          488          488          488
   Panel B. With Controls
   Equal Division      -0.0490                        -0.0471             5.970        9.381          -2.524     -13.10
                        (0.0169)                       (0.0170)            (1.273)      (1.573)      (2.754)      (2.380)
   Observations            490                            490                488          488          488          488
   Panel C. Distance to Border
   Equal Division       -0.0423                       -0.0450             5.169        8.055          -3.138     -8.303
                         (0.0114)                      (0.0134)            (1.289)      (1.608)      (1.973)      (2.486)
   Observations             157                           157                155          155          155          155
   Mean Outcome                  0.770                   0.770              7.627        10.45        27.97        29.23
   SD Outcome                   0.0975                  0.0975              6.727        8.458        12.56        15.92
Notes: This table shows the results of table 2 for Prussia only. Share of farms in 5 size categories as stated in 'Statistik des
Deutschen Reichs' Vol. 109. Panel A includes longitude, latitude, and state-fixed effects. Panel additionally B includes geographic
and cultural controls as specified in summary statistics. Panel C reduces the sample to counties in 35 km distance to the border
of the inheritance rule. Independent cities are excluded. Regressions are weighted by population. Standard errors clustered at
the district (Regierungsbezirk) level. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01



                             Table A9: Landholding Inequality 1895 in Bavaria

                               Landholding Gini Coeff. 1895                         % Farms in Size Category...
                                (1)                     (2)                  (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)
                         Linear RD Polyn.         Quad. RD Üolyn.           < 2 ha      2-5 ha      5-20 ha     20-100 ha
    Panel A. OLS
    Equal Division              0.0232                  -0.00513             3.321       2.706       -4.445        -2.872
                               (0.0286)                 (0.0182)            (2.424)     (2.524)     (5.379)       (2.779)
    Observations                 189                       189                190         190         190           190
    Panel B. With Controls
    Equal Division       0.00820                        0.00519            -1.426       -4.663       3.013         1.507
                         (0.0137)                       (0.0124)            (0.590)     (2.005)     (3.714)       (2.933)
    Observations           189                             189                190         190         190           190
    Panel C. Distance to Border
    Equal Division        0.00283                      0.000992              -0.703      -2.821      2.410         0.509
                          (0.0114)                     (0.00974)            (0.445)     (2.274)     (2.769)       (2.363)
    Observations             84                            84                  84          84          84            84
    Mean Outcome                 0.557                   0.557               5.353       14.98       49.75         27.27
    SD Outcome                  0.0549                   0.0549              5.084       8.552       10.27         14.43
Notes: This table shows the results of table 2 for Bavaria only. Share of farms in 5 size categories as stated in 'Statistik des
Deutschen Reichs' Vol. 109. Panel A includes longitude, latitude, and state-fixed effects. Panel B additionally includes geographic
and cultural controls as specified in summary statistics. Panel C reduces the sample to counties in 35 km distance to the border
of the inheritance rule. Independent cities are excluded. Regressions are weighted by population. Standard errors clustered at
the district (Regierungsbezirk) level. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
                                           Table A10: Equal Division and Income and Wages, 1878 and 1895

                                                                       Income and County Taxes 1878                                            Daily Wages
                                              (1)                      (2)                 (3)                             (4)                     (5)
                                       Federal Class Tax       Federal Income Tax Local County Tax                 Total County Income          Males 1892
                                                                              (per Capita)
                  Panel A. OLS
                  Equal Division              -0.141                   -0.0815                  0.0449                      -0.420                 0.100
                                             (0.0802)                  (0.129)                  (0.172)                    (0.341)               (0.0761)
                  Observations                  415                      415                      415                        415                    413
                  Panel B. With Controls
                  Equal Division        -0.125                         0.0958                   0.0885                     0.0465                 0.0596
                                       (0.0682)                        (0.110)                  (0.122)                    (0.275)               (0.0780)
                  Observations            415                            415                      415                        415                   413
                  Panel C. Distance to Border
                  Equal Division       -0.157                          0.0946                    0.118                    -0.00813                0.0317
                                        (0.0496)                       (0.116)                  (0.121)                    (0.242)               (0.0667)
                  Observations             190                           190                      190                        190                    189
                  Mean Outcome                1.376                     0.624                     1.010                     2.068                  1.487
                  SD Outcome                  0.390                     0.441                     0.792                     2.777                  0.356
Notes: The table reports the effect of equal division on the outcomes reported in the column headers. The unit of observation is a county. The table uses various measures of tax
income per person in each Prussian county in 1878 as outcome variables (column 1-4). The outcome variables in column 1 and 2 come close to an income tax while taxes in column
3 and 4 are local community taxes. In column 5 it uses daily wages for males in 1892 in Prussia as outcome variable. Panel A includes longitude, latitude, and state-fixed effects.
Panel B additionally includes geographic and cultural controls as specified in summary statistics. Panel C reduces the sample to counties in 35 km distance to the border of the
inheritance rule. Regressions are weighted by population. Standard errors clustered at the district (Regierungsbezirk) level. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
                               Table A11: Equal Division and Education 1886

                                              1871                            1816                   1886
                                      (1)                 (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)           (6)
                                Percent Able to        Percent      Schools      Pupils    Schools        Pupils
                                Read and Write        Illiterate                (per 1000 People)
           Panel A. OLS
           Equal Division            -6.103            4.564        0.0609      -32.82         0.203      1.808
                                      (2.528)          (1.737)      (0.227)      (9.807)      (0.160)    (13.04)
           Observations                 415              415          308          305          415        415
           Panel B. With Controls
           Equal Division        -1.135                 -0.102       0.414        -3.967      0.0144      -10.59
                                (1.824)                (1.035)      (0.247)      (10.55)      (0.168)    (13.52)
           Observations           415                    415          308          305          415        415
           Panel C. Distance to Border
           Equal Division       -0.0543                 -0.574      0.0395        -4.428       -0.114     -15.70
                                (1.847)                (0.629)      (0.111)      (8.813)      (0.150)    (15.63)
           Observations           190                    190           90           87          190        190
           Mean Outcome               62.57             9.544        1.928           110.7     1.328        169.8
           SD Outcome                 12.03             9.305        0.923           43.72     0.533        43.13
Notes: The table reports the effect of equal division on the outcomes reported in the column headers. The unit of observation is
a county. The table uses data on education levels in Prussia as outcome variables. In column 1 and 2 the data stems from 1871
and shows the percent of the population which is able to read and write. In column 2 the percent of illiterate people is used.
Earliest measures of education come from the documented number of schools and pupils in Prussian counties in 1816 (column
3 and 4). In 1886 the same measures are documented for Prussia again. Panel A includes longitude, latitude, and state-fixed
effects. Panel B additionally includes geographic and cultural controls as specified in summary statistics. Panel C reduces the
sample to counties in 35 km distance to the border of the inheritance rule. Regressions are weighted by population. Standard
errors clustered at the district (Regierungsbezirk) level. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
                              Table A12: Sectoral Employment in Prussia 1882

                                                    (1)         (2)              (3)
                                                   Agric.      Manuf.     Trade and Services
                             Panel A. OLS
                             Equal Division        0.720        -1.481            0.364
                                                  (1.872)      (1.791)           (0.383)
                             Observations           415          415               415
                             Panel B. With Controls
                             Equal Division   -0.820            -0.686           0.753
                                             (1.801)           (2.057)           (0.346)
                             Observations      415               415               415
                             Panel C. Distance to Border
                             Equal Division    -0.765    0.489                  0.724
                                              (1.411) (1.578)                   (0.229)
                             Observations       190       190                      190
                             Mean Outcome           20.68      12.40              2.636
                             SD Outcome             6.907      6.584              1.481
Notes: This table uses the percentage of people in the three main economic sectors: agriculture, manufacturing, and trade and
services as outcome variables. The sample stems from 1882 Prussia. Panel A includes longitude, latitude, and state-fixed effects.
Panel B additionally includes geographic and cultural controls as specified in summary statistics. Panel C reduces the sample
to counties in 35 km distance to the border of the inheritance rule. Regressions are weighted by population. Standard errors
clustered at the district (Regierungsbezirk) level. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                        Table A13: Height of Bavarian conscripts in 19th century

                                                      (1)                    (2)
                                                  Height (cm)       SD (cm) within County
                             Panel A. OLS with Individual Controls
                             Equal Division    -0.345              -0.166
                                                (0.155)            (0.00258)
                             Observations        19048               19048
                             Panel B. Additional Geographic Controls
                             Equal Division       1.097            -3.182
                                                 (1.645)             (0.187)
                             Observations         19047               19047
                             Panel C. Border Sample
                             Equal Division     0.0717                       -0.265
                                               (1.235)                      (6.71e-12)
                             Observations        4982                          4982
                             Mean Outcome              165.6                   6.250
                             SD Outcome                6.353                   0.201
Notes: The table uses absolute height in centimeter of Bavarian conscripts in the 19th century as outcome variable in column
1. Column 2 uses the standard deviation of height in centimeter within a Bavarian county as outcome variable. The variation
in equal division comes from the county level. There are 181 counties in the sample. Panel A includes longitude, latitude, and
state-fixed effects. Panel B additionally includes geographic and cultural controls as specified in summary statistics. Panel C
reduces the sample to counties in 35 km distance to the border of the inheritance rule. Regressions are weighted by population.
Standard errors clustered at the district (Regierungsbezirk) level. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Table A14: Deposits at and Credit from Savings Banks and Credit Associations 1895 and 1907

                             (1)                (2)                (3)              (4)             (5)            (6)
                        Depositors pc      Depositors pc       Deposits pc      Deposits pc      Credit pc      Credit pc
                           (1895)             (1907)             (1895)           (1907)          (1895)         (1907)
  Panel A. OLS
  Equal Division            0.0101              0.0227             2.563            -2.809         10.49         -81.96
                           (0.0158)            (0.0351)           (9.006)          (27.37)         (5.610)       (39.21)
  Observations                69                  70                126               70             124           69
  Panel B. With Controls
  Equal Division     -0.00398                  0.00946             -7.438           -34.65          -4.083        -64.75
                     (0.0214)                  (0.0377)           (12.37)          (47.49)         (5.228)       (47.27)
  Observations           69                       70                126               70             124            69
  Panel C. Distance to Border
  Equal Division     0.0000760                  0.0271             -3.240           -19.67          2.342         -25.25
                      (0.0170)                 (0.0308)           (10.49)          (33.96)         (4.017)       (44.78)
  Observations           63                       64                112               64             110            63
  Mean Outcome              0.186               0.257              98.60            296.5           61.74         234.6
  SD Outcome                0.0616              0.0891             112.3            159.2           59.43         151.0
Notes: The table uses per capita data from local savings banks (Baden, Hesse, Württemberg) and credit associations (Baden)
aggregated at the county level. The number of savings banks' depositors is available in Baden and Hesse, deposits in RM at
savings banks in Baden, Hesse and Württemberg (only 1895) and credit in RM in Baden (only credit associations), Hesse and
Württemberg (only 1895). Sources are Statistisches Jahrbuch für das Großherzogtum Baden 1895/6 and 1908/9, Mitteilungen
der Großherzoglich Hessischen Zentralstelle für Landesstatistik 1895 and 1909, and Statistisches Handbuch für das Königreich
Württemberg 1896. Panel A includes longitude, latitude, and state-fixed effects. Panel B additionally includes geographic and
cultural controls as specified in summary statistics. Panel C reduces the sample to counties in 35 km distance to the border of
the inheritance rule. Regressions are weighted by population. Standard errors clustered at the district (Regierungsbezirk) level.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
              Table A15: Equal Division and the Composition of Income and Wealth

                         (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)              (5)              (6)              (7)
                       Business        Real Estate        Capital            Labor          Business        Real Estate       Financial
                     Income (pc)       Income (pc)      Income (pc)       Income (pc)      Assets (pc)      Assets (pc)      Assets (pc)
Panel A. OLS
Equal Division          40.99              -4.810           23.31             91.75            54.92          -302.7            -248.6
                        (21.06)           (9.933)          (27.24)           (58.27)          (59.65)          (121.5)         (380.2)
Observations              115               115              115               115              70               70               70
Panel B. With Controls
Equal Division     22.07                   -14.01           4.020             41.83            -23.45        -571.1             -452.1
                  (10.88)                 (9.242)          (12.09)           (25.71)          (100.5)         (126.9)          (326.9)
Observations        115                     115              115               115               70             70                70
Panel C. Distance to Border
Equal Division      21.24                  -13.92           3.573             39.98            31.80         -473.2             -210.1
                    (10.62)               (9.730)          (13.64)           (25.22)          (85.35)         (101.2)          (299.1)
Observations          106                   106              106               106              64              64                64
Mean Outcome             109.0             127.1            57.14             188.0            574.3           2668.7          1240.5
SD Outcome               116.8             54.75            114.0             245.3            441.1            931.0          954.0
Notes: The table uses county level aggregates from the wealth tax collection in Baden 1908 and Hesse 1907 as well as income tax
collection in Baden 1908 and Württemberg 1907. Income tax statistics included roughly a third of the population. Real estate
includes both land and buildings. Panel A includes longitude, latitude, and state-fixed effects. Panel B additionally includes
geographic and cultural controls as specified in summary statistics. Column 3 reduces the sample to counties in 35 km distance
to the border of the inheritance rule. Independent cities are excluded. Regressions are weighted by population in 1907. Standard
errors clustered at the district (Regierungsbezirk) level. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
     Table A16: Equal Division and Innovation and Entrepreneurship: Appendix Material

                                      Employment 1925:                         Prussia 1816:
                                              (1)                   (2)                 (3)
                                          Self Empl.           Middle Schools Middle School Pupils
                                         out of Agric.                   (per 1000 People)
                Panel A. OLS
                Equal Division               0.0656                  -0.0113                  -0.338
                                            (0.0848)                (0.0195)                 (1.210)
                Observations                  779                      311                     311
                Panel B. With Controls
                Equal Division          0.151                        0.0180                  1.943
                                       (0.118)                      (0.0129)                 (0.803)
                Observations             763                           311                     311
                Panel C. Border Sample
                Equal Division        0.309                        0.0347                     1.934
                                      (0.162)                      (0.0158)                  (1.450)
                Observations            329                           90                       90
                Mean Outcome                  4.415                  0.0430                   2.305
                SD Outcome                    1.540                  0.0804                   4.503
Notes: The table reports the effect of equal division on the outcomes reported in the column headers. The unit of observation is
a county. In column 1 the percent of people in self-employment out of agriculture (manufacturing and trade and services) is used
as outcome variable for the sample of the whole German Empire in 1925. In column 2 and 3 the sample is reduced to Prussian
counties. The number of middle schools (column 2) and the number of pupils in middle schools (column 3) per 1000 people are
used as outcome variables. Panel A includes longitude, latitude, and state-fixed effects. Panel B additionally includes geographic
and cultural controls as specified in summary statistics. Panel C reduces the sample to counties in 35 km distance to the border
of the inheritance rule. Regressions are weighted by population. Standard errors clustered at the district (Regierungsbezirk)
level. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
