                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    A MACROECONOMIC MODEL OF HEALTHCARE SATURATION, INEQUALITY
                AND THE OUTPUT-PANDEMIA TRADEOFF

                                      Enrique G. Mendoza
                                       Eugenio I. Rojas
                                        Linda L. Tesar
                                          Jing Zhang

                                      Working Paper 28247
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28247


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020




The views expressed in this document are those of the authors and not those of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago or the Federal Reserve System. We thank participants at the Fifth
Annual Conference on International Economics organized by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas,
University of Houston, and Bank of Mexico for useful comments and suggestions. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Enrique G. Mendoza, Eugenio I. Rojas, Linda L. Tesar, and Jing Zhang. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Macroeconomic Model of Healthcare Saturation, Inequality and the Output-Pandemia Tradeoff
Enrique G. Mendoza, Eugenio I. Rojas, Linda L. Tesar, and Jing Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 28247
December 2020
JEL No. E3,E6,F44,I28

                                           ABSTRACT

COVID-19 became a global health emergency when it threatened the catastrophic collapse of
health systems worldwide. Its particular mix of rapid spread and severity caused demand for
health goods and services and their relative prices to surge, unlike other diseases that are deadlier
(e.g. Ebola, MERS) or just as contagious but less severe (e.g. Influenza, H1N1). Governments
responded with prolonged lockdowns that caused large drops in economic activity. Empirical
evidence shows that lockdowns and healthcare saturation explain a sizable fraction of cross-
country variation in observed GDP drops even after controlling for COVID cases and mortality.
We explain this output-pandemia tradeoff as resulting from a shock to the Stone-Geary
subsistence level of health that is larger at higher levels of capital utilization in a model with
capitalists and workers. A health system’s degree of saturation is the gap between supply and
subsistence levels. The tradeoff is non-linear, with sharply larger welfare costs as lockdowns or
healthcare saturation tighten. An externality distorts utilization, because firms do not internalize
that lower utilization relaxes healthcare saturation. Optimal lockdowns remove it, but small
deviations leave health systems closer to saturation or impose large output costs. Inequality
worsens markedly with pandemias, increases sharply their welfare costs, and makes large
transfers to workers optimal.

Enrique G. Mendoza                                Linda L. Tesar
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania                        University of Michigan
3718 Locust Walk                                  Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
Philadelphia, PA 19104                            and NBER
and NBER                                          ltesar@umich.edu
egme@sas.upenn.edu
                                                  Jing Zhang
Eugenio I. Rojas                                  Research Department
Department of Economics                           Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
University of Florida                             230 S LaSalle Street
331 Matherly Hall                                 Chicago, IL 60604
PO Box 117140                                     Jing.Zhang@chi.frb.org
Gainesville, FL 32611
erojasbarros@ufl.edu
1 Introduction
A distinguishing feature of the COVID-19 pandemia is that, unlike other viral illnesses that are either
more lethal (e.g. Ebola, MERS) or just as contagious but less severe (e.g. Influenza, H1N1), it caused
a large, sudden surge in use of human and material resources for prolonged hospitalizations and in
demand for medical and cleaning supplies by the economy as a whole.1 Thus, in addition to its in-
fection and mortality rates, a key challenge posed by COVID-19 has been the threat of catastrophic
collapse of health systems worldwide. The painful experiences of Bergamo, Guayaquil, Mexico City,
New York City, Wuhan, and other cities, showed that collapsing health systems prevented hospitals
from providing required care to COVID-19 patients and paralyzed the provision of services to those
affected by other conditions, both emergencies and elective treatments, thus increasing excess mor-
tality well above the mortality rate of COVID-19 itself. At the time of this writing, a second surge
larger than the first is spreading rapidly across several advanced and developing economies exerting
severe pressure on health systems.
       Governments responded to the threat of collapse of health systems by imposing severe lock-
downs that required all non-essential businesses to close and households to obey strict stay-at-home
orders, after attempts with weaker social-distancing restrictions failed to slow the spread of the dis-
ease. As we document in the next Section, lockdowns have been in place, with some shifting be-
tween relaxing and re-tightening, from March, 2020 until the present in several countries. These
lockdowns resulted in the largest quarterly declines in GDP in history in many countries during the
second quarter of 2020, with a median of -10.6 percent relative to the second quarter of 2019 in a
sample with 48 countries (see Section 2 for details). In addition, in many advanced economies, poli-
cies implemented to provide liquidity to households and firms affected by the lockdowns produced
record-high public deficits and sharp increases in already-high public debt ratios.
       The unprecedented economic costs of the lockdowns, on the one hand, and their effectiveness at
preventing the collapse of health systems, on the other, pose a critical public policy trade-off: What is
the socially-optimal severity of a lockdown that balances the need to contain a pandemia like COVID-
19 against its large economic costs? Related to this are other central questions: How does inequality
affect the relative impact of pandemias on capital-owners v. wage earners? What is the optimal size
of transfers given to workers so they can withstand a lockdown? How does international hetero-
geneity in economic development and health-system strength affect the output-pandemia tradeoff?
       This paper provides answers to these questions by proposing a model that deviates from the
commonly-used approach of integrating the dominant susceptible-infected-recovered (SIR) model
of epidemiology into dynamic macroeconomic models. Instead, we propose a framework that fo-
cuses on the severe scarcity problem caused by the pandemia and captured by the saturation of
health systems and the shortages of health goods. This approach is motivated by the observation
that COVID-19 put health systems at the risk of collapse despite its low mortality and the large share
of asymptomatic infections. The severe strain on health systems was evidenced by the suspension
   1
    According to the CDC, the median length of hospitalizations for surviving patients in the U.S. as of October, 2020 was
10 to 13 days. Severe shortages of medical staff, ventilators, N95 masks, disinfectants, and various other health-related
products were reported worldwide since the initial outbreak in January 2020.


                                                            1
of regular hospital services to concentrate on COVID treatment and by the sharp increases in occu-
pancy of hospital beds, particular ICU beds, in demand for medical specialists and nurses, and in
usage of critical equipment such as respiratory ventilators (see Section 2 for details). As a result,
excess mortality rates rose significantly above those explained by COVID itself. For instance, while
COVID’s infection fatality rate is estimated at 0.65 percent (according to the CDC), excess weekly
deaths as a percent of expected deaths between March and June, 2020, peaked at 154 percent in
Spain, 108 in the United Kingdom, 90 in Italy, and 45 in the United States, and in Mexico City excess
mortality reached 300 percent in the March-May period.2
       The theoretical analysis is preceded by an empirical examination of cross-country data that doc-
uments the effects of the COVID pandemia on resource scarcity and relative prices for health goods
and services. In addition, we provide empirical evidence showing that a non-trivial share of cross-
country differences in observed output declines caused by the pandemia is explained by variables
that proxy for the severity of lockdowns, resource shortages and pre-COVID health system strength,
even after controlling for COVID cases and fatalities.
       In the model, the pandemia arrives as a large, temporary shock to the subsistence level of de-
mand for health goods and services in a Stone-Geary utility function, with the size of the shock
inversely related to the rate of utilization of physical capital. The degree of saturation of the health
sector is represented by the gap between the available supply of health goods and services and their
subsistence level. The catastrophic (i.e. nonlinear) nature of a health-system collapse is captured by
the Inada condition of Stone-Geary preferences. The tradeoff with economic activity works through
the dependency of the subsistence level of demand for health goods on factor utilization. Lower
utilization relaxes the capacity of the health system, moving it away from its saturation point, but
it implies reduced demand for factors of production, reduced output and cuts in wage and non-
wage incomes. This also introduces an externality, because private agents do not internalize the link
between utilization and health-system-saturation when choosing utilization. A planner who takes
this into account has a social marginal cost of utilization higher than the private marginal cost when
a pandemia is active. This results in a socially-optimal reduction in utilization during a pandemia,
which can be implemented as a competitive equilibrium by imposing an optimal lockdown (namely,
a binding constraint on utilization tighter than the technologically feasible limit).
       In order to study the implications of the output-pandemia tradeoff for inequality and the design
of liquidity-provision programs, the model includes two types of agents: Capitalists, who collect
wages and all capital factor payments from the health and non-health sectors, and workers, who
are hand-to-mouth consumers that collect only wage income. The government can use lump-sum
transfers or debt to re-distribute resources across agents. We show that inequality, in terms of both
income or as the ratio of relative excess consumption (or relative marginal utilities) of capitalists
vis-a-vis workers, worsens during a pandemia. As a result, it is optimal to provide transfers to
workers.3 Hence, the optimal policy response to a pandemia includes both a lockdown and transfers
   2
      See https://ourworldindata.org/excess-mortality-covid and https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/the_americas/mexico-
citycoronavirus- excess-death-toll/2020/07/02/2baaab3e-bbbb-11ea-80b9-40ece9a701dc_story.html.
    3
      Inequality also makes transfers desirable even in the absence of pandemia for a utilitarian planner or a planner who



                                                        2
to workers.
    In the model, the benefits of removing the utilization externality and redistributing resources
during the pandemia are independent, which facilitates characterizing the forces that drive them.
The externality is driven by the sensitivity of the subsistence level of demand for health to the uti-
lization rate, with aggregate allocations unaffected by agent heterogeneity, inequality and welfare
weights. The optimal redistribution is driven by the planner’s welfare weights, the fraction of work-
ers relative to capitalists, and the size of the increase in inequality during the pandemia. The latter
is in turn determined by how close workers move to their subsistence level of demand for health as
a result of the pandemia.
    We explore the potential quantitative relevance of the model by examining numerical solutions
based on a calibration to U.S. data. Key to this calibration are the determination of the subsistence
level of demand for health goods and services in “normal times” (i.e. without a pandemia) and the
parameterization of the function that drives the jump in this subsistence level when the pandemia
hits. We determine the former by estimating a standard linear-expenditure-system regression using
U.S. data. For the latter, we postulate a simple linear function that simplifies the calibration into the
choice of a linear coefficient that captures the elasticity of the subsistence level of health goods and
services (as a percent of available supply) with respect to the rate of utilization of capital. Since
this elasticity is difficult to pin down with existing data, we study an “observed lockdown” scenario
that rationalizes the observed decline in second-quarter U.S. GDP as optimal and compare it with
alternative scenarios for an interval of values of the elasticity.
    The observed lockdown results show than an elasticity of 0.091 makes the -8.8 percent drop in GDP
of nonhealth goods observed in the second quarter of 2020 in the United States optimal, with an
associated optimal lockdown equivalent to a cut in utilization from a normalized rate of 100 percent
pre-pandemia to 84.8 percent. This yields a sharp increase in the relative price of health goods to
nonhealth goods of about 100 percent. Optimal transfers to workers reach 12.2 percent of GDP.
Assuming a pandemia that lasts four quarters, these optimal policies yield a social welfare gain of
1.1 percent in terms of a compensating variation in consumption constant across time and across
agents that makes the economy without policy intervention as well off in terms of social welfare as
under the optimal policies. With an elasticity of health subsistence to utilization of 0.07, the optimal
utilization is about 0.95, which causes a non-health output drop of about half what was observed in
the United States, and the implied relative price increase is 60 percent. Hence, small differences in
the estimates of the elasticity of health subsistence to utilization yield sharply different outcomes for
the size of the optimal lockdown and implied output drop and relative price hike.4
    Agent heterogeneity and inequality also play an important role in our results. A representative-
agent economy with the same parameter values, except assuming all agents are capital-owners,
yields sharply smaller welfare gains at the same values of the elasticity of health subsistence to uti-
weights capitalists by less than their share of total wealth. Still, optimal transfers are higher during a pandemia because
inequality worsens.
    4
      The elasticity cannot exceed an upper bound at which workers hit their subsistence level of demand for health, thus
triggering the Inada condition in their preferences. As this upper bound is reached, the welfare gains of the optimal policy
grow infinitely large driven by unbounded social gains from redistribution.


                                                             3
lization, and has a much higher elasticity upper bound at which the welfare gains grow infinitely
large. Hence, the larger benefits of redistribution, and the larger optimal transfers predicted by the
model, result from the non-linearity due to the effect of the pandemia moving workers towards their
subsistence level of health at a much faster pace than capitalists.
       This paper is related to the growing macro literature on COVID-19. To date, most of this literature
has emphasized the probabilistic dynamics of contagion, infection and death (or recovery) from the
disease itself, by incorporating them into macro models using the canonical SIR/SEIR models from
epidemiology. The contribution of our work is the focus on resource scarcity and the saturation of the
health sector as the drivers of the output-pandemia tradeoff and its distributional implications.5 In
the studies based on the SIR/SEIR setup, decentralized equilibria are inefficient because the planner
internalizes these dynamics and the social welfare function depends negatively (positively) on the
aggregate death (recovery) rate of COVID infections. In contrast, in the model proposed here social
welfare is a standard aggregation of individual preferences over consumption and labor, and the
adverse implications of a pandemia for efficiency and inequality result from the surge in subsistence
demand for health that it causes, which is larger at higher factor utilization and affects workers more
severely than capitalists. Moreover, this framework also accounts for large increases in the relative
price of health goods when a pandemia hits.
       Alvarez et al. (2020), Atkeson (2020) and Eichenbaum et al. (2020) initiated the literature on
quantitative Covid macro models that use the SIR setup. In these models, the pandemia affects
macroeconomic outcomes through demand and supply effects. Infections and mortality increase
with consumption and hours worked. Workers that get sick become less productive or work less and
consume less, and consumption and labor have feedback effects on infections. In addition, contagion
causes externalities as agents do not internalize how their individual actions affect the SIR dynam-
ics. Lockdowns improve efficiency by tackling this externality. Alvarez et al. (2020), Favero et al.
(2020) and Jones et al. (2020) introduce also a congestion externality by modeling the Covid fatality
rate as an increasing function of total infections above a constant mortality rate. This externality is
somewhat similar to the utilization externality resulting from the adverse effect of utilization on the
health subsistence level in our model, but it differs in that in the SIR models congestion increases
Covid fatalities, which the planner dislikes. Hence, although both models predict that lockdowns
are desirable because of health system congestion, the mechanism driving the result is different. In
particular, in our setup lockdowns are desirable because the pandemia brings all agents closer to
their subsistence level of health regardless of the Covid fatality rate, and redistribution is desirable
because this effect hits workers more severely than capitalists.
       The macro-SIR/SEIR framework has also been used in models with agent and sectoral hetero-
geneity, as in the studies by Acemoglu et al. (2020), Baqaee et al. (2020), Bodenstein et al. (2020),
Azzimonti et al. (2020), Glover et al. (2020), Guerrieri et al. (2020), Hur (2020), Kaplan et al. (2020),
Krueger et al. (2020) and Rampini (2020). These studies suggest that lockdowns should be targeted
   5
    This is in parallel with the public health literature on pandemias, in which a branch focusing on resource scarcity and
saturation of hospitals (e.g. Ajao et al., 2015, Halpern and Tan, 2020) coexists with the SIR/SEIR epidemiology branch
(see the survey by Britton, 2010).



                                                            4
differentially across sectors, with their severity depending on how contact-intensive sectors are, the
composition of workers in the sector (age, susceptibility, health), how essential and easy to substi-
tute are the goods produced by the sector, and how connected agents are in a production network.
In most of these articles, agent and/or sectoral heterogeneity drive the policies due to their effect on
aggregate outcomes and on the dynamics of infection, recovery and death rates.
   SIR models with wealth and income inequality have also been used to study the optimal re-
distributive policy during a pandemia. Glover et al. (2020) find that the optimal policy involves
redistribution from agents that continue working towards those who cannot or who lost their jobs.
Bloom et al. (2020) argue that lockdowns and transfers should consider dimensions of income and
wealth inequality, because low-income or low-wealth workers typically are more affected by lock-
downs since their occupations are less suitable for teleworking (see also Galasso, 2020, Mongey et al.,
2020 and Palomino et al., 2020). Thus, economies with a larger fraction of agents with low wealth
require milder lockdowns and/or larger transfers. Chetty et al. (2020) examine heterogeneous ef-
fects on consumption. Using high-frequency data, they find that Covid has had negative effects on
consumption, which vary by income quintile: lower-income agents have been affected dispropor-
tionately.
   The SIR framework has also been used in small open economy models. Arellano et al. (2020) em-
bedded the SIR mechanism into an Eaton-Gersovitz sovereign default model. The sovereign cares
about the fatality rate and can impose lockdowns in order to mitigate the magnitude of the health
crisis. Since lockdowns depress output, the sovereign has the incentive to borrow abroad to smooth
consumption, but this increases default risk and hence limits the planner’s ability to impose ag-
gressive lockdowns as its borrowing capacity is restricted, costing additional lives. Cakmakli et al.
(2020) study a multi-sector model with sectoral supply and demand shocks that vary with infections
depending on lockdowns. The openness of the economy matters via external demand shocks and
input-output linkages.
   There are other influential macro models of Covid that do not use the SIR setup and consider
the role of financial frictions on firms. Gourinchas et al. (2020) study effects on small and medium
enterprises using a model in which Covid causes labor supply constraints that vary by sector and also
causes sectoral and aggregate demand shocks and business failures. They find that firm bailouts are
better than labor subsidies for reducing bankruptcies and saving jobs, and that targeted bailouts have
sizable benefits at lower GDP costs. Céspedes et al. (2020) and Fornaro and Wolf (2020) show that
financial frictions combined with a negative productivity shock during the pandemia can produce
equilibria with long-lasting crises and slow recoveries. Elenev et al. (2020) study a setup in which
firms can go bankrupt due to the pandemia, and study how bailouts can help save firms that are
experiencing financial distress. Faria e Castro (2020) models the pandemia as a shutdown of the
contact-intensive services sector (caused by a utility shock) that is transmitted to other sectors in the
economy, while Guerrieri et al. (2020) model it as a shock on the labor supply of a productive sector
that requires physical interactions (a fraction of workers becomes unable to work in this sector). In
turn, reduced consumption of goods from this sector reduces the households’ health. These studies
find that transfer payments to workers in sectors affected by the pandemia are socially optimal.


                                                   5
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides an empirical analysis illustrat-
ing the relevance of healthcare saturation and documenting important empirical regularities of the
macro effects of the Covid-19 pandemia. Section 3 describes the model. Section 4 presents the quan-
titative results of the calibrated model. Section 5 provides some conclusions.


2 Empirical Evidence
In this Section, we review the empirical evidence on COVID-19 that motivates the theoretical model.
The discussion is divided into four parts: 1) a review of the resource shortages and constraints on
medical systems for managing the pandemia, 2) the impact of the pandemia on the prices of critical
medical services and equipment, 3) international evidence on the severity and duration of lock-
downs, and 4) a cross-country analysis of the determinants of output collapse during the pandemia.


2.1 Resource shortages and capacity constraints for COVID-19
Saturation of the health system caused by COVID-19 has three important components. The first
is the capacity of hospitals to treat COVID patients, particularly to provide them with ventilation
therapy. The second is the closure of non-Covid related medical and hospital services, as hospitals
are dedicated to COVID patients and medical practices and elective procedures are shut down. The
third are the shortages of medical and cleaning supplies as the healthcare and non-healthcare sectors
as well as households aim to build up subsistence inventories.
    Consider first hospital capacity to treat COVID patients. Evidence from COVID projections and
existing studies from the public health literature shows that pandemias pose a tangible risk to cause
health systems to collapse. On March 26, 2020, the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
(IHME) of the University of Washington issued a forecast of the likely stresses on the U.S. medical
system due to COVID-19. Their analysis, based on a state-by-state assessment of medical facilities,
warned that in the absence of large-scale public health interventions, particularly mitigation mea-
sures (i.e. lockdowns) the demand for intensive care facilities would outstrip existing supply in a
matter of days.
   IHME’s analysis focused on ICU beds, but health systems can collapse well before running out
of regular and ICU hospital beds as they run out of medical specialists, nursing staff, equipment and
materials needed to treat patients in respiratory distress. Ajao et al. (2015) assessed the capacity of
the US healthcare system to respond to increased ventilation therapy demand due to a hypothetical
influenza pandemic outbreak under three levels of stress on the health system: (i) conventional
capacity (usual and normal patient care); (ii) contingency capacity (minor adaptation of treatment
approaches) and (iii) crisis capacity (fundamental, systematic change in which standards of care
are significantly altered to allow treatment of a greater number of patients). Their study identified
four key components necessary to provide ventilation therapy:
  1. Supplies, such as ventilators, ancillary supplies, and equipment.
  2. Space, namely hospital beds equipped for ventilation and critical care.


                                                  6
   3. Staff, consisting of specialized medical personnel to manage patients on ventilators.
   4. Systems, namely accessible, exercised plans to rapidly increase ventilation therapy capacity.

Hence, the provision of ventilation therapy is akin to a Leontief technology that requires comple-
mentary inputs in relatively fixed proportions. As a result, hitting a constraint on one of them limits
the ability to provide ventilation therapy. Taking as given the estimated number of ventilators avail-
abe in 2010 and assuming that they would not be the constraining factor, Ajao et al. (2015) showed
that at the peak of the hypothetical influenza pandemia in the United States, the constraining factor
for ventilation therapy in scenario (iii) would be the number of respiratory therapists, not the num-
ber of beds. The maximum number of additional patients that could be put in a ventilator would
range from 56,300 to 135,000, which would fall short of the number of available beds enabled for
ventilation therapy. In fact, 32,300 to 42,300 beds would go unused.
   Halpern and Tan (2020) assess U.S. capacity for treating COVID-19 patients under current con-
ditions. Based on surveys of U.S. hospitals, they report that acute care hospitals own 62,188 full-
featured mechanical ventilators. Adding other equipment that can be diverted to ventilator use (e.g.
from operating rooms and the U.S. stockpile) has the potential to bring the total up to 200,000 de-
vices nationally. Recent projections suggest that approximately 960,000 patients in the US would
require ICU ventilatory support, though not all patients would be treated at the same time. But even
if the number of patients could be optimally staggered, they conclude the critical factor is staffing.
According to the BLS there are approximately 130,000 respiratory therapists in the labor force. How-
ever, there are far fewer respiratory intensivists, physicians certified to provide care for critically ill
patients. The American Hospital Association estimates that there are roughly 29,000 intensivists na-
tionwide, and about half of acute care hospitals have no intensivists on their staff. Halpern and Tan
(2020) conclude, “At forecasted crisis levels, we estimate that the projected shortages of intensivists,
critical care APPs, critical care nurses, pharmacists, and respiratory therapists trained in mechanical
ventilation would limit the care of critically ill ventilated patients.”(p. 1) “Moreover, even in the 50
percent of acute care hospitals with intensivists, the intensivist team may be overstretched as new
ICU sites are created or experienced ICU staff become ill.” (p. 8)
   Li et al. (2020) apply the dynamics of the COVID-19 outbreak in Wuhan to the United States and
reached similar conclusions as Ajao et al. (2015) and Halpern and Tan (2020). In their analysis, “the
projected number of prevalent critically ill patients at the peak of a Wuhan-like outbreak in US cities
was estimated to range from 2.2 to 4.4 per 10,000 adults, depending on differences in age distribu-
tion and comorbidity (ie, hypertension) prevalence.” (p. 1). Based on a population of roughly 210
million adults, this is an afflicted population of 460,000 to 920,000. “[I]f a Wuhan-like outbreak were
to take place in a US city, even with social distancing and contact tracing protocols as strict as the
Wuhan lockdown, hospitalization and ICU needs from COVID-19 patients alone may exceed current
capacity...Plans are urgently needed to mitigate the consequences of COVID-19 outbreaks on local
health care systems in US cities.” (pp. 5-7).
   The second aspect of health system saturation caused by COVID-19 is evidenced by the sus-
pension or drastic reduction in provision of non-Covid-related medical services and treatments.


                                                    7
Hospitals expanded capacity to treat COVID patients as envisaged in the critical scenario (iii) of
Ajao et al. (2015), by reallocating physical and human resources normally dedicated to other uses to
treat COVID patients. In addition, in many instances lockdowns implied closure of medical and den-
tal practices, laboratories, and outpatient surgery facilities. These changes and restrictions caused
a sharp increase in mortality, as measured by the standard excess mortality P-Score. We collected
cross-country data for P-cores computed using the number of total deaths, COVID- and non-COVID-
related, at a weekly frequency minus the average of deaths over the 2015-2019 period and divided
by the same 2015-2019 average (the source was https://ourworldindata.org/excess-mortality-covid
and some country-specific sources). Table 1 shows the highest weekly P-Scores for the January-June,
2020 period in 35 countries. The mean (median) reached 42.9 (23.8) percent, but in several cases it
exceeded 50 percent (Belgium, Chile, Italy, Netherlands, Mexico, Peru, Spain, Turkey and the U.K.).
Since P-scores combine COVID and non-COVID fatalities, they are a noisy measure of fatalities not
caused directly by the disease, but in the analysis of cross-country output drops conducted below
we will control for COVID fatalities to identify the effect of non-COVID excess mortality.


                                Table 1: Excess Mortality P-Scores, Percent

                Country                       P-score           Country                          P-score
                Peru                              163           Israel                              20.3
                Spain                           154.5           South Africa                          18
                United Kingdom                    108           Colombia                              18
                Belgium                         104.4           Greece                                16
                Italy                            96.8           Austria                               16
                Mexico                             87           Germany                             14.5
                Netherlands                      74.9           Russia                                14
                Chile                            68.7           Finland                             13.6
                France                           65.2           Ireland                               12
                Turkey                             54           Australia                             12
                Indonesia                          50           New Zealand                         11.9
                Sweden                           47.1           Denmark                             10.5
                United States                    44.9           South Korea                          9.6
                Switzerland                        44           Norway                               9.5
                Brazil                             42           Taiwan                               9.2
                Canada                           26.2           Czech Republic                       8.9
                India                              25           Poland                               8.3
                Portugal                         23.8

                Notes: The scores shown are the maximum of weekly P-scores over the January-June, 2020
                period computed as the number of total deaths in each week minus the average of deaths
                over the 2015-2019 period and divided by the same 2015-2019 average. For most countries,
                weekly P-scores were retrieved from https://ourworldindata.org/excess-mortality-covid
                on 12/2/2020. Data for Brazil, Indonesia, Mexico, Peru, Russia, South Africa, and
                Turkey    are    from    https://www.economist.com/graphic-detail/2020/07/15/tracking-
                covid-19-excess-deaths-across-countries, for Colombia, India and Ireland from
                https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/04/21/world/coronavirus-missing-
                deaths.html, and for Australia from the Australian Bureau of Statistics. Data for Indonesia
                and Turkey cover only Jakarta and Istanbul, respectively.




                                                            8
   The third element of resource shortages due to COVID-19 relate to health goods and services and
cleaning supplies for the economy as whole. We document the impact of these shortages by exam-
ining the evolution of the relative prices of the affected goods and services in the next subsection.


2.2 Rising prices of PPE and medical equipment
The COVID pandemia caused severe shortages of medical equipment and cleaning supplies that re-
sulted in sharp price hikes. In the United States, spikes in prices for cleaning supplies, toilet paper
and medical masks prompted consumer groups to complain of price gouging. Attorneys general in
several states embarked on “see it / snap it / send it” campaigns, inviting consumers to send images
of purported price gouging. A quick Google search of images of “COVID price gouging” yields pic-
tures of 8 oz. bottles of hand sanitizer priced at $50 and Clorox wipes at over $40 per container. The
U.S. PIRG consumer watchdog association reported rates of inflation of COVID-19 related consumer
goods ranging from 200 percent for thermometers to 1,300 percent for anti-bacterial handwipes.
These goods disappeared from store shelves where they were priced at regular prices, resulting in
massive, prolonged stockouts of key items in retail chains. The prices of these goods facing severe
shortages are mismeasured in aggregate price indexes, because they rely on surveys of those prices
posted for out-of-stock goods (e.g. on August 18, 2020, the posted but out-of-stock price for Clorox
disinfecting wipes 75ct was $6.59 in the CVS website but they were available on eBay for $29 plus
$11.67 shipping; Lysol disinfectant spray 19oz was $5.97 at Home Depot but out of stock while on
eBay it was available for $12.50 plus $17.50 shipping).
   Similar price dynamics were observed for medical equipment as hospitals and even state gov-
ernments competed for the limited supply of PPE and ventilators. On April 24, 2020, National Pub-
lic Radio aired a report entitled “Are Illinois Officials Paying Hugely Inflated Prices For Medical
Supplies?” A government audit revealed spending up to $174 million on COVID-related medical
supplies and equipment, including $13 million for 200 ventilators, a 100 percent markup over pre-
COVID price. The governor stated that “A typical ventilator that’s useful in an [intensive care unit]
situation, the price starts at $25,000, maybe up to $35,000 or $40,000,"... "When we’re paying more
than that, that’s typically because the market has bid up the prices for any available ventilators. Let
me be clear: There are very few ventilators available in the entire world. We are acquiring whatever
we can so that we’re ready in the event there’s a spike in ICU beds and a need for ventilators..."
   Wages for travel nurses responded to the increased demand for hospital staff. During the peak
COVID periods in the Spring and Summer of 2020, the weekly compensation rate for travel nurses
roughly doubled, according to the Health IT website (HIT.net). The “Travel Nurse Compensation
Report” data from BLS show more modest salary increases for nurses in early 2020 of less than five
percent, but these are somewhat misleading, however, as they aggregate the salaries of specialists
in fields where medical services actually declined (e.g. voluntary medical care, private medical
practices) along with the salaries of nurses that are ICU and respiratory specialists.
   To provide more systemic evidence of the large price fluctuations produced by the Covid-related
shortages, Table 2 shows price changes for essential health goods and services during the pandemia.


                                                  9
The median price increase for transactions of thirteen key goods, including among others N95 masks,
ventilators, thermometers and disinfectants, reached 259 percent from March to April, 2020. The
Table also shows inflation rates for aggregate price indexes. Health-services-related price indexes
rose at annualized rates ranging from 3.1 to 4.7 percent in the second quarter of 2020, while the price
index for private goods-producing industries fell -16.1 percent.6 Hence, the prices of health services
relative to those for private goods-producing industries rose between 19.2 to 20.8 percent, and for
the specific health goods listed in Table 2, the median relative price increase exceeded 275 percent.


            Table 2: Price Changes of Key Health Goods & Services During the Pandemia
                                  Item                            Price Change    Source
        N95 Masks                                                     1513%      SHOPP
        3M N95 Masks                                                  6136%      SHOPP
        Hand Sanitizer                                                 215%      SHOPP
        Isolation Gowns                                               2000%      SHOPP
        Face Shields                                                   900%      SHOPP
        Soap                                                           184%      SHOPP
        Ventilators                                                     80%      NY State
        Clorox Disinfecting Wipes                                      660%      US PCW
        Anti-Viral Facial Tissues                                      254%      US PCW
        Bleach Cleaner                                                 238%      US PCW
        Thermometers                                                   200%      US PCW
        Face Masks                                                     259%      US PCW
        Anti-Bacterial Hand Wipes                                     1294%      US PCW
        Aggregate Price Indexes (Q2:2020 v. Q1:2020 annualized)
        Physicians’ Services                                          4.68%        BLS
        Medical Care Services                                         4.40%        BLS
        Hospital Services                                             3.14%        BLS
        Health Care and Social Assistance                             3.60%        BEA
        Private Goods-Producing Industries                           -16.10%       BEA

        Notes: Personal protective equipment price changes (not annualized rates) reported by the Society for Healthcare
        Organization Procurement Professionals (SHOPP) correspond to those observed in April 2020 with respect to pre
        COVID-19 levels. Price changes (not annualized) for items reported by the US PCW (US PIRG Consumer Watchdog)
        correspond to the difference between the price listed in Amazon and the lowest price listed by other platforms during
        August 2020. BLS and BEA price indexes correspond to percent changes between 1st and 2nd quarter of 2020, an-
        nualized. Private goods-producing industries are: agriculture, forestry, fishing, and hunting; mining; construction;
        and manufacturing.



2.3 Duration and severity of lockdowns
Figure 1 illustrates the severity and duration of the lockdowns implemented in response to the Covid
pandemia in a group of sixteen advanced and emerging economies. The data correspond to the Gov-
ernment Response Stringency Index constructed as part of the Oxford COVID-19 Government Re-
sponse Tracker (OxCGRT).7 This index combines information from nine indicators including school
   6
     Health services at this level of aggregation include some for which prices fell as a result of suspension of elective
treatments, routine medical, dental and optical appointments, etc.
   7
     Available at https://www.bsg.ox.ac.uk/research/research-projects/coronavirus-government-response-tracker


                                                                 10
and business closures, and travel bans in a scale from 0 to 100 (with 100 for the strictest). In coun-
tries where policies vary within the country, the index corresponds to the strictest area. The index
is available for 180 countries.
              The Figure shows that strict lockdowns were implemented in all countries by mid March, 2020.
In most cases, the index peaked around 75-80 percent, except in Sweden, well-known for its less re-
strictive stance. Even in Sweden, however, the stringency index reached nearly 50 percent. Moreover,
lockdowns have persisted from March to the latest available data as of the date of this paper. The
severity of the lockdowns has fluctuated somewhat and in several cases declined (in some like France
and New Zealand quite sharply), but as of the latest data all countries still maintained significant
restrictions on economic activity relative to the pre-Covid status. Even in Sweden, the stringency
index fell slightly from its peak but it remains above 30 percent.


                                                              Figure 1: Stringency Index for Different Countries

                                             Australia                                       France                                          Italy                                      New Zealand
                     0 25 50 75 100




                                                                    0 25 50 75 100




                                                                                                                   0 25 50 75 100




                                                                                                                                                                  0 25 50 75 100
                                      Jan Mar May   Jul   Sep Nov                    Jan Mar May   Jul   Sep Nov                    Jan Mar May   Jul   Sep Nov                    Jan Mar May   Jul   Sep Nov


                                              Spain                                         Sweden                                     United Kingdom                                   United States
                     0 25 50 75 100




                                                                    0 25 50 75 100




                                                                                                                   0 25 50 75 100




                                                                                                                                                                  0 25 50 75 100
  Stringency Index




                                      Jan Mar May   Jul   Sep Nov                    Jan Mar May   Jul   Sep Nov                    Jan Mar May   Jul   Sep Nov                    Jan Mar May   Jul   Sep Nov


                                              Brazil                                         China                                           India                                         Mexico
                     0 25 50 75 100




                                                                    0 25 50 75 100




                                                                                                                   0 25 50 75 100




                                                                                                                                                                  0 25 50 75 100




                                      Jan Mar May   Jul   Sep Nov                    Jan Mar May   Jul   Sep Nov                    Jan Mar May   Jul   Sep Nov                    Jan Mar May   Jul   Sep Nov


                                               Peru                                          Russia                                      South Korea                                       Turkey
                     0 25 50 75 100




                                                                    0 25 50 75 100




                                                                                                                   0 25 50 75 100




                                                                                                                                                                  0 25 50 75 100




                                      Jan Mar May   Jul   Sep Nov                    Jan Mar May   Jul   Sep Nov                    Jan Mar May   Jul   Sep Nov                    Jan Mar May   Jul   Sep Nov


Source: Government Response Stringency Index available from the Oxford COVID-19 Government Response Tracker.




2.4 Economic activity
The strict, prolonged lockdowns resulted in very deep recessions, which in many cases produced
the largest recorded quarterly declines in output. Figure 2 shows the year-on-year quarterly drops


                                                                                                             11
in GDP in the second quarter of 2020 for 48 advanced and emerging economies.8 The mean (median)
drop was a staggering -11.5 (-10.6) percent.


                                                         Figure 2: Year-on-Year Q2 GDP Declines
                                                0
                                                −5
              GDP % Change Q2:2020 v. Q2:2019
                                                −10
                                                −15
                                                −20
                                                −25
                                                −30


                                                                   Peru
                                                                   India
                                                                  Spain
                                                      United Kingdom
                                                            Argentina
                                                                France
                                                               Mexico
                                                                    Italy
                                                          South Africa
                                                             Malaysia
                                                           Philippines
                                                              Portugal
                                                             Colombia
                                                               Greece
                                                              Belgium
                                                                   Chile
                                                               Canada
                                                                Austria
                                                            Singapore
                                                        New Zealand
                                                              Thailand
                                                             Germany
                                                                  Brazil
                                                      Czech Republic
                                                             Romania
                                                                 Japan
                                                        United States
                                                           Hong Kong
                                                          Netherlands
                                                                Turkey
                                                             Denmark
                                                              Sweden
                                                          Switzerland
                                                                Poland
                                                                  Israel
                                                         Saudi Arabia
                                                                  China
                                                             Australia
                                                               Nigeria
                                                                Russia
                                                            Indonesia
                                                               Norway
                                                               Finland
                                                                Ireland
                                                         South Korea
                                                                  Egypt
                                                               Taiwan
                                                              Vietnam
Source: http://ourworldindata.org/, https://fred.stlouisfed.org/, https://www.focus-economics.com/ and country sources.


       How much of the fall in output is due to healthcare system saturation? To answer this question,
we test for the relative importance of lockdowns, COVID case and mortality rates, and measures of
the stress on healthcare systems in explaining the magnitude of the decline in GDP in a cross-section
of countries. The severity of lockdowns can be gauged with de-jure or de-facto measures. For the
former, we use again the Oxford Stringency Index, and for the latter we use the components of the
Google COVID-19 Community Mobility Reports that track movement to and from retail, recreational
and work places. Mobility is reported as percent change relative to a pre-COVID baseline (the me-
dian for the five-week period Jan. 3rd-Feb. 6, 2020).9 This indicator is useful because it captures the
actual mobility of the population while the stringency index captures legal restrictions.
       Unconditional scatter diagrams of both de-jure and de-facto lockdown severity indicators show a
clear relationship with the observed quarterly GDP drops (see Figure 3). Output drops were larger
in countries with stricter lockdowns, whether measured by a higher stringency index or lower com-
   8
     Most of the data are from http://ourworldindata.org/, https://fred.stlouisfed.org/, and https://www.focus-
economics.com/. For China and Hong Kong, the Figure shows the GDP drop in the first quarter, because these countries
entered the pandemia earlier.
   9
     For both the Stringency Index and Community Mobility, we use 30-day averages as of the end
of November, which were obtained from the components of Bloomberg’s Covid Resilience Index, see
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-11-24/inside-bloomberg-s-covid-resilience-ranking.



                                                                          12
         munity mobility. These scatter diagrams only tell part of the story, however, because other variables
         are likely to jointly affect economic activity and lockdowns, and we are interested in particular in de-
         termining whether variables that proxy for resource shortages and capacity constraints (i.e. health
         system saturation) play a role. To identify those effects, we conduct a panel regression analysis in a
         cross-section of 35 countries.

                                             Figure 3: Lockdown Severity and Q2:2020 Output Declines




                                                                                                  0
        .8




                                                                                                            −.1
                                                                                     Community Mobility Change
              .6
Strigency Index




                                                                                                −.2
        .4




                                                                                      −.3         −.4
        .2




                   −30                 −20                   −10            0                                     −30      −20                   −10      0
                                    GDP % Change Q2:2020 v. Q2:2019                                                     GDP % Change Q2:2020 v. Q2:2019

         Notes: See footnotes to Figures 1 and 2 for sources of stringency index and GDP. Community mobility was retrieved from
         https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-11-24/inside-bloomberg-s-covid-resilience-ranking on 11/29/2020.


                        The dependent variable in this analysis is the contraction in GDP, as measured by the fall in the
         second quarter of 2020 relative to the same quarter in 2019. The independent variables include: the
         stringency index and community mobility changes described above, two variables to capture the in-
         fection and mortality rates of COVID itself (COVID cases for November, 2020 and cumulative COVID
         deaths through the end of November), and four variables as proxies for health system resources and
         capacity limits. The latter include a proxy for the non-COVID excess mortality rate (defined as the
         residual from regressing the excess mortality P-scores on COVID deaths), hospital beds, the log of
         2019 GDP per capita, and the UNDP’s human development index, which combines life expectancy,
         educational attainment and gross national income per capita. COVID cases and fatalities and hos-
         pital beds are in units per one-million inhabitants and the rest of the variables are in percent. The
         data are available for 48 countries for most variables, but excess mortality P-scores are only available
         for 35, which sets the sample size of the regressions. The variables are expressed in deviations from
         their means and the regressions are estimated using MM Robust Least Squares.10 The coefficients
         for all variables but hospital beds and COVID cases and deaths are elasticities, since the data are
         all in percent, and hence they are comparable. Coefficients for hospital beds and COVID cases and
         deaths are comparable, because the data for each are per one-million inhabitants.
                        The results are reported in Table 3. Column (1) shows the results with the highest overall signif-
         icance (Rn2 = 99.2) and explanatory power (robust Rw
                                                            2 = 0.81), and the lowest deviance coefficient

                   10
                        Leverage plots, influence statistics and histograms indicated outliers in Q2:2020 GDP and in several of the regressors.


                                                                                13
(0.036). The regressors include the stringency index, non-covid excess mortality, (log of) GDP per
capita, hospital beds and COVID cases. Using together a measure of lockdown severity, proxies
for resource shortages and health system capacity, and COVID cases is important to avoid possi-
ble omitted variable bias (e.g. lockdown severity is likely to depend on COVID cases and deaths).
Simultaneity bias is addressed by using lockdown severity and COVID variables with data up to
November, 2020, which makes them less likely to be determined jointly with Q2:2020 GDP. All of the
regression coefficients are significant at the 95-percent level or higher (hospital beds marginally) and
have the expected signs. The regression explains roughly 81 percent of the cross-country variation in
Q2:2020 GDP drops. In addition, an important result for the argument of this paper is that lockdown
severity and the variables that proxy for health system resources and capacity are all significant, even
after controlling for COVID infections. Non-covid excess mortality has the largest elasticity. A 100-
basis-points increase in this variable reduces quarterly GDP growth by 1.12 basis points, compared
with 0.9 for a 100-basis points rise in the stringency index and 0.65 for a cut in GDP per capita of the
same magnitude. Moreover, hospital beds have a significantly larger effect on quarterly GDP than
COVID cases. Adding one bed per one-thousand people improves GDP by roughly 58 basis points,
whereas an extra COVID case per one-thousand inhabitants reduces GDP growth by 35 basis points.
   Columns (2)-(8) explore the robustness of the above results to potentially important modifica-
tions. Column (2) shows that adding cumulative COVID deaths is not useful. The coefficient for this
variable is not significant, the rest of the coefficients change slightly, and the explanatory power, sig-
nificance and deviance statistics of the regression are slightly weaker. The coefficients on stringency
and beds are estimated with less precision (they are marginally significant at the 90-percent confi-
dence level). Column (3) shows that replacing cases for November, 2020 with cumulative COVID
deaths throughout end November worsens the results. The regression explains about 10 percentage
points less of the cross-country variation in GDP drops and has sharply lower Rn2 and higher de-
viance than Columns (1) and (2). Beds are no longer significant. Columns (4) and (6) show that
replacing the stringency index with the community mobility measure makes little difference. Both
are statistically significant (with opposite signs because higher mobility implies a less severe lock-
down), and the other coefficients remain about the same as in Columns (3) and (5), respectively.
Column (5) shows that removing hospital beds also weakens sharply the results, with sharply lower
Rn2 and Rw
         2 and higher deviance. Column (7) compared with Column (5) shows that using either

GDP per capita or the human development index yields very similar results. Finally, Column (8)
shows that removing hospital beds from Column (1) yields slightly weaker results. The coefficient
on the stringency index rises from -0.095 to -0.128, suggesting the possibility of omitted variable bias
as lockdown severity is likely to depend on hospital capacity.




                                                   14
                 Table 3: Cross-Country Regressions for Output Collapse in Q2:2020

                             Dependent variable: year-on-year quarterly GDP growth as of Q2:2020
Regressors               (1)        (2)           (3)          (4)        (5)         (6)        (7)                        (8)
Stringency               -0.095     -0.084        -0.110                  -0.115                 -0.116                     -0.128
                         (0.048)       (0.109)       (0.073)                      (0.058)                     (0.062)       (0.010)
Mobility                                                           0.186                        0.168
                                                                   (0.025)                      (0.044)
Non-covid excess         -0.112        -0.108        -0.081        -0.095         -0.084        -0.090        -0.089        -0.116
Mortality                (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.004)       (0.000)        (0.002)       (0.001)       (0.002)       (0.000)


ln(GDP pc)               0.065         0.063         0.047         0.052          0.050         0.051                       0.071
                         (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.001)       (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)                     (0.000)
Human dev. index                                                                                              0.361
                                                                                                              (0.000)
Hospital beds            5.801         5.262         1.649         2.766
                         (0.053)       (0.100)       (0.644)       (0.410)
Covid cases              -3.51E-04     -3.11E-04                                                                            -2.98E-04
                         (0.001)       (0.013)                                                                              (0.005)
Covid deaths                           -1.49E-05     -6.00E-05     -3.85E-05      -6.06E-05     -5.15E-05     -5.84E-05
                                       (0.557)       (0.020)       (0.144)        (0.017)       (0.050)       (0.024)
# observations           35            35            35            35             35            35            35            35
 2
Rw                       0.812         0.809         0.711         0.770          0.713         0.711         0.702         0.780
Adjusted Rw2             0.812         0.809         0.711         0.770          0.713         0.711         0.702         0.780
 2
Rn                       99.151        93.737        55.515        69.026         56.655        61.942        54.073        82.747
Deviance                 0.0363        0.037         0.0461        0.042          0.046         0.047         0.048         0.042
Notes: All regressions were estimated using Robust MM Least Squares. The variables are deviations from their respective country means in
the common sample. Numbers in parenthesis are p-values. Stringency is the Oxford stringency index divided by 100. Mobility is Google’s
community mobility indicator. Both stringency and mobility are 30-day averages over a period ending in late November 2020. Non-covid
excess mortality is the residual of regressing the excess mortality P-Scores in Table 1 on the cumulative deaths due to COVID-19 as of end
November 2020. Human dev. index is the 2019 UNDP’s human development index, which combines GNI per capita, life expectancy at
birth, and mean years of schooling of adults older than 25. Ln(GDP pc) is the natural log of GDP per capita in 2019. Hospital beds are per
1 million inhabitants. Covid cases are the one-month COVID cases per 1 million population for the month ending in late November 2020.
Covid deaths are cumulative deaths due to Covid-19 per 1 million inhabitants through late November 2020. Q2:2020 GDP data are from
the sources reported in the note to Figure 2. Data on stringency, mobility, human development index, Covid cases and Covid deaths were
retrieved from https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-11-24/inside-bloomberg-s-covid-resilience-ranking on 11/29/2020. 2019
real GDP and hospital beds are from World Bank Open Data and population data are from IMF World Economic Outlook. Hospital beds data
are based on WHO figures and is for the most recent year available, which is in the 2010-2015 range for most countries.




                                                         15
    In summary, Table 3 yields three key results: (a) non-SIR variables, and in particular those that
proxy for cross-country differences in health system resources and capacity, are important determi-
nants of the depth of the recessions caused by COVID-19, even after controlling for the direct effects
of COVID transmission; (b) variables driving SIR dynamics also play a role, since the regressions
reject the hypothesis that the coefficients on COVID cases and/or deaths are zero; and (c) the effects
of non-SIR variables are stronger than those of SIR variables.


3 A Model of the Output-Pandemia Tradeoff
The key feature of the model is the characterization of a pandemia as a large, transitory shock to the
subsistence level of demand for health goods and services (h̄t ) in a Stone-Geary utility function that
is directly related to the utilization rate (mt ). The value of h̄t is given by:

                                                               h̄t = h⋆ + zt f (mt K),                                             (1)

where h⋆ is the “normal” subsistence level of demand for h goods, zt is a binary variable which equals
0 in normal times and 1 when there is a pandemia, and f (·) is an increasing function.11 A pandemia
lasts j periods, so that zt = 1 for t = 0, ..., j and zt = 0 for t > j. The pandemia hits the economy as
a fully unanticipated, non-recurrent shock.12 In addition, the supply of health goods H is assumed
to be fixed, which is reasonable since the shock is unanticipated and key parts of the provision of
health goods and services rely on forms of capital that are difficult to adjust in the short-run (e.g.
hospitals, medical equipment, medical specialists, etc).

3.1 Decentralized Competitive Equilibrium
3.1.1   Households

There are two types of households, which together add up to a unit mass of agents. A fraction γ1 are
type-1 agents who own all the wealth (the capital stock used in production of non-health goods and
the stock of health goods and services). The two types of agents have identical utility functions.
    The optimization problem of an individual of type 1 is to maximize this utility function:

                                                 ∞
                                                                                     (l1 )ω
                                                 X                                                                         
                              max                      β   t
                                                                   a ln       c1t   − t           + (1 −   a) ln(h1t   − h̄t ) ,   (2)
                       {c1t ,lt1 ,h1t ,d1t+1 }                                         ω
                                                 t=0

subject to the following budget constraint,

                                      c1t + pht h1t = wt lt1 − qt d1t+1 + d1t + πt + pht h − τt .                                  (3)
   11
      If this function is concave (convex), a given reduction in utilization is less (more) effective at reducing the stress on
the health system.
   12
      The pandemia could also be modeled as a stochastic, non-insurable disaster shock, but modeling it as an unanticipated
shock is a more realistic approximation of how the COVID-19 shock arrived. Still, exploring the implications of modeling it
as a disaster shock is worthwhile, because it would alter precautionary saving behavior and incentivize the accumulation
of buffer stocks of health goods.


                                                                                    16
In the above expressions, c1t and h1t are consumption of non-health and health goods by an agent of
type-1, respectively, and lt1 is its labor supply. In addition, d1t and d1t+1 are the agent’s holdings of
existing and newly-issued public debt. Non-health goods are the numeraire, so pht is the relative price
of health goods, wt is the wage rate, and qt is the price of government bonds, all in units of non-health
goods. Type-1 agents are the only agents who purchase public debt. They own the endowment of
health goods, with an amount h for each type-1 agent, and they also collect the profits paid by firms
producing non-health goods and pay lump-sum taxes, with amounts πt and τt for each type-1 agent,
respectively, both in units of non-health goods.
       The utility function is time-separable, with discount factor β, and period utility is a Stone-Geary
utility function of consumption of h and c. The argument for utility of non-health consumption is of
the Greenwood-Hercowitz-Huffman form (i.e. the subsistence level is determined by the disutility
of labor, which removes the wealth effect on labor supply by making the marginal rate of substi-
tution between lt1 and c1t independent of the latter).13 At equilibrium, the parameter a is the share
of expenditure on non-health goods in excess of the disutility of labor relative to income net of the
disutility of labor and subsistence expenditure on health goods. Similarly, (1 − a) is the share of
excess health expenditure above its subsistence level relative to the same net income measure.
       Simplifying the first-order conditions of the above problem yields these optimality conditions:

                                                                                  (l1 )ω
                                                              1 − a c1t − tω
                                                                                = pht                                           (4)
                                                                a     h1t − h̄t

                                                                    (lt1 )ω−1 = wt                                              (5)
                                                                                 1 )ω
                                                                              (lt+1
                                                              c1t+1 −              ω
                                                                              (lt1 )ω
                                                                                        = βRt                                   (6)
                                                                c1t −            ω

where Rt ≡ 1/qt . Condition (4) equates type-1’s marginal rate of substitution between non-health
and health consumption to the corresponding relative price. Condition (5) equates the marginal
disutility of labor supply to the real wage. Condition (6) equates the intertemporal marginal rate of
substitution in consumption to the real return on public debt.
       The second type of agents are hand-to-mouth workers who are a fraction γ2 ≡ 1 − γ1 of the
unit-mass of agents. The optimization problem of a single type-2 agent is given by:

                                           ∞
                                                                               (l2 )ω
                                           X                                                                            
                           max                   β   t
                                                             a ln       c2t   − t              + (1 −   a) ln(h2t   − h̄t ) ,   (7)
                        {c2t ,lt2 ,h2t }                                         ω
                                           t=0

subject to this budget constraint,
                                                         c2t + pht h2t = wt lt2 + trt .                                         (8)

Here, c2t and h2t are consumption of non-health and health goods by an agent of type 2, respectively,
and lt2 is its labor supply. Type-2 agents collect income only from wages (wt lt2 ) and from government
  13
   This assumption is essential for the result that aggregate allocations and the optimal lockdown are independent of
agent heterogeneity, inequality and optimal transfers, and vice versa.


                                                                                17
transfers in the amount trt per agent.
   The first-order conditions of the above problem reduce to the following optimality conditions:

                                                        (l2 )ω
                                           1 − a c2t − tω
                                                             = pht ,                                  (9)
                                             a     h2t − h̄t

                                                (lt2 )ω−1 = wt .                                     (10)

Condition (9) equates type-2’s marginal rate of substitution between non-health and health con-
sumption to pht . Condition (10) equates the marginal disutility of labor supply to the real wage.

3.1.2   Firms

All firms are identical and the representative firm’s optimization problem is:

                                                                            mχt 1
                             max      Πt = (mt K)1−α Lαt − wt Lt − χ0             K                  (11)
                             mt ,Lt                                         χ1

subject to the technlogical constraint on utilization,

                                                  mt ≤ m̄,                                           (12)

where Lt is aggregate labor demand and m̄ is the technologically-feasible maximum rate of uti-
lization, which is assumed to be nonbinding. Since the capital stock is constant, utilization costs
       χ
     mt 1
         
  χ0 χ1 K can be seen as the standard cost associated to faster depreciation at higher utilization or
as a rental cost that increases with utilization.
   The first-order conditions of the above problem yield standard marginal-productivity conditions
for labor demand and the utilization rate:

                                      (1 − α)(mt K)−α Lαt = χ0 mχt 1 −1 ,                            (13)

                                          α(mt K)1−α Lα−1
                                                      t   = wt .                                     (14)

The marginal products of utilization and labor equal their corresponding marginal costs. In the case
of utilization, the cost is determined by the firm’s utilization choice. In the case of labor, the cost is
the market-determined wage rate.

3.1.3   Government Budget Constraint

The government budget constraint is the following:

                                         Tt − T Rt = qt Dt+1 − Dt ,                                  (15)

The left-hand-side is the primary balance, which equals aggregate tax revenue, Tt , minus total trans-
fer payments, T Rt . The right-hand-side equals the resources raised by selling new debt net of the


                                                      18
repayment of existing debt.
    The fiscal structure could be simplified by abstracting from public debt so that transfers to type-
2 agents are paid by lump-sum taxes paid by type-1 agents and the government’s budget is bal-
anced each period. Debt is introduced just so that we can highlight some implications of debt-
financed transfers for fiscal solvency, but the two formulations are equivalent because the taxes are
non-distortionary (i.e. debt is Ricardian). For a given policy of transfers funded with lump-sum
taxes, the debt-equivalent formulation (without taxes) is given by the sequence of debt issuance
Dt+1 = Tt + Dt , starting from a given initial debt D0 . The debt formulation requires, however, that
the intertemporal government budget constraint must hold, so the present discounted value of the
primary balance as of any date t must match the outstanding debt as of that date. Hence, if it is opti-
mal to increase transfers during a pandemia (as we show later) and the transfers are debt-financed,
making sustainable the debt Dj+1 accumulated during the j periods of the pandemia requires in-
creasing the stream of primary balances for t > j so that their present value equals Dt+j , which can
be accomplished by imposing lump-sum taxes on type-1 agents. This Ricardian equivalence of debt
and taxes breaks if taxes are distortionary, in which case the optimal policy problem would need to
consider the optimal tax structure, in addition to the optimal lockdown and transfer policies.

3.1.4   Competitive Equilibrium with and without Pandemia

The decentralized competitive equilibrium (DCE) is defined by sequences of individual allocations
{c1t , c2t , h1t , h2t , lt1 , lt2 , d1t+1 }∞                                               ∞                       h ∞
                                            t=0 , aggregate allocations {mt , Lt , Ct , Πt }t=0 , and prices {Rt , pt }t=0 such
that: (a) the optimality conditions and budget constraints of type-1 and type-2 agents hold, (b) the
optimality conditions of the representative firm hold, (c) the following market-clearing conditions:

                                                    γ1 lt1 + γ2 lt2 = Lt ,                                               (16)

                                                    γ1 h1t + γ2 h2t = H,                                                 (17)

and (d) the following aggregation conditions hold:

                                                     γ1 d1t+1 = Dt+1 ,                                                   (18)

                                                         γ1 τt = Tt                                                      (19)

                                                       γ2 trt = T Rt ,                                                   (20)

                                                         γ1 h = H,                                                       (21)

                                                         γ1 πt = Πt                                                      (22)

                                                    γ1 c1t + γ2 c2t = Ct .                                               (23)

    The budget constraints of the agents, the definition of profits and the above market-clearing and




                                                              19
aggregation conditions yield the following resource constraint:

                                                             1−α              mχt 1
                                              Ct = (mt K)          Lαt   − χ0       K.             (24)
                                                                              χ1

   Since the only shock to the economy is the unanticipated, temporary hike in subsistence demand
for health goods during the pandemia, and since there are no endogenous mechanisms to induce dy-
namics at work in the model, the DCE separates into pandemia (P) and no-pandemia (NP) phases,
and within each prices and allocations are constant. The DCE has a closed-form solution. To char-
acterize it, consider first that, since preferences are identical, labor is homogeneous, and all agents
are paid the same wage, conditions (5) and (10) imply that all agents offer the same labor supply,
which must equal labor demand at equilibrium: lt1 = lt2 = Lt . Therefore, using the labor demand
and supply conditions, considering that both must be equal at the equilibrium wage, yields this
expression:
                                                 Lω−1
                                                  t   = α(mt K)1−α Lα−1
                                                                    t   ,                          (25)

which together with the firm’s optimality condition for utilization yields the following expression
for the labor allocation as a function of the utilization rate:
                                                                    1
                                                             χ0 αK       ω     χ1
                                                  Lt =                       mt ω .                (26)
                                                             1−α

   Using the above result, factor allocations can be solved for using the firm’s optimality conditions
(13) and (14):
                                                                        1

                               mt = m⋆ = χα−ω
                                          0   αα
                                                 (1 − α)ω−α α(1−ω) χ1 ω+αω−ω−χ1 α
                                                           K                                       (27)
                                                                                     1
                                            α−1 χ1 +α−1        1−α (1−α)(χ1 −1) χ1 ω+αω−ω−χ1 α
              Lt =   lt1   =   lt2      ⋆
                                     = L = χ0 α         (1 − α)   K                            .   (28)

Given the above, it is straightforward to obtain equilibrium solutions for output, profits, wages and
aggregate consumption using other optimality conditions and the resource constraint:

                                                 Yt = Y ⋆ = (m⋆ K)1−α L⋆α                          (29)

                                                                              1
                                            Πt = γ1 π ⋆ = (1 − α)(1 −            )Y ⋆ > 0          (30)
                                                                              χ1
                                                    wt = w⋆ = (L⋆ )ω−1                             (31)
                                                                          (m⋆ )χ1
                                               Ct = C ⋆ = Y ⋆ − χ 0               K.               (32)
                                                                            χ1
   It is critical to note two important properties of the aggregate DCE allocations, profits and wages
solved above: First, they are independent of heterogeneity and inequality in the wealth and income
distributions, as is evident by the fact that γ1 and γ2 do not enter in the solutions. Second, they are
the same during the P and NP phases (i.e. for t = 0, ..., j and for t > j).
   In contrast with the aggregate allocations, individual consumption allocations of health and non-


                                                               20
health goods and the relative price of those goods differ in the P and NP phases in the DCE. The
equilibrium prices are:
                                                                  ⋆ ω
                                            1−a   C ⋆ − (Lω)
                             p⋆hP
                              t      =                                         for t=0, ..., j,        (33)
                                             a H − h⋆ − f (m⋆ K)
                                                         (L⋆ )ω
                                            1 − a C⋆ − ω
                           p⋆hN
                            t
                                P
                                     =                              for t>j.                           (34)
                                              a    H − h⋆

Prices are higher during the pandemia because of the direct effect on demand for health goods and
services due to the increase in h̄t . In turn, this rise in p⋆hP
                                                             t   worsens income inequality because it
increases the value of the endowment of health goods that type-1 agents own.
   The solutions of the consumption allocations across agents are straightforward applications of the
linear expenditure system implied by the Stone-Geary preferences. In particular, using conditions
(4) and (9) together with the budget constraints of the two types of agents and the above results for
aggregate variables we can obtain solutions for the individual consumption allocations as functions
of relative prices and the subsistence level of demand for health:

                                                                                   (L⋆ )ω     (L⋆ )ω
                                                                                         
                  c⋆1
                   t  (p ⋆h
                         t  , h̄t ) = a   π ⋆
                                              + p ⋆h
                                                  t  h − τ t + (L ⋆ ω
                                                                   )  − p ⋆h
                                                                          t  h̄t −          +          (35)
                                                                                     ω          ω

                                                                             (L⋆ )ω     (L⋆ )ω
                                                                                   
                         c⋆2  ⋆h
                          t (pt , h̄t )
                                                       ⋆ ω
                                          = a trt + (L ) −        p⋆h
                                                                   t h̄t   −          +                (36)
                                                                               ω          ω
                                                                         (L⋆ )ω
                                                                               
                                  1−a ⋆
                 h⋆1  ⋆h                      ⋆h         ⋆ ω
                              = ⋆h π + pt h − τt + (L ) − pt h̄t −
                  t (pt , h̄t )
                                                                 ⋆h
                                                                                  + h̄t                (37)
                                   pt                                      ω
                                                                  (L⋆ )ω
                                                                        
                         ⋆2 ⋆h          1−a         ⋆ ω   ⋆h
                        ht (pt , h̄t ) = ⋆h trt + (L ) − pt h̄t −          + h̄t                       (38)
                                         pt                         ω

Expressing individual consumption allocations as functions of (p⋆h
                                                                t , h̄t ) is useful because these are
the only two variables that cause the allocations to differ in the P and NP phases. Both h̄t and p⋆h
                                                                                                  t
are higher in the P phase, affecting individual consumption allocations as explained below.
   Assume trt = 0 (i.e. a DCE without policy intervention), or alternatively, assume that trans-
fers are unchanged when the pandemia hits. It follows from (36) that c⋆2P (p⋆hP , h⋆ + f (m⋆ K)) <
c⋆2N P (p⋆hN P , h⋆ ), because p⋆h
                                t h̄t rises during the pandemia and the rest of the variables that deter-
mine non-health consumption of type-2 agents are unaffected by the pandemia. The intuition is that
type-2 agents need to redirect some of their income to pay for the subsistence level of health, which
increased both in quantity and in price. Since aggregate consumption C ⋆ is unchanged, it must be
that c⋆1P (p⋆hP , h⋆ + f (m⋆ K)) > c⋆1N P (p⋆hN P , h⋆ ). For these agents, the rise in the value of the en-
dowment of health goods exceeds the increase in the cost of the subsistence level of health. Hence,
during a pandemia, non-health consumption of type-1 (type-2) agents rises (falls). The same ap-
plies to excess non-health consumption relative to the disutility of labor. It rises for type-1 agents
and falls for type-2 agents.
   The responses of health consumption differ from those of non-health consumption. In particular,


                                                         21
h2t rises but h1t falls. This occurs because, while the direct effect of higher h̄t on demand for health
goods is the same for both agents, the income effect of higher pht reducing the real value of income
is stronger for capitalists as the value of profits from the non-health sector in units of health goods
falls. Excess health consumption (i.e., net of h̄t ) falls for both agents, however, because even for
type-2 agents the adverse income effects of higher prices imply that the increase in h̄t exceeds that
in h2t . Overall, type-2 agents suffer more with the pandemia, because they always consume less of
all goods than type-1 agents and the pandemia causes their excess consumption of both health and
nonhealth goods to fall, while for type-1 agents excess consumption of non-health goods rises.
   The need to keep consumption of all goods above their subsistence levels imposes and upper
bound on the set of p⋆hP
                     t   that can be supported as a DCE. In particular, the results in (36) and (38)
imply that, in order for type-2 agents to keep h⋆2     ⋆2               ω
                                                t and ct above h̄t and Lt /ω, respectively, their
                                                               (L⋆ )ω
residual income must satisfy: trt + (L⋆ )ω − p⋆h
                                              t h̄t −            ω      > 0. Solving for p⋆hP
                                                                                          t   yields:

                                                        tr P + (L⋆ )ω ω−1
                                                                               
                                  p⋆hP
                                   t     < p̂   ⋆hP
                                                      ≡                ω
                                                                                                        (39)
                                                           h∗ + f (m⋆ K)

where tr P is a given value of exogenous transfers provided during the pandemia. Hence, the jump
in p⋆hP
    t   caused by f (m⋆ K) during a pandemia cannot reach p̂⋆hP , because otherwise type-2 agents
hit their subsistence consumption levels triggering the Inada conditions of their preferences. The
market price, which depends on the aggregate demand for health goods, would still be well-defined
by condition (33), but it cannot be an equilibrium because type-2 agents saturate the health system.
   Combining the above result with the pricing condition (33) implies that f (·) cannot exceed this
upper bound:
                                                               H
                              f (m⋆ K) <                      c⋆ −(L⋆ω )/ω
                                                                               − h∗ ,                   (40)
                                                      1−a
                                            1+         a tr P +(ω−1)(L⋆ω )/ω

where c⋆ , L⋆ , m⋆ are the DCE allocations independent of f (·) (see eqns. (27), (28) and (32)).
   If debt is used to pay for transfers, the real interest rate is solved for by plugging the solutions
obtained above in the Euler equation of type-1 agents (eq. (6)). Since L⋆ is constant at all times, and
since consumption of type-1 agents shifts from a higher level in the P phase to a lower level in the
NP phase, the interest rate equals 1/β in all periods except between t + j and t + j + 1 (the transition
from pandemia to non-pandemia). The interest rate on debt sold that period is:

                                                                   (L⋆ )ω
                                                   c⋆1N P
                                                    t+j+1 −          ω
                                       Rt+j     =                        .                            (41)
                                                                   (L⋆ )ω
                                                  β c⋆1P
                                                      t+j −          ω


Hence, given that c⋆1P > c⋆1N P , the interest rate falls in the last period of the pandemia.
   Finally, to characterize the effects of the pandemia on inequality, it is useful to consider a mea-
sure of inequality given by the ratio of excess consumption of type-1 to type-2 agents denoted Ω⋆t .




                                                          22
Dividing eq. (35) by (36), or (37) by (38), yields:

                                                                                                               (L⋆ )ω
                                                     π ⋆ + p⋆h           ⋆ ω   ⋆h
                                                            t h − τt + (L ) − pt h̄t −
                                           Ω⋆t   =                                                    (L⋆ )ω
                                                                                                                 ω
                                                                                                                                                 (42)
                                                          trt + (L⋆ )ω − p⋆h
                                                                          t h̄t −                       ω

Across the two types of agents in the DCE, this ratio is the same for non-health consumption or
for health consumption, and the ratio itself satisfies Ω⋆t > 1. This is clearly true for the DCE with-
out transfers, and when transfers are present it holds because we assume that τt < π ⋆ + p⋆h
                                                                                          t h (i.e.
per-capita transfers never exceed the non-wage income of type-1 agents). Moreover, the ratio is con-
stant at different levels with and without pandemia, and satisfies Ω⋆P > Ω⋆N P , which implies that
inequality worsens temporarily with a pandemia.
    Without pandemia, since prices and allocations are time-invariant, Ω⋆N P also summarizes the
income distribution of the economy. Type-1 agents own the firms and the endowment of H, so
their income includes the profits from non-health goods production and the sales of health goods,
in addition to the same amount of wage income as type-2 agents. Hence, lower γ1 implies both
higher income inequality and higher Ω⋆N P . The adverse effect of the pandemia on inequality occurs
because, keeping γ1 unchanged, the hike in the subsistence level of health goods and in their relative
price increases excess consumption for type-1 agents and lowers it for type-2 agents, and this also
includes regressive income redistribution as the income from sales of health goods and services rises
during the pandemia.


3.2 Social Planner’s Problem
The social planner solves the following optimization problem:

                                ∞
                          (                                                                   )
                                                         (l1 )ω
                                X                               
       max               φ γ1         βt       a ln c1t − t           + (1 − a) ln(h1t − h̄t )
  {cjt ,ltj ,hjt ,mt }                                     ω
                                t=0
                                                                  ∞
                                                          (                                                                                    )
                                                                                                      (l2 )ω
                                                                  X                                          
                                                 + (1 − φ) γ2           β   t
                                                                                    a ln       c2t   − t           + (1 −   a) ln(h2t   − h̄t )   (43)
                                                                  t=0
                                                                                                        ω

subject to resource constraints on labor, health goods, non-health goods, and utilization:

                                                             γ1 lt1 + γ2 lt2 = Lt ,

                                                            γ1 h1t + γ2 h2t = H,
                                                                                                           mχt 1
                                           γ1 c1t + γ2 c2t ≡ Ct = (mt K)1−α Lαt − χ0                             K,
                                                                                                           χ1
                                                                  mt ≤ m̄,

                                                           h̄t = h⋆ + zt f (mt K).




                                                                        23
The social welfare function is standard, with weights φ and 1 − φ on the population of type-1 and
type-2 agents, respectively. The ratio of these weights is denoted Ωsp ≡ φ/(1 − φ). As in the DCE, m̄
is assumed to be nonbinding.

3.2.1   Socially Optimal Allocations

The social planner’s equilibrium (SPE) can be characterized as the set of allocations that satisfy the
constraints of the planner’s problem and the following optimality conditions:

                                                                                        1
                                         lt1 = lt2 = Lt = α(mt K)1−α
                                                                                   
                                                                                       ω−α
                                                                                                                    (44)
                                             α                                          Lω
                                                                      1 − a (Ct − ωt )
                                 
                                      Lt
                       (1 − α)                    =   χ0 mχt 1 −1   +                  zt f ′ (mt K).               (45)
                                     mt K                               a    H − h̄t
                                                        h1t − h̄t
                                                                  = Ωsp                                             (46)
                                                        h2t − h̄t
                                                               (lt1 )ω
                                                       c1t −      ω
                                                               (lt2 )ω
                                                                          = Ωsp                                     (47)
                                                       c2t −      ω

The planner will set allocations at two different constant levels for the P and NP phases. As we
show below, aggregate allocations will be set lower during the P phase than in the NP phase. The
conditions in (44) show that the planner aligns with the DCE in that it allocates the same labor
supply to both agents, and the total labor allocation equates the marginal disutility of labor with the
marginal product of labor.
   Conditions (45)-(47) are essential to this paper’s argument. Condition (45) determines the plan-
ner’s optimal utilization choice and it drives the planner’s incentive to lockdown the economy. It
differs from its counterpart—equation (13) in in the DCE—in that, during a pandemia, the social
marginal cost of utilization in the right-hand-side of (45) exceeds its private counterpart by the
                                                            t  Lω
                                                  1−a (Ct − ω )
amount   ph,sp
          t    f ′ (mt K)   where    ph,sp
                                      t      ≡     a    H−h̄t
                                                                         is the social price of health goods. Hence, uti-
lization is inefficiently chosen in the DCE during a pandemia, because firms do not internalize the
marginal social cost of utilization. This cost exceeds the private one because of the marginal social
value of lowering utilization to relax the degree of saturation of the health system by hampering the
increase in h̄t due to the pandemia. As a result, the planner reduces utilization and this reduces
labor demand, output, profits and wages, giving rise to the output-pandemia tradeoff.
   The SPE does not have a closed-form solution because of the non-linear nature of condition (45).
Using this condition together with (44), the optimal utilization rate (i.e. the optimal lockdown) can




                                                                  24
be represented as the solution to the following non-linear equation in mt :
                                  1
                                        α
            α(mt K)1−α
                              
                                  ω−α
  (1 − α)                               − χ0 mχt 1 −1 =
                 mt K
                                                                                                     ω     
                                                           α                χ
                                                                            m 1          (α(mt K)1−α ) ω−α
                         K)1−α                 K)1−α
                                                       
             1−a (mt                   α(mt               ω−α
                                                                     −    χ0 χt1 K   −           ω
                                                                                                               zt f ′ (mt K). (48)
                                                                                                              
                
              a                                            H − h̄t                                           


Without pandemia, zt = 0 and this equation collapses to the same closed-form solution for utilization
in the DCE, because there is no externality affecting the utilization decision. The labor allocation,
output, and aggregate consumption are therefore the same as well. During the pandemia, utilization
is lower because of its higher marginal social cost, but notice that it retains the property of the DCE
that it is still independent of agent heterogeneity and inequality (and now independent also of the
planner’s welfare weights). As a result, the planners aggregate allocations for labor and production
in the pandemia phase also retain this property.
       The above results imply that in this model the utilization externality and the optimal lockdown
do not interact with the planner’s incentives to redistribute (i.e. with inequality and agent hetero-
geneity). The planner’s utilization choices depends on f ′ (mt K) and ph,sp
                                                                       t    , which are determined
by aggregate variables that are independent of inequality and distributional incentives. This also
implies that the planner‘s aggregate allocations and the utilization externality are identical in a
representative-agent version of the model (i.e. if γ1 = 1).
       Conditions (46) and (47) are important because they drive the planner’s incentives to redistribute
resources across agents during the pandemia. The planner sets the (inverse) ratios of marginal
utilities of health and non-health consumption across agents equal to the ratio of welfare weights
the planner assigns them. The extent to which redistribution is relevant depends on the extent to
which Ωsp differs from Ω⋆P and Ω⋆N P (recall that in the DCE we showed that Ω⋆P > Ω⋆N P > 1).
       Consider three scenarios. First, a case with Ωsp = 1 (i.e. φ = 1/2). This corresponds to a
utilitarian social welfare function in which the planner weighs each agent equally.14 The planner
redistributes resources so as to equalize consumption of health and non-health goods across agents.
Second, a case with Ωsp = Ω⋆N P (i.e. φ = Ω⋆N P /(1 + Ω⋆N P )). This is an application of the First
Welfare Theorem in which the DCE without pandemia is supported as an SPE.15 The planner has no
incentive to redistribute without a pandemia, but will still want to redistribute during a pandemia
because Ωsp = Ω⋆N P < Ω⋆P . Third, a case with Ωsp > Ω⋆N P (i.e. Ω⋆N P /(1 + Ω⋆N P ) < φ ≤ 1 ). This
is a case with bias in favor of capitalists, because the planner weighs type-1 agents by more than
what the inequality implicit in Ω⋆N P indicates. We will show later that when this is the case it is
possible for the optimal policies to be Pareto efficient (i.e. the lifetime utility of both agents increases
  14
     In this case, φ can be ignored because it becomes a common factor for the utility of both agent types in the social
welfare function, and the planner’s allocations become independent of φ.
  15
     This is evident because with Ωsp = Ω⋆NP and zt = 0 for all t the SPE’s optimality conditions are identical to those of
the DCE without pandemia.



                                                                     25
relative to the DCE). In light of these results, the analysis that follows focuses on Ωsp ∈ [1, ∞) (or
φ ∈ [1/2, 1]).
   It is worth noting that if the welfare weights satisfy φ < Ω⋆N P /(1 + Ω⋆N P ), the planner will
engage in redistribution in favor of type-2 agents relative to the DCE even without pandemia. Still,
the optimal transfers solely due to the pandemia can be separated from the those that are optimal
in “normal times” so as to focus on the additional redistribution that is socially desirable when a
pandemia hits.
   Given the above intuition for the utilization externality and the distributional incentives of the
planner, we can now characterize the solution of the planner’s problem when the pandemia is present.
The solution to the non-linear equation (48) yields the planner’s optimal utilization rate msp
                                                                                            t , and
once it is known it can be used to determine the rest of the SPE allocations: Lsp   sp   1sp  2sp
                                                                               t , Ct , ct , ct ,
h1sp      2sp
 t , and ht . It is evident that there are no distributional incentives affecting the utilization choice
because φ, γ1 and γ2 do not enter in eq.(48). The higher social marginal cost of utilization leads
the planner to reduce msp
                       t . Condition (44) then implies that aggregate and individual labor alloca-
tions fall, and since both labor and utilization fall, output and Ct also fall. This is again the output-
pandemia tradeoff: The planner internalizes that by reducing utilization it weakens the pandemia,
but it also takes into account that lowering utilization has output and consumption costs.
   The drops in utilization, output and consumption chosen by the planner trigger distributional in-
centives, because as Ctsp falls, the planner wants to keep consumption ratios aligned with Ωsp . Given
the SPE’s aggregate allocations, the planner assigns to type-2 agents these consumption allocations:

                                                      (Lsp )ω
                                               Ctsp − tω        (Lsp
                                                                  t )
                                                                     ω
                                    c2sp
                                     t     =                  +        ,                            (49)
                                             1 + γ1 (Ωsp − 1)     ω

                                    H − h∗ − zt f (msp
                                                    t K)
                           h2sp
                            t   =              sp
                                                         + h∗ + zt f (msp
                                                                       t K).                        (50)
                                      1 + γ1 (Ω − 1)
The denominators of the first terms in the right-hand-side of the above expressions are equal to 1 for
the utilitarian planner (since Ωsp = 1), and the solutions give the consumption levels that are com-
mon for all agents. For Ωsp > 1, these expressions yield consumption levels for type-2 agents that
are lower than for type-1 agents. Type-2 (type-1) agents receive “below average” (“above average”)
consumption levels so that market-clearing in health and non-health goods holds. As explained ear-
lier, the size of Ωsp determines the degree of consumption inequality that is optimal for the planner.
For Ωsp = Ω⋆N P (recall Ω⋆N P > 1), this yields the same consumption allocations and the same
inequality as in the DCE so that no redistribution is optimal without a pandemia.

3.2.2   Decentralization & Optimal Policies

The social planner’s allocations can be implemented as a competitive equilibrium by imposing a
lockdown (i.e. a binding limit on utilization) and providing transfers to type-2 agents. The optimal
design of these two policies is characterized below.



                                                      26
Optimal Lockdown: The planner’s optimal utilization rate can be decentralized using various in-
struments to correct the utilization externality. Since the COVID pandemia arrived as a large, un-
expected shock that required an urgent response to the threat of saturation of health systems, it is
reasonable to consider a lockdown as the policy instrument, instead of standard policy instruments
(e.g. taxes) that would have been too slow and cumbersome to implement. The optimal lockdown
is obtained by implementing the following policy rule:

                                               mt ≤ msp
                                                     t           for t=0, ..., j,                                       (51)
                                               mt ≤ m̄           for t>j.                                               (52)

Since the utilization externality increases the marginal cost of utilization relative to the DCE and m̄
is not binding in the DCE, it must be the case that msp   ⋆
                                                     t < m < m̄ for t = 0, ..., j. Recall also that
in the DCE, m⋆ is the optimal utilization rate with or without pandemia and that, since there is no
utilization externality without pandemia, msp   ⋆
                                           t = m for t > j.


Optimal Transfers:          By imposing the planner’s health and non-health consumption allocations for
type-2 agents (eqns. (49) and (50)) on these agents’ budget constraint in the DCE solution (eq. (8)),
it follows that the optimal policy rule for government transfers is:

     T Rtsp ≡ T Rsp,P
                                     (Lsp )ω
                           Ctsp − tω
                 "(                                                                                    )
                                          (Lsp ω                     H − h∗ − f (msp
                                                                 
                                            t )                                      K)
            = γ2                  sp
                                        +        + ph,sp
                                                    t
                                                                                   t               sp
                                                                                        + h∗ + f (mt K)
                         1 + γ1 (Ω − 1)     ω                         1 + γ1 (Ωsp − 1)                    (53)
                                                                                          #
                                                                                    − (Lsp
                                                                                        t )
                                                                                           ω
                                                                                                    for t= 0, ..., j,

                                               ⋆ ω
                                       C ⋆ − (Lω)
                                "(                                                                  )              #
                                                        (L⋆ )ω                  H − h∗
                                                                        
T Rtsp   ≡ TR   sp,N P
                         = γ2                         +        + p⋆h                         + h∗             ⋆ ω
                                                                                                         − (L )         for t>j.
                                     1 + γ1 (Ωsp − 1)     ω                 1 + γ1 (Ωsp − 1)

In the expressions inside square brackets, the terms in braces represent the total value of nonhealth
and health consumption of type-2 agents, and the term (Lsp ω
                                                        t ) is these agents’ wage income. Hence,
the optimal transfer finances the gap between the planner’s desired allocation of total consumption
to type-2 agents and the wages they collect (all in units of nonhealth goods). The optimal transfers
are constant at different levels within P and NP phases, because the SPE’s allocations have the same
property.
    The planner takes into account that, during a pandemia, the optimal lockdown reduces the mar-
ket income of type-2 agents by more than that of type-1 agents, since the former only earn wages
while the latter collect profits and sales of H in addition to wages. Moreover, the planner internalizes
that the relative price of health goods will rise, making health-good purchases costlier, and that the
overall result of these effects is that type-2 (type-1) agents move closer to (further from) their sub-
sistence levels of health and non-health goods. The planner will therefore redistribute consumption
from type-2 to type-1 agents by more than it does in normal times without pandemia. If Ωsp = Ω⋆N P ,


                                                            27
there is no redistribution in normal times (T Rsp,N P = 0), but the planner still redistributes during
the pandemia. Hence, the planner has incentives to intervene in the DCE so as to both reduce uti-
lization (to tackle the utilization externality) and redistribute resources across agents (to offset some
of the fall in wage income, redistribute the decline in aggregate output across agents and maintain
their ratio of excess consumptions equal to Ωsp ).
   As explained earlier, the planner can pay for the optimal transfers during the pandemia with
lump-sum taxes on type-1 agents maintaining a balanced budget, or it can finance them by selling
debt to those agents. Using debt, the equilibrium
                                                 interest rates
                                                             would be given by Rt = 1/β for t =
                                          (Lsp
                                            j+1 )
                                                 ω                 (Lsp
                                                                     j )
                                                                        ω
0, .., j−1 or t > j and Rj = (c1sp
                               j+1 −         ω     )/   β(c1sp
                                                           j   −     ω )    . Since transfers are constant during the
pandemia and the interest rate differs from 1/β only
                                                   h in period j, the planner would
                                                                               i      arrive at the end
                                     sp                sp,P
                                                            Pj−1 i       j−1
of the pandemia with a debt stock Dj+1 = (1/Rj ) T R         i=0 β + β       D0 . In order to maintain
fiscal solvency after the pandemia (i.e. satisfy the intertemporal government budget constraint),
the government can impose lump-sum taxes Tt for t > j such that the present discounted value of
                    sp
tax revenue equals Dj+1 . The specific sequence of these taxes is undetermined. Any sequence that
satisfies the solvency condition yields the same outcome because the taxes are non-distortionary. For
                                                                         sp
instance, since Rt = 1/β for t > j, a constant lump-sum tax T̄ = (1 − β)Dj+1 satisfies the solvency
                                                            sp
condition. A tax paying all the debt in one period (Tj+1 = Dj+1 ) is also consistent with solvency,
but is akin to a default in which the government “pays” all the debt at t = j + 1 by simply taxing
away the entire debt repayment. The planner has no reason to prefer either debt or taxes to pay for
transfers during the pandemia, or any particular sequence of taxes post-pandemia consistent with
solvency, since they all yield identical allocations and welfare (i.e. there is Ricardian equivalence).
In contrast, with distortionary taxes, given the pre-pandemia structure of tax rates, the planner’s
problem is more complex because it would consider the optimal structure and time-variation of tax
rates, and even restricted to time-invariant tax rates, it would consider how dynamic Laffer curves
limit sustainable debt levels (see D’Erasmo et al., 2016).


3.3 Social Welfare & Private Utility Gains:
In order to compare the utility that agents derive under the SPE relative to the DCE, define ∆Ui ≡
UiSP E − UiDCE for agents of type i = 1, 2 where U1 and U2 are the lifetime utility functions shown
in (2) and (7). Then, denoting excess consumption levels as C̃t ≡ Ct − Lωt /ω and h̃t ≡ ht − h̄t and
using the results from the SPE and the DCE yields these expressions:

                       j         h                                   i
                              β t a ln C̃tsp − ln C̃ ⋆ + (1 − a) ln h̃sp
                       X
               ∆U1 =                                                  t  − ln h̃⋆t
                       t=0
                              j
                          "
                                          Ωsp                      Ω⋆P
                                                                           
                                                                                              (54)
                              X
                                  t
                       +     β ln                     − ln
                                   1 + γ1 (Ωsp − 1)          1 + γ1 (Ω⋆P − 1)
                         t=0
                                                                                          #
                                  βj              Ωsp                        Ω⋆N P
                                                                  
                               +        ln                     − ln
                                 1−β        1 + γ1 (Ωsp − 1)           1 + γ1 (Ω⋆N P − 1)



                                                            28
                        j         h                                    i
                               β t a ln C̃tsp − ln C̃ ⋆ + (1 − a) ln h̃sp
                        X
                ∆U2 =                                                  t  − ln  h̃⋆t
                        t=0
                               j
                           "                                                 
                               X
                                   t        1                          1                        (55)
                        +     β ln                      − ln
                                    1 + γ1 (Ωsp − 1)           1 + γ1 (Ω⋆P − 1)
                          t=0
                                                                                            #
                                   βj
                                                                    
                                                      1                           1
                                +        ln                      − ln
                                  1−β         1 + γ1 (Ωsp − 1)           1 + γ1 (Ω⋆N P − 1)

Using these results, the change in social welfare (∆W ) under the SPE allocations with the optimal
lockdown and transfer policies relative to the unregulated DCE allocations can be expressed as:

                                       ∆W = φγ1 ∆U1 + (1 − φ)γ2 ∆U2 .                                  (56)

Thus, the change in social welfare attained by the optimal policies equals the valuation of the indi-
vidual lifetime utility changes valued using the social welfare function.
   To obtain a cardinal measure of ∆W , we follow the standard procedure of expressing welfare
gains in terms of a compensating variation in consumption. In particular, we calculate the percentage
increase in consumption of non-health goods common across households and time periods (Λ) that
would be needed for the DCE to yield the same social welfare as under the SPE allocations. That is,
we compute the value of Λ that solves this equation:

       ∞
                                 (L⋆t )ω
       X                                                        
            t
     φ     β γ1 a ln      c1⋆
                           t (1
                          + Λ) −                           1⋆
                                           + (1 − a) ln(ht − h̄t )
                                   ω
       t=0
                       ∞
                                                   (L⋆t )ω
                       X                                                          
                          t           2⋆
             + (1 − φ)   β γ2 a ln ct (1 + Λ) −               + (1 − a) ln(ht − h̄t ) = W sp
                                                                            2⋆
                                                                                                       (57)
                                                      ω
                          t=0

where W sp is given by eq. (43) evaluated at the SPE allocations. Note that, while the duration of the
pandemia does not alter allocations and prices in the DCE and SPE (it only determines when the
economy switches from the P to the NP phase), it does matter for the size of all of these individual
utility and social welfare effects. In particular, the effects of the pandemia on social welfare and
individual utility are larger for pandemias that last longer.
   The term in the first row in the right-hand-side of equations (54)-(55) for ∆U1 and ∆U2 is
the same, because it represents the aggregate effects of the planner’s management of the output-
pandemia tradeoff by neutralizing the utilization externality. Since, as we showed earlier, the SPE’s
aggregate allocations are independent of inequality, this term depends only on aggregate allocations
and not on their distribution across agents. In the DCE, aggregate labor and consumption of non-
health goods are constant at the same level in the P and NP phases, so that C̃ ⋆ is constant at all times.
During the pandemia, however, aggregate excess health goods consumption (h̃⋆t ) falls because of the
increase in h̄t for t = 0, .., j. The utilization externality implies that these allocations are suboptimal.
Hence, during the pandemia the planner lowers the utilization rate, which reduces C̃tsp but props-up
h̃sp
  t . The post-pandemia phase washes out from this term, because, as explained earlier, for all t > j


                                                    29
there is no utilization externality and hence the aggregate allocations of labor, non-health output
and consumption of both goods are the same in the DCE and SPE.
       The second and third rows in the right-hand-side of ∆U1 and ∆U2 reflect the distributional effects
of the transfers, with the parts due to the P and NP phases shown in the second and third rows,
respectively. Ω⋆P > Ω⋆N P ≥ Ωsp is a sufficient condition for these effects to be negative for ∆U1
and positive for ∆U2 . These distributional effects are determined by a collection of constant terms
that depend on γ1 and the marginal utility ratios of the planner (Ωsp ) vis-a-vis those in the DCE
(Ω⋆P , Ω⋆N P ).16 The terms for the pandemia phase reflect the result justifying increased transfers to
type-2 agents during the pandemia, because the distribution of resources for health and nonhealth
consumption is suboptimal and worsens during the pandemia (since Ω⋆P rises). The terms for the
post-pandemia phase show that, as explained earlier, the planner redistributes resources to type-2
agents even without a pandemia (as long as Ωsp < Ω⋆N P ).
       For quantitative analysis, expressions (54) and (55) provide an intuitive way of separating the
social welfare gain into key components: First, the gains due to neutralizing the utilization external-
ity. Second, the gains due to the redistribution that the planner finds optimal to undertake when a
pandemia occurs. Third, the gains due to redistribution even without a pandemia, because of the
planner’s dislike for inequality in general.
       Evaluating ∆U1 and ∆U2 separate from social welfare is also helpful for assessing whether the
optimal policy is Pareto efficient (i.e. ∆U1 , ∆U2 ≥ 0). For this to be the case, the utility gain for
type-1 agents from neutralizing the utilization externality must exceed their loss due to the redistri-
bution in favor of type-2 agents. A heuristic argument suggests that, for given social welfare weights,
the SPE can be Pareto efficient if γ1 is sufficiently high. Start with some γ1 that yields a particular
Ω∗N P (γ1 ) and assume we set Ωsp = Ω∗N P (γ1 ). As we increase γ1 keeping Ωsp fixed, the utility of
type-1 agents rises (locally) because the cost of redistribution falls, since the second row of ∆U1 in-
creases (becomes less negative) and the third row is zero (since Ωsp = Ω∗N P (γ1 )). The result is not
general, however, because the redistribution costs and ∆U1 are nonlinear functions of γ1 , but as we
verify in the numerical example below, it is possible to have a paremeterization such that for given
Ωsp there is an interval of γ1 values such that ∆U1 , ∆U2 ≥ 0.


4 Quantitative Analysis
In this Section, we assess the quantitative relevance of the mechanism driving the optimal lockdown
and transfer payments during a pandemia via the degree of saturation of the health system. In par-
ticular, we examine the performance of the model based on a calibration in which the selection of
the model’s parameter values is disciplined by setting them to be consistent with U.S. data. It is
worth noting, however, that the model we presented is streamlined with the intent of highlighting
the mechanism we proposed, and we left for future research its interactions with other potentially
  16
     In the [1, ∞) interval of Ωsp , the utilitarian planner (Ωsp = 1) has the strongest desire for reallocating resources. All
the terms that include Ωsp vanish from ∆U1 , ∆U2 , which implies that the second and third rows of ∆U1 (∆U2 ) take their
most negative (positive) values. In particular, comparing the second rows of the two expressions shows that the planner
has the strongest desire to redistribute when the pandemia hits, relative to scenarios with Ωsp > 1.


                                                              30
important mechanisms, particularly those working through dynamic propagation (e.g. capital ac-
cumulation, financial frictions, durable goods, habit persistence, etc.).


4.1 Calibration
Table 4 lists the model’s calibrated parameter values. The values of all of the parameters, except those
of the Stone-Geary utility and the f (mK) function, are easy to set following a conventional calibra-
tion approach. The model is set to a quarterly frequency with a standard discount factor of β = 0.99.
The Frisch elasticity of labor supply is set to 2, which is also a standard value in the literature, and
since the Frisch elasticity in the model is 1/(ω − 1), we obtain ω = 1.5. The labor share in production
is set to α = 0.7, which is a common value based on historical U.S. data. Utilization is normalized so
that m = 1 without pandemia, which is equivalent to full capital utilization. The depreciation (or uti-
lization cost) function is modified slightly to adopt a formulation typical of dynamic macro models
                                                 χ
                                               mt 1
(see Mendoza et al., 2014): δ(mt ) = χ0        χ1 .   Without pandemia, since mt = 1, the capital deprecia-
                          χ0
tion rate satisfies δ =   χ1 ,   where δ is set to a depreciation rate of 0.0164 per quarter, consistent with
the calibration to U.S. data in Mendoza et al. (2014) and D’Erasmo et al. (2016). The capital stock is
set to K = 6.04, which is consistent with a capital-GDP ratio of 3. The value of χ0 then follows from
the DCE optimality condition for capital utilization, which yields χ0 = (1 − α)(L(K, m)/K)α = 0.10,
where L(K, m) is the solution to eq. (25) for K = 6.04 and m = 1, and then the condition that
δ = χχ10 yields χ1 = 6.10. Finally, γ1 = 0.2 because the top quintile of the U.S. wealth distribution
owned nearly 90% of the wealth in 2017 (Leiserson et al., 2019), and for simplicity we focus mainly
on the case in which Ωsp = Ω⋆N P , so that the SPE supports the DCE without pandemia and there is
no incentive to redistribute except when a pandemia hits.

                                      Table 4: Calibrated Parameter Values
       Parameter    Value          Reference
           β        0.99           Standard for quarterly frequency
           ω        1.5            Frisch Elasticity of labor supply equals 2
           α        0.7            Standard labor Share
           K        6.04           Capital stock to match K/GDP=3
          m⋆        1              Normalization
          χ0        0.10           Optimality condition for utilization with m⋆ = 1
          χ1        6.10           1.64% depreciation rate, Mendoza et al. (2014)
           γ1       0.2            Top quintile owns 90% of U.S. wealth in 2017, Leiserson et al. (2019)
           H        1              Normalization
           h⋆       0.0948         Linear expenditure system regression
           a        0.756          Average nonhealth-to-health consumption and GDP ratios, 2009-2018
           θ        0–0.095        Interval up to feasible DCE upper bound


   To calibrate the Stone-Geary preferences, we start by normalizing the fixed supply of health goods
and services so that H = 1. Hence, h⋆ represents the percent of the available supply of health goods
allocated for subsistence in normal times. To set the value of h⋆ , we use estimates from a standard
linear-expenditure-system regression of the nominal expenditures of health goods and services on
nominal expenditures of non-health goods and services and the price of health goods. This regres-


                                                         31
sion follows from the equilibrium pricing condition for the NP phase, eq. (34), using the resource
constraint for non-health goods and the market-clearing condition for health goods.17 The value of
h⋆ corresponds to the coefficient on pht , which yields h⋆ = 0.0948 with a standard error of 0.0235 and
a probability value of 0.0002.18
       The share of non-health expenditures a is determined by imposing on the same pricing condition
(34) the estimated value of h⋆ = 0.0948 and the average ratios of non-health to health consumption
and non-health to health GDP for the period 2009-2018, which are 5.01 and 4.73, respectively. We use
2009-2018 data so as to capture averages from data where the ratios stabilized, after a long period in
which both rose steadily. This yields a = 0.756.
       The last item that needs to be specified is the function f (mt K) that maps utilization into subsis-
tence demand for health goods during a pandemia. The function is assumed to be monotonically
increasing but it could be convex, concave or linear. As noted earlier, a concave (convex) formu-
lation would represent an economy in which reductions in utilization are less (more) effective at
reducing the stress on the health system during a pandemia. For simplicity, we assume a linear
function f (mt K) = θmt K. Since we know little about θ and, given the linear specification and the
value of K, equation (40) yields an upper bound θ̃ that can support a DCE with pandemia, we
explore model solutions for θ in the [0, θ̃) interval. Moreover, within this interval, we identify the
value of θ that would make the drop in non-health GDP observed during the pandemia consistent
with an optimal lockdown. This scenario is denoted as the “observed lockdown” (OL) scenario.
Using the decline of 8.8 percent in non-health GDP of the United States in the second quarter of
2020 relative to the first quarter, the implied θ that yields the drop in utilization needed for this
output drop to be optimal is θ OL = 0.0918. The corresponding utilization rate is 0.848 and hence
f (mK) = 0.0918 ∗ 0.848 ∗ 6.04 = 0.47. Thus, accounting for the observed lockdown as an optimal
policy outcome requires a sharp increase in the subsistence level of demand for health goods and
services from 9.48 to 9.48 + 47 = 56.4 percent of the available supply.


4.2 Quantitative findings
Table 5 shows the results for the DCE without pandemia (DCEN P ) and two DCE and SPE pandemia
scenarios. One is the OL case, in which we find the value of θ such that the SP EP,OL solution returns
the observed drop in non-health U.S. GDP (i.e. θ = θ OL = 0.0918). This is compared with results
for a variant of the DCE with an ad-hoc cut in utilization set to yield the same observed output drop
during the pandemia, labeled DCEP,OL . This differs from SP EP,OL because, while the aggregate
allocations are the same (i.e. there is no utilization externality since DCEP,OL and SP EP,OL yield
                                                                                                       
  17                                                                        1−a         δ(·)K
       After simplifying terms, combining these expressions yields ph H =    a
                                                                                   1−     Y
                                                                                                −   α
                                                                                                    ω
                                                                                                            Y + h⋆ ph .
  18
    The regression uses data for 1960-2018. Expenditures are proxied by GDP of health and non-health goods. The price
index corresponds to the GDP deflator for the health sector (obtained from the BLS). Expenditures are expressed as
indexes with the same base year as the deflator. Other time series used are Total National Health Expenditures, Health
Investment, Health Consumption Expenditures, obtained from the National Health Expenditure database of the Centers
for Medicaid and Medicare Services (CMS), and Nominal GDP and Gross Private Domestic Investment, obtained from
the BLS and BEA, respectively. The regression is estimated in second differences, because non-health expenditures are
integrated of order two, reflecting the sharp growth of the health sector relative to the rest of the U.S. economy.



                                                            32
the same utilization rate by construction), the planner still finds it optimal to redistribute resources
across agents. The second scenario, with columns labeled DCEP,N L and SP EP,N L , compares solu-
tions assuming there is no ad-hoc lockdown (NL) in the DCE. We cannot solve this NL scenario with
θ OL = 0.0918 because without ad-hoc lockdown θ̃ = 0.083 in the DCE, so instead we set θ = 0.075
which yields the same relative price increase as the OL scenario.19

                   Table 5: Competitive & Social Planner’s Equilibria: Alternative Scenarios

                                          Normal Times           Observed Lockdown                 No Lockdown
                                             (levels)             (percent changes)               (percent changes)
         Variable                        DCEN P = SPEN P         DCEP,OL SPEP,OL                 DCEP,N L SPEP,N L
                                                                     θ = 0.0918                       θ = 0.075
         Aggregate variables:
         Ω                                          10.768         187.08          10.768          69.113         10.768
         h̄                                         0.095          0.564            0.564           0.548          0.502
         Y (GDPNH )                                 2.012          -8.843          -8.842             0           -5.819
         m                                             1          -15.176         -15.176             0           -10.11
         L                                          1.256          -5.986          -5.985             0           -3.918
         Π                                          0.505          1.849            1.849             0            2.414
         C                                          1.913          -6.023          -6.022             0           -3.647
         w                                          1.121          -3.039          -3.039             0           -1.979
         ph                                         0.348         101.099         101.099          100.06          78.85
         ph H(GDPH )                                0.348         101.099         101.099          100.06          78.85
         Individual variables:
         c1                                          4.49          21.75           -4.462         23.444          -2.445
         c2                                         1.269         -30.595          -7.402         -20.743         -4.711
         h1                                         3.395         -20.603         -36.624         -20.879        -31.716
         h2                                         0.401          43.574          77.457         44.158         67.076
         c̃1                                        3.551          29.838          -3.304         29.642          -1.553
         c̃2                                         0.33         -92.526          -3.303          -79.8          -1.556
         h̃1                                          3.3         -35.436         -51.917         -35.198        -44.959
         h̃2                                        0.306         -96.284         -51.916         -89.903        -44.957
         Transfer & Welfare:
         T R/GDP (%)                                 n.a.            n.a.          12.29            n.a.           9.53
         Welfare Gain (%)                             0               0            1.129             0            0.646
         ∆U 1                                         0               0            -1.161            0            -0.977
         ∆U 2                                         0               0            10.088            0            6.349
         ∆W                                           0               0            0.473             0            0.253
Notes: The “Normal Times” column corresponds to the equilibrium without pandemia (DCE and SPE are identical because the calibra-
tion assumes Ωsp = Ω⋆NP ). Allocations and prices in the Observed Lockdown and No Lockdown scenarios are reported as percent
changes relative to the Normal Times scenario, except h̄ and Ω are shown in levels because m and h̄ are percentages and Ω is a ratio.
Transfers as a share of GDP (T R/GDP ) and welfare gains are percentages as defined in the text, and ∆U 1 , ∆U 2 , ∆W are changes in
utility and welfare, also as defined in the text.

  19
     It follows from eq. (40) that the upper bound θ̃ required for type-2 agents to avoid hitting h̄ in the DCEP increases
with the size of an ad-hoc utilization cut imposed on the DCE solution. Hence, the interval of feasible θ values shrinks as
the assumed ad-hoc utilization cut is reduced. The upper bound in the DCEP,OL solution is θ̃ = 0.095, compared with
θ̃ = 0.0834 in the DCEP,NL solution.


                                                                33
   The aggregate allocations for DCEP,OL and SP EP,OL show that the 8.8 percent output drop is
associated with a utilization cut of 15 percentage points and declines in consumption and labor of
about 6 percent. Moreover, ph rises by about a 100 percent relative to prices without a pandemia.
   The consumption allocations differ sharply across agents in the DCEP,OL vis-a-vis SP EP,OL .
Relative to DCEN P , c1 rises 21.8 percent while c2 falls 30.6 percent in the DCEP,OL. Since labor
disutility is the same for both agents, this implies that excess consumption of nonhealth goods also
rises sharply for type-1 agents and falls sharply for type-2 agents. Regarding health goods consump-
tion, note that in the DCEN P type-2 agents consume less than the subsistence level under DCEP,OL,
hence h2 rises 43.6 percent relative to its level in the DCEN P so as to yield positive excess consump-
tion. Since H = 1, this implies that type-1 agents must reduce their consumption of health goods, by
20.6 percent relative to what they were consuming under DCEN P . Excess health goods consump-
tion also shrinks for type-1 agents under DCEP,OL relative to DCEN P , but it is substantially higher
than for type-2 agents.
   The planner’s redistribution under SP EP,OL reduces c1 and h1 so as to increase c2 and h2 . In
particular, it moves type-2 agents further away from the level at which the saturation of the health
system is reached. This requires an amount of transfers equivalent to 12.3 percent of total GDP.
Moreover, this policy yields a sizable welfare gain of 1.13 percent, assuming a pandemia that lasts 4
quarters. As noted earlier, this is solely due to the social welfare gains of redistribution, because by
construction in this OL scenario the DCE and SPE feature the same utilization rate, and thus there
are no welfare gains due to the utilization externality.
   The no-lockdown scenario differs from the OL case in that now there is no drop in utilization in
the DCE with pandemia, which is what the theory predicts in the absence of an ad-hoc utilization cut.
Hence, all aggregate allocations in the DCEP,N L solution remain at their levels without pandemia.
Relative prices increase by about 100 percent as in the OL case by design (i.e. θ = 0.075 was chosen
from the set of feasible values so as to yield the same price hike). The consumption allocations of
health and nonhealth goods across agents move in the same directions and by magnitudes that are
roughly similar, except the drop in c2 is much smaller (−20.7 v. −30.6 percent in the DCEP,OL).
Moreover, the regressive redistribution in the DCEP,N L is driven solely by the effect of higher ph
increasing the income type-1 agents derive from sales of health goods, with profits, wages and labor
supply unchanged. In contrast, in the DCEP,OL, wage income of each agent falls 8.8 percent as the
wage rate and labor supply fall 3 and 6 percent, respectively, and profits paid to type-1 agents rise
1.8 percent. Hence, income inequality worsens more in the OL than in the NL case, and this causes
larger inequality in excess consumption with Ω⋆P rising to 187 in the OL case v. 69 in the NL case.
   In contrast with the OL case, DCEP,N L and SP EP,N L differ not only because the planner redis-
tributes resources across agents but it also alters utilization and aggregate allocations. The planner
cuts utilization by 10 percentage points, because now the utilization externality is in full force, since
there is no ad-hoc utilization cut in the DCEP,N L . The optimal drop in nonhealth GDP is about -5.8
percent with declines in aggregate consumption and labor near -4 percent. The subsistence demand
for health goods rises to 50 percent under the optimal policies. Redistribution in the SP EP,N L rela-


                                                   34
tive to the DCEP,N L is again roughly similar to what we reported for the OL case. The social welfare
gain is 0.65 percent, roughly two thirds of that obtained in the OL scenario. This is the case because,
although there is now a welfare gain due to the utilization externality, the bump in h̄ is 6 percentage
points smaller and the planner allocates a smaller increase in health consumption to type-2 agents.
        Figures 4 and 5 illustrate how the quantitative results vary as θ changes in the [0, θ̃) interval.
Figure 4 shows utilization and non-health GDP. Since θ̃ applies only to the DCE solution, not the SPE,
and it increases with the size of the assumed ad-hoc lockdown imposed on the DCE, the vertical lines
identify θ̃ for the NL and OL scenarios (i.e. θ̃ = 0.0834 and 0.095, respectively). The SPE solution is
plotted for θ in the [0, 0.095] interval. The two horizontal lines correspond to the DCE solutions for
NL (with m⋆ = 1) and OL (with m⋆ = 0.848). These lines are horizontal because the DCE aggregate
allocations are independent of θ due to the utilization externality. Drawing any other horizontal line
at some m value would correspond to the DCE for an ad-hoc lockdown at that same m value.

                                  Figure 4: Utilization and Non-Health Output in Pandemia

                                 Utilization                                                             Non-Health GDP
   1                                                                            2.05


 0.98


                                                                                  2
 0.96


 0.94

                                                                                1.95
 0.92


  0.9
                                                                                 1.9

 0.88


 0.86
                                                                                1.85


 0.84


 0.82                                                                            1.8
        0   0.01   0.02   0.03   0.04   0.05   0.06   0.07   0.08   0.09               0   0.01   0.02   0.03   0.04   0.05   0.06   0.07   0.08   0.09




        For a given θ in the horizontal axis of the plots of Figure 4 , we can use the plots to examine how
the optimal lockdown (i.e. utilization rate) and output chosen by the planner differ from the DCE.
For the NL (OL) case, if θ = 0 (θ = 0.0918) the corresponding DCE values of m are socially optimal,
because at those θ values the SPE yields the same utilization and non-health GDP, since the SPE
curve and the corresponding DCE line intersect. The DCE utilization and nonhealth output remain
the same at their corresponding NL and OL levels as θ varies, but they change for the SPE. The
concave SPE curves show that the utilization externality causes the planner to select an increasingly
larger optimal lockdown with a larger associated output drop as θ rises by a fixed amount. For
instance, if the “true” value of θ were 0.075, the optimal lockdown reduces utilization from 100 to 90
percent and non-health GDP falls 5.8 percent. These are the socially optimal choices for which the
government balances optimally the output-pandemia tradeoff.

                                                                           35
   The Figure also shows that the observed lockdown can be excessive if θ is slightly lower than
0.0918 (i.e. if the government imposed the observed lockdown thinking that it would be optimal
based on assuming that θ = 0.0918 but in fact the “true” θ is lower). For instance, if θ = 0.075,
the correct optimal lockdown would set utilization 5 percentage points higher than the DCE with
the observed lockdown (0.9 v. 0.848), which yields a non-health GDP drop 3 percentage points
smaller (−5.8 v. −8.8 percent). The values of h̄ differ by six percentage points, 56.4 percent with the
observed lockdown v. 50.2 percent for the correct optimal lockdown. Hence, the model predicts that,
because of the concavity of the optimal lockdown, small errors overestimating the elasticity of the
subsistence level of health to the utilization rate during a pandemia cause large errors in the severity
of lockdowns and their associated recessions, relative to what is socially optimal. On the other hand,
the optimal lockdown is unlikely to exceed the correct observed lockdown by much, because in this
case the value of θ that makes the observed lockdown optimal is close to the corresponding feasibility
upper bound θ̃. If the correct θ were closer to this θ̃, utilization and output would drop only slighltly
more than under the DCE with the observed lockdown.
   Figure 5 shows how the percent increase in ph during a pandemia varies with θ in the SPE and
in the DCE cases for no lockdown and observed lockdown. The planner chooses higher prices for
θ values that would make the observed lockdown excessive, and lower prices when the opposite
occurs. In contrast, the SPE price hikes always exceed those for the no-lockdown DCE case, because
in this case the planner always finds it optimal to reduce utilization below its DCE level. The price
hikes are very sizable, unless we consider θ values that would result in negligible drops in utilization
and output. For θ > 0.05, the optimal policy yields price hikes of at least 45 percent and as much as
105 percent. Price hikes in the no-lockdown DCE case would be uniformly higher. In the observed-
lockdown DCE they would be in the 35 to 125 percent range. Hence, the model predicts large relative
price movements during pandemias.


                                     Figure 5: Price Increases in Pandemia
                           140



                           120



                           100



                           80



                           60



                           40



                           20



                             0



                           -20
                                 0   0.01   0.02   0.03   0.04    0.05   0.06   0.07   0.08   0.09




                                                                 36
        The left panel of Figure 6 shows optimal transfers and the social welfare gain of the optimal
policy (assuming a 4-quarter pandemia) as θ varies, comparing the SPE relative to the observed-
lockdown DCE. Transfers increase monotonically because, in line with the findings for prices, the
larger price increases cause larger regressive redistribution as the value of the endowment of health
goods and services owned by type-1 agents rises, and as their profits from non-health goods pro-
duction increase too. The welfare gains follow an increasing, convex shape that diverges to infinity
as θ reaches the upper bound at which type-2 agents approach the subsistence level of health con-
sumption. The right panel of Figure 6 shows the fraction of the welfare gains due to the utilization
externality relative to the one due to redistribution. Interestingly, although the utilization externality
strengthens as θ rises, the redistribution gain is the one that becomes relatively more important. This
is again because type-2 agents move closer to their subsistence level of health consumption as θ rises
and as this happens they approach the Inada condition that makes the marginal utility of allocating
health consumption to them infinitely large. This Figure also indicates that redistribution is in gen-
eral more important for social welfare in the model: For low θ, the utilization externality accounts
for most of the welfare gains but these gains are small, whereas for high θ most of the welfare gains
are due to redistribution and the gains are large.

               Figure 6: Transfers & Welfare Gains: Pandemia with Observed Lockdown in DCE

                   Transfers and Welfare Gains                                                      Composition of Welfare Gains
  0.4                                                                        4           1


                                                                                        0.9
 0.35                                                                        3.5

                                                                                        0.8
  0.3                                                                        3
                                                                                        0.7

 0.25                                                                        2.5
                                                                                        0.6


  0.2                                                                        2          0.5


                                                                                        0.4
 0.15                                                                        1.5

                                                                                        0.3
  0.1                                                                        1
                                                                                        0.2

 0.05                                                                        0.5
                                                                                        0.1


   0                                                                         0           0
        0   0.01     0.02   0.03   0.04   0.05   0.06   0.07   0.08   0.09                    0   0.01   0.02   0.03   0.04   0.05   0.06   0.07   0.08   0.09




        The left panel of Figure 7 shows an important result regarding Pareto efficiency. The plot shows
how the lifetime utilities of type-1 and type-2 agents vary as the fraction of type-1 agents rises, keep-
ing social welfare weights fixed at the level such that the SPE supports the DCE without pandemia
and θ at the level that makes the observed lockdown socially optimal. The utility gains for the
observed-lockdown DCE with the calibrated value of γ1 = 0.2 reduces utility for type-1 agents and
increases it for type-2 agents. However, if γ1 is slightly higher and falls within the interval marked by
the shaded area in the Figure, both agents are better off with the optimal policy. Thus, as suggested

                                                                                   37
in the previous Section, given social welfare weights, the SPE can be Pareto efficient if γ1 is suffi-
ciently high so as to reduce the cost of redistribution for type-1 agents below the benefit of removing
the utilization externality.


              Figure 7: Utility Changes, Excess Consumption Ratios & Fraction of Type-1 Agents

              Lifetime Utility Changes                                             Excess Consumption Ratios

                                       Household Type 1
                                       Household Type 2              11.25
10
                                                                                                                  200




  0                                                                    10
                                                                                                                  175




-10                                                                   8.75
                                                                                                                  150



-20                                                                    7.5
                                                                                                                  125



-30                                                                   6.25
                                                                                                                  100



-40                                                                     5
        0.2        0.25      0.3        0.35              0.4                0.2        0.25     0.3     0.35   0.4




      Notes: Calculations are based on the observed lockdown scenario.


      The relevance of excess consumption inequality in the model is illustrated in the right panel
of Figure 7, which shows Ωsp , Ω⋆N P and Ω⋆P (right axis) as γ1 rises up to 0.4. The value of Ωsp
(which is roughly 11) is the value such that the SPE supports the DCE without pandemia. The
plot shows that, with the calibrated parameter values, the measure of inequality provided by the
ratio of excess consumptions (i.e. the ratio of marginal utilities) shows non-trivial inequality even
without a pandemia, but always significantly more when a pandemia hits. The values of Ω⋆P are
in the 80-225 range while Ω⋆N P is in the 6-11.5 range. Hence, the pandemia worsens inequality in
excess consumption significantly.
      Figure 8 shows the importance of agent heterogeneity (or income inequality as captured by the
value of γ1 ). We compare social welfare gains of the optimal policy for the observed lockdown case as
θ varies for the calibrated economy with γ1 = 0.2 and the comparable representative-agent economy
with γ1 = 1. In the latter, the welfare gains are only due to the removal of the utilization externality
and aggregate allocations are the same as in the DCE (relative to the DCE with two agents) and in
the SPE (relative to the SPE with two agents). Both welfare gains display the convex, asymptotic
behavior as θ reaches the upper bound at which agents hit the subsistence level of health goods.
This upper bound is much larger, however, in the representative-agent model that has no income
inequality (since γ1 = 1), because the health system saturates earlier when inequality is present. At
values of θ for which both models can be solved, the welfare gains of the optimal policy are negligible
for the representative-agent model. The utilization externality in this case would need to be driven

                                                                38
by much larger values of θ (above 0.14) in order to yield non-trivial welfare gains. At those values,
however, to model would predict much larger falls in output than what has been observed (since the
higher θ values would yield much larger utilization cuts). Hence, the model predicts that inequality
plays a key role in tempering the size of the optimal lockdowns, and this is due to the adverse effects
they have in the distribution of excess consumption across agents.


                   Figure 8: Welfare Gains - Representative v. Heterogeneous Agents
                              2.5




                               2




                              1.5




                               1




                              0.5




                               0
                                    0   0.025   0.05   0.075    0.1   0.125   0.15   0.175




Notes: Calculations are based on the observed lockdown scenario.


5 Conclusions
This paper proposed a model of the macroeconomic effects of pandemias in which the saturation of
the health system is the key driving force. A cross-country empirical analysis shows that proxies for
healtcare system saturation and the stringency of lockdowns are significant determinants of differ-
ences in the severity of the recessions caused by COVID-19, even after controlling for the effects of
COVID infection and mortality rates.
    Healthcare saturation is modeled by introducing Stone-Geary preferences with a jump in the
subsistence level of health goods and services during pandemias that is negatively related to the
utilization rate. The model generates an output-pandemia tradeoff because firms do not internalize
that reducing utilization during a pandemia moves the healthcare system away from its saturation
point. Inequality matters because the pandemia moves wage-earners closer to the subsistence level
of health than capitalists. Hence, the optimal policy includes a lockdown and transfer payments to
wage earners.
    A quantitative exercise calibrated to U.S. data illustrates the potential relevance of the mechanism
driving the model and the hurdles facing the design of optimal lockdown and transfer policies to
deal with pandemias. Social welfare gains of the optimal mix of lockdown and transfers are large,
but small miscalculations in the elasticity of the subsistence level of health to changes in utilization


                                                           39
result in large errors in the design of lockdowns. During pandemias, the relative price of health
goods rises sharply and both income and consumption inequality worsen significantly. As a result,
optimal transfers are large and contribute a sizable fraction of the welfare gains of the optimal policy.
   This study is a first step in a research agenda exploring the saturation of the healthcare system as
the engine of macroeconomic models of pandemias. Further research is needed to examine the im-
plications of this mechanism in models with dynamic and cross-country propagation mechanisms,
particularly models with capital accumulation and financial frictions, and to study the interaction of
optimal lockdown and transfer policies with optimal taxation and public debt sustainability.




                                                   40
References
Acemoglu, D., Chernozhukov, V., Werning, I., and Whinston, M. D. (2020). ‘A Multi-Risk SIR Model
  with Optimally Targeted Lockdown’. NBER Working Paper No 27102.

Ajao, A., Nystrom, S., Koonin, L., Patel, A., Howell, D., Baccam, P., Lant, T., Malatino, E., Chamberlin,
  M., and Meltzer, M. (2015). ‘Assessing the Capacity of the Healthcare System to Use Additional
  Mechanical Ventilators During a Large-scale Public Health Emergency’. Disaster Medicine and Pub-
  lic Health Preparedness, vol. 9, no. 6, 634–641.

Alvarez, F. E., Argente, D., and Lippi, F. (2020). ‘A Simple Planning Problem for COVID-19 Lock-
  down’. NBER Working Paper No 26981.

Arellano, C., Bai, Y., and Mihalache, G. P. (2020). ‘Deadly Debt Crises: COVID-19 in Emerging
  Markets’. NBER Working Paper No 27275.

Atkeson, A. (2020). ‘What Will Be the Economic Impact of COVID-19 in the US? Rough Estimates
  of Disease Scenarios’. NBER Working Paper No 26867.

Azzimonti, M., Fogli, A., Perri, F., and Ponder, M. (2020). ‘Pandemic Control in ECON-EPI Net-
  works’. NBER Working Paper No 27741.

Baqaee, D., Farhi, E., Mina, M., and Stock, J. (2020). ‘Reopening Scenarios’. NBER Working Paper
  No 27244.

Bloom, D. E., Kuhn, M., and Prettner, K. (2020). ‘Modern Infectious Diseases: Macroeconomic Im-
  pacts and Policy Responses’. NBER Working Paper No 27757.

Bodenstein, M., Corsetti, G., and Guerrieri, L. (2020). ‘Social Distancing and Supply Disruptions in
  a Pandemic’. Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-031.

Britton, T. (2010). ‘Stochastic Epidemic Models: A Survey’. Mathematical Biosciences, vol. 225, 24–35.

Cakmakli, C., Demiralp, S., Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Yesiltas, S., and Yildirim, M. A. (2020). ‘COVID-19
  and Emerging Markets: An Epidemiological Model with International Production Networks and
  Capital Flows’. NBER Working Paper No 27191.

Céspedes, L. F., Chang, R., and Velasco, A. (2020). ‘Macroeconomic Policy Responses to a Pandemic’.
  Working Paper.

Chetty, R., Friedman, J. N., Hendren, N., Stepner, M., and Team, T. O. I. (2020). ‘How Did COVID-19
  and Stabilization Policies Affect Spending and Employment? A New Real-Time Economic Tracker
  Based on Private Sector Data’. NBER Working Paper No 27431.

D’Erasmo, P., Mendoza, E., and Zhang, J. (2016). ‘What is a Sustainable Public Debt?’ Handbook of
  Macroeconomics, vol. 2, 2493–2597.


                                                     41
Eichenbaum, M. S., Rebelo, S., and Trabandt, M. (2020). ‘The Macroeconomics of Epidemics’. NBER
  Working Paper No 26882.

Elenev, V., Landvoigt, T., and Van Nieuwerburgh, S. (2020). ‘Can the Covid Bailouts Save the Econ-
  omy?’ NBER Working Paper No 27207.

Faria e Castro, M. (2020). ‘Fiscal Policy during a Pandemic’. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
  Working Paper No 2020-006E.

Favero, C. A., Ichino, A., and Rustichini, A. (2020). ‘Restarting the Economy While Saving Lives’.
  CEPR Discussion Paper No 14664.

Fornaro, L. and Wolf, M. (2020). ‘Covid-19 Coronavirus and Macroeconomic Policy’. CEPR Technical
  Report.

Galasso, V. (2020). ‘Covid: Not a Great Equaliser’. Covid Economics, vol. 19, 241–255.

Glover, A., Heathcote, J., Krueger, D., and Ríos-Rull, J. (2020). ‘Health versus Wealth: On the Distri-
  butional Effects of Controlling a Pandemic’. NBER Working Paper No 27046.

Gourinchas, P.-O., Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Penciakova, V., and Sander, N. (2020). ‘COVID-19 and SME
  Failures’. NBER Working Paper No 27877.

Guerrieri, V., Lorenzoni, G., Straub, L., and Werning, I. (2020). ‘Macroeconomic Implications of
  COVID-19: Can Negative Supply Shocks Cause Demand Shortages?’ NBER Working Paper No
  26918.

Halpern, N. A. and Tan, K. (2020). ‘United States Resource Availability for COVID-19’. Society of
  Critical Care Medicine Report.

Hur, S. (2020). ‘The Distributional Effects of COVID-19 and Optimal Mitigation Policies’. Federal
  Reserve Bank of Dallas Working Paper.

Jones, C. J., Philippon, T., and Venkateswaran, V. (2020). ‘Optimal Mitigation Policies in a Pandemic:
  Social Distancing and Working from Home’. NBER Working Paper No 26984.

Kaplan, G., Moll, B., and Violante, G. (2020). ‘The Great Lockdown and the Big Stimulus: Tracing
  the Pandemic Possibility Frontier for the U.S.’ NBER Working Paper No 27794.

Krueger, D., Uhlig, H., and Xie, T. (2020). ‘Macroeconomic Dynamics and Reallocation in an Epi-
  demic’. NBER Working Paper No 27047.

Leiserson, G., McGrew, W., and Kopparam, R. (2019). ‘The Distribution of Wealth in the United
  States and Implications for a Net Worth Tax’. Washington Center for Equitable Growth.

Li, R., Rivers, C., Tan, Q., Murray, M., Toner, E., and Lipsitch, M. (2020). ‘Estimated Demand for US
  Hospital Inpatient and Intensive Care Unit Beds for Patients With COVID-19 Based on Compar-
  isons With Wuhan and Guangzhou, China’. JAMA Network Open, vol. 3, no. 5.

                                                  42
Mendoza, E., Tesar, L., and Zhang, J. (2014). ‘Saving Europe?: The Unpleasant Arithmetic of Fiscal
  Austerity in Integrated Economies’. NBER Working Paper No 20200.

Mongey, S., Pilossoph, L., and Weinberg, A. (2020). ‘Which Workers Bear the Burden of Social
  Distancing Policies?’ NBER Working Paper No 27085.

Palomino, J., Rodríguez, J., and Sebastian, R. (2020). ‘Wage inequality and poverty effects of lock-
  down and social distancing in Europe’. European Economic Review, vol. 129, 103564.

Rampini, A. (2020). ‘Sequential Lifting of COVID-19 Interventions with Population Heterogeneity’.
  NBER Working Paper No 27063.




                                                43
