                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                EARLY CAREER, LIFE-CYCLE CHOICES, AND GENDER

                                         Itzik Fadlon
                                   Frederik Plesner Lyngse
                                    Torben Heien Nielsen

                                     Working Paper 28245
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28245


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2020




We thank Julie Cullen, Gordon Dahl, Karthik Muralidharan, Tom Vogl, and seminar participants
at UCSD, University of Copenhagen, Berlin Applied Micro Seminar, and the NBER Summer
Institute Gender in the Economy meeting for helpful comments and discussions. We thank the
Danish Health Authority, the Regional Councils for Physicians' Post-Graduate Education, and
Danish Telemedicine A/S for data access and helpful institutional knowledge. Fadlon: University
of California, San Diego, Department of Economics, and NBER, fadlon@ucsd.edu; Lyngse:
University of Copenhagen, Department of Economics, and Center for Economic Behavior and
Inequality (CEBI), fpl@econ.ku.dk; Nielsen: University of Copenhagen, Department of
Economics, and CEBI, thn@econ.ku.dk. We gratefully acknowledge funding from the Danish
Independent Research Fund (grant no. 9061-00035B). The activities of CEBI are financed by the
Danish National Research Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Itzik Fadlon, Frederik Plesner Lyngse, and Torben Heien Nielsen. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Early Career, Life-Cycle Choices, and Gender
Itzik Fadlon, Frederik Plesner Lyngse, and Torben Heien Nielsen
NBER Working Paper No. 28245
December 2020
JEL No. H0,I11,I23,J01,J13,J16,J24,R23

                                          ABSTRACT

Do early labor market experiences determine longer-run life and career outcomes, and do they
operate differentially for males and females? We study this question in the context of the
physician labor market by exploiting a randomized lottery that determines the sorting of Danish
physicians into internships, where students with bad lottery numbers end up assigned to less
desirable local labor markets and entry-level jobs. Using administrative data that span up to ten
years after physicians' graduations, we study key decisions that determine their longer-run life
trajectories. We find causal effects of early-career labor market sorting on a range of life-cycle
outcomes that cascade from longer-run labor market sorting, to human capital accumulation, to
occupational choice, and even to fertility. Notably, we find that the persistent longer-run effects
are entirely driven by females, whereas males experience only temporary career disruptions from
unfavorable early-stage sorting. The gender divergence is unlikely to be explained by preferences
over entry-level markets, but differential family obligations, attitude toward competition, and
mentorship appear to play operative roles. Our findings have implications for policies aiming at
outcome-based gender equality, as they reveal how persistent gaps can arise even in an
institutionally gender-neutral setting with early-stage equality of opportunity.

Itzik Fadlon                                     Torben Heien Nielsen
Department of Economics                          University of Copenhagen
University of California, San Diego              Department of Economics
9500 Gilman Drive, #0508                         Øster Farimagsgade 5, Building 35
La Jolla, CA 92093                               DK-1353 Copenhagen K
and NBER                                         Denmark
fadlon@ucsd.edu                                  and CEBI
                                                 torben.heien.nielsen@econ.ku.dk
Frederik Plesner Lyngse
Department of Economics and CEBI
University of Copenhagen
Øster Farimagsgade 5, Building 35
DK-1353 Copenhagen K
Denmark
fpl@econ.ku.dk
1. Introduction
        A long tradition of economic research has studied and documented gender inequality in economic
life-cycle outcomes, including human capital accumulation, field-of-study, occupational choice, and career
trajectories. Recent empirical work has made great strides in understanding the underlying channels of these
inequalities and in identifying causal routes by which gender disparities evolve and perpetuate. Labor
economics extensively highlights the early career stage as an important potential determinant of life-cycle
trajectories. Hence, early career experiences and choices could play a role in initiating longer-run gender
inequalities.
        Our research question is therefore: do early labor market experiences causally determine longer-
run life and career choices, and do they operate differentially for males and females? Answering this
question is challenging for two main reasons. First, it requires a clean source of exogenous variation in
individuals' early-career choices. Second, it requires data on the evolution of a range of life-cycle outcomes
and choices.
        In this paper, we address this question by studying the labor market for physicians, which is an
important market for highly-specialized labor in modern developed economies that has served as a
"laboratory" for a range of economic questions.1 Specifically, we study the allocation of Danish physicians
to entry-level labor market positions, which offers several advantages. First, medical internship
placements--i.e., physicians' first jobs--are governed by a randomized lottery that provides a clean source
of variation in entry-level labor market sorting.2 As we establish in our first-stage analysis, this generates
large exogenous variation, so that graduating physicians with the worst lottery numbers are much more
likely to sort into less desirable local labor markets and their respective positions which offer inferior
training and future career opportunities (e.g., in terms of fewer high-seniority colleagues and weaker
professional networks, less affiliation with teaching hospitals, and higher likelihood of locating in rural
communities). Second, we exploit novel administrative data that allow us to track individuals for ten years
after the draw as they make further human capital, labor market, and family decisions that determine their
longer-run trajectories. Third, we can also explore the role of mechanisms that have been hypothesized in
the literature, including preferences, family obligations, as well as mentorship and role models.
        The summary of our findings is as follows. Early-career labor market sorting has far-reaching
causal effects on life-cycle outcomes. While males and females with unfavorable lottery numbers are
subject to similar quasi-experimental treatment, the persistent longer-run effects on all margins are entirely
driven by females, whereas lottery-unlucky males experience only transitory career disruptions. We show


1
  This market has been studied since the work of Friedman and Kuznets (1954) and Arrow (1963), and recent work in
this setting that is particular to gender includes Sarsons (2019), Wasserman (2019), and Zeltzer (2020).
2
  The internships typically last 1-1.5 years.

                                                       1
that this gender divergence cannot be explained by preferences over entry-level labor markets, and we find
supportive evidence for family obligations, attitudes toward competition, and same-gender role models as
potential operative channels. Overall, the findings reveal that persistent gender inequality can still appear
even in a context of a highly-skilled merit-based profession with institutional early-stage equality of
opportunity.
        In the main part of our analysis, we investigate three categories of outcomes: geographical location
and local labor markets, human capital investment and occupational choice, and family formation and
fertility. We define our treatment group to be physicians with the worst lottery numbers and the control
group to be physicians with the best lottery numbers,3 and we study the long run effects of the lottery on
these outcomes based on this simple design. First, motivated by the literature on the importance of location,
we study the household's longer-run decision of geographical sorting. This choice affects the local labor
market in which the household operates and the available career opportunities it offers, as well as the
amenities available to the household. We find that the lottery has a significant persistent effect on this
choice, so that by the end of our analysis window individuals in the treatment group are 6.5 percentage
points (pp) more likely to sort into the less desirable local labor markets (on a counterfactual of 16 pp). We
then show a clear gender asymmetry: although males and females experience similar geographical sorting
effects in the internship period due to the lottery, women bear the entire long-run effect with a 9.8 pp
increase in the propensity to locate in undesirable local labor markets (on a counterfactual of 14 pp). Among
other dimensions, the less desirable labor markets women sort into are more likely rural, are less competitive
as measured by the concentration of peer physicians, and are characterized by lower levels of skill and
prestige as measured by the concentration of high-skilled senior colleagues.
        Second, we move on to studying further educational investments and occupational choices. The
further human capital investment that is most relevant in our setting is obtaining a medical PhD. This choice
represents an occupational choice of a research career and provides access to economically more favorable
and prestigious positions, such as in university hospitals. While males do not have any adverse effects from
the treatment, treated females are 25 percent less likely to make this investment (5.4 pp decrease on a
counterfactual of 21.3 pp). This impact alone can account for one-fifth of the observed gender-biased
sorting into scientific careers (as opposed to clinical positions) among physicians in our sample.
Furthermore, studying sorting into gender-represented occupations, we find no effect on men, but that
treated women are more likely to sort into female-represented medical specialties, which we show to be
economically less favorable.


3
 These correspond to physicians with lottery percentile ranks at the top 30% (worst numbers) and at the bottom 30%
(best numbers) in our main estimations, with appropriate robustness analysis across the percentile range and
estimations with linear specifications in lottery percentile ranks in the appendix.

                                                        2
        Third, as the post-graduation stage represents a formative period regarding family choices, we
analyze how early careers can affect family formation and fertility. We split the sample based on
individuals' partnership status at the baseline pre-period--i.e., individuals who were partnered and
individuals who were not--since the two groups enter this stage with a different set of operative family-
related margins. Interestingly, among the sample of unpartnered graduates we find long-run effects on
fertility. With no effects on men, women in the treatment group exhibit an increase of 11.5 percent in their
number of children. This effect stems from some increased probability of becoming a parent, but it is driven
particularly by a higher fertility rate with an increase of 7.1 pp in the propensity to have more than one child
on a counterfactual 45.2 pp. The lack of such an impact on partnered graduates suggests this effect may be
less likely driven by an underlying shift in women's family preferences but could rather relate to differential
matching in the marriage market among unpartnered graduates, for which we find some support.
        In the final part of the paper, we investigate and discuss potential mechanisms for the gender
divergence. First, we find that the priority rankings over entry-level markets are similar across males and
females. Hence, potential differential preferences, about which there is a heated discussion in the literature
as a source of gender inequality, are unlikely to provide an explanation in our setting. Second, consistent
with the role of mentors and their gender, we find substantial differential exposure to same-gender role
models (as proxied by high-seniority colleagues) across male and female graduates during the internship.
Moreover, we show using internship exit surveys, that the quasi-experiment leads to a large decrease in the
probability of being assigned a female internship mentor, and that only treated female interns rank their
internship's mentorship experience and quality lower. Next, we speak to recent work which has shown that
women are more likely to shy away from competition and to stop competing when they face adverse
experiences. Consistent with this work, we find that treated females are more likely to sort in the long run
into less competitive labor markets as measured by the concentration of physician peers. Finally, our
fertility results relate to the notion that family responsibilities could hinder females' advancement in the
labor market. They suggest that women may crowd out long-run career goals by becoming more oriented
toward the family when faced with the adverse early career event.
        Our paper relates and contributes to two strands of the literature. First, classic labor economics
research has underscored the importance of early career stages in shaping long-run life-cycle trajectories.
This work has considered the role of search and job mobility, human capital investments, on-the-job
learning and skill accumulation, and early job and career choices (see reviews in Weiss 1986 and Rubinstein
and Weiss 2006). Within this literature, a related series of papers studies the effects of entering the labor




                                                       3
market in a recession (see von Wachter 2020 for a review).4 We contribute to this broad line of research by
providing a novel lottery-based source of idiosyncratic variation for identifying effects of early careers. The
margin that we study is a pervasive characteristic of early careers as young adults sort into entry-level jobs
across different local labor markets. We further provide evidence on the far-reaching impacts of early
careers as they cascade to a range of life-cycle outcomes, from long-run geographical sorting, to human
capital investments, to occupational choice, and to fertility.
         Our second contribution is to the long-standing work on gender inequality in economic outcomes
and their underlying sources (see reviews and discussions in, e.g., Bertrand 2011, Goldin 2014,
Jayachandran 2015, Olivetti and Petrongolo 2016, Blau and Kahn 2017, Lundberg and Stearns 2019).5 We
contribute to this literature by revealing a new important route which is inherent in the natural course of the
life-cycle--the early career--that initiates and perpetuates gender inequality and norms in long-run
economic outcomes. We are also able to offer insights into the operative mechanisms that could drive the
findings of gender asymmetry in the effects of early careers. Lastly, as our analysis reveals that significant
gender inequality can emerge in a lottery-based setup with embedded early-stage equality of opportunity,
it has important policy implications. Specifically, policies for outcome-based gender equality cannot merely
rely on leveling the starting playing field, but they should also target the way in which opportunities and
choices evolve in practice over the formative stage of the early career. Our analysis of mechanisms offers
some initial guidance in that direction.
         The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the institutional setting. Section 3
describes the data sources we use. In section 4, we set out our empirical strategy. Section 5 provides the
evidence on the causal effects of early careers. We begin by describing the nature of the quasi-experimental
treatment, and we then provide our main analysis of the long-run effects of early careers on life-cycle
choices. Section 6 explores the anatomy of the identified treatment effects. Section 7 concludes.




4
  Among others, these important papers include Devereux (2002), Oyer (2006), Raaum and Røed (2006), Kahn (2010),
Oreopoulos et al. (2012), Currie and Schwandt (2014), Altonji et al. (2016), Liu et al. (2016), Schwandt and von
Wachter (2019, 2020), and Rothstein (2020).
5
  Recent important studies in this active research on underlying channels investigate the role of job search and labor
market preferences, social interactions, personality characteristics, and family obligations. These include, among
others, Gneezy et al. (2003), Niederle and Vesterlund (2007, 2011), Bertrand et al. (2010), Buser et al. (2014), Azmat
et al. (2016), Card et al. (2016), Field et al. (2016), Azmat and Ferrer (2017), Bursztyn et al. (2017), Caliendo et al.
(2017), Buser and Yuan (2019), Cai et al. (2019), Cullen and Perez-Truglia (2019), Exley and Kessler (2019), Iriberri
and Rey-Biel (2019), Kleven et al. (2019a), Kleven et al. (2019b), Cheng (2020), Porter and Serra (2020), Ginther et
al. (2020), Le Barbanchon et al. (forthcoming).

                                                           4
2. Institutional Setting and Nature of Assignment to Entry-Level Jobs
       2.1. Physician Training
           We begin this section by describing Danish physicians' post-graduate professional experience and
training, which captures the early stages of their career. Figure 1 summarizes the timeline of this process
which is broadly typical of other OECD countries.6 Following medical school, graduating physicians begin
the period of their residency. The residency represents a period of on-the-job training, during which
physicians make pivotal human capital investments and occupational choices that determine their career
paths. The initial stage of residency is the internship, which typically lasts 1-1.5 years. The internship
represents the entry-level labor market for physicians, and it determines the initial exposure to practical
knowledge and career opportunities.
           Completion of the internship allows physicians to practice medicine independently, that is, without
the supervision of a senior physician. Following the internship, physicians engage in a process of human
capital investment and job search that will determine their later positions. In this stage, they apply for
different introductory positions, which typically last one year each. They must complete at least one such
position within their future specialty of interest. This would then qualify them to apply for a main position
within a specific choice of medical specialty, representing the last stage of the residency whereby the choice
of specialty is an absorbing state in relation to physicians' future careers. Main positions can be highly
competitive and hence physicians' success in this stage is strongly affected by investments and training up
to that point. Specifically, practical experience from relevant introductory positions and further academic
education by obtaining a PhD degree are key determinants. In the longer run, a PhD degree will further
qualify a physician for a broader set of competitive positions, such as positions at university hospitals and
prestigious positions of chief specialists. Upon the completion of the residency, physicians receive their
specialty license and continue on to their independent careers.

       2.2. Internship: Source of Variation
           The internship following medical school provides our source of variation in initial job market
sorting of physicians. The program matches physicians with internship positions which are supervised by
assigned mentors. The internship positions aim to provide hands-on work experience and have the
physicians accumulate practical knowledge and skills through learning-by-doing. Specifically, interns
accumulate professional experiences through treating patients, interacting with patients' relatives, and
working with a myriad of healthcare professionals. The internship consists of bundles of half-year primary
positions at hospitals followed by secondary positions at primary-care practices. By construction,


6
    For the institutional structure in EU countries, see, e.g., EU Council Directive 75/363/EEC.

                                                            5
internships are tied to particular geographical regions and their associated hospitals. Institutionally, the
healthcare system in Denmark is broadly organized such that Danish counties (with a total of 16) represent
the local healthcare market (which bears similarities to Hospital Referral Regions [HRRs] in the U.S.). We
note that spatial variation in entry jobs for physicians is typical of post-graduate medical training positions
in other developed countries, such as the U.S., and is a main dimension by which the training programs are
categorized (see, e.g., Brotherton and Etzel 2018).
        Internship positions are periodically created by the Danish National Health Authority (NHA) to
accommodate all graduating students and with respect to national demand for healthcare professionals.
Specifically, prior to every graduation round, the NHA requires medical schools to report how many
students will graduate in that round. The NHA then guarantees to create internship positions nationally at
least at that amount, where the positions are designed to distribute geographically across the local labor
markets based on their size. That is, in each local labor market the NHA creates a number of positions that
equals the total national amount times the relative population weight of that county out of the overall Danish
population.
        The key institutional feature we exploit for identification is that a random lottery governs the
placement to internships. For every graduating cohort, a public notary performs a lottery that allocates a
random number to each graduating student, which sets the ordering of the matching process for that cohort.
To capture individuals' relative position in the ordering relevant to them, we rank individuals' lottery
numbers relative to the lottery numbers of their entire cohort. We assign to individuals their percentile
within this distribution, and we refer to it as the "lottery rank" in the analysis that follows.7
        The exact implementation of assignment to internships based on the lottery has somewhat changed
over the years, but it has been continuously designed so that a better lottery number (of a lower rank)
guarantees a student a more favorable position in the allocation process. We leverage this simple yet
powerful feature and pool all data periods to maximize precision. Prior to 2008 the placement process has
been administered such that in its primary stage the NHA would allocate students to counties based on the
order of their lottery numbers. The graduating students would compile their list of priority over all the
Danish counties, and they would then be matched with their highest-ranked county among counties with
remaining open positions when their time in line arrives. Later, each county would match its assigned
students with the internship positions (across the county's hospitals) that were created in that round, based
on student choices in the order of their initial lottery number. In 2008 when the system was digitized, the
process simplified into a single combined step, where interns would make a county-hospital choice in the


7
  This normalization permits a comparison between individuals with bad lottery numbers and individuals with good
lottery numbers across cohorts. In Appendix Table C.4 we provide estimations for our main outcomes that include
graduation round fixed effects for robustness.

                                                        6
order of their lottery number from the positions available nationally. Across years, each stage of the
allocation process has followed a serial dictatorship procedure. In Appendix A we discuss some potential
choice and prioritization considerations that could result from the incentives embedded in these processes
and we investigate how they play out in practice. While the procedural change could have potentially led
to differential incentives and choices, in practice the placement system has maintained similar
prioritizations and allocation patterns as we now describe which is driven by students' reluctance to intern
in remote rural areas.
        Nature of Placement to Internships. Important to our purposes, the motivation underlying the
randomization-based placement process (see, e.g., Danish Ministry of Health 1989) has been to distribute
physicians more evenly across the different parts of the country, specifically to less desirable remote rural
labor markets (which is a broader concern and a common policy target across OECD countries; see, OECD
2012, Ono et al. 2014). Indeed, throughout the years geographical dispersion and relocation of graduating
students have been a key dimension of variation the lottery has created across the lottery rank distribution.
To see this, we first calculate for each student the distance between their municipality of residence at the
time of the lottery and their municipality of the internship, which captures their "relocation distance." To
put it in context, we note that graduating students reside near the major cities in which medical schools are
located in Denmark (Aarhus, Copenhagen, and Odense). Hence, short relocation distances broadly imply
staying in the vicinity of the urban market where the student was educated, and long relocation distances
broadly imply placing in internships that are located in remote rural areas.
        Panel A of Figure 2 plots a graduating student's relocation distance against the student's lottery
rank (where a cohort split around 2008 is provided in Appendix Figure A.2). There are two main patterns
that will help guide our analysis. First, there is a clear gradient such that the relocation distance of those
with better lottery numbers (lower ranks) is significantly shorter than for those with worse lottery numbers
(higher ranks). This mirrors the underlying motivation for the lottery-based system, as it reveals interns'
distaste for locating in remote labor markets when they get to choose. This will guide our first-stage
analysis, where we will begin by analyzing how the lottery affects interns' propensity to be geographically
placed in less versus more desirable local labor markets and the entry-job related implications of that
placement. As we will show, a local labor market is an informative aggregate for characterizing aspects of
the internship bundle.
        The persistence of location-based preferences over the years, as they are revealed through choices,
can be also shown in the following way. Let us characterize the desirability of a labor market (i.e., a county)
based on the average lottery rank of the interns who choose to sort into it. This captures the aggregate
regularities that a market is revealed as more desirable if it is chosen by individuals with better lottery
numbers (lower ranks), and a market is revealed as less desirable if it is chosen by individuals with worse

                                                      7
lottery numbers (higher ranks). We construct these rankings for both earlier and later cohorts and compare
across them in Appendix Figure A.3. Locations are effectively valued over the years to a similar extent. We
use this measure of market desirability throughout our analysis that follows.
        The second pattern that arises in Panel A of Figure 2 across years is the nature of the distance
gradient in lottery rank. Specifically, it is non-linear with an increasing slope, such that there is a flat region
in the vicinity of the best lottery ranks (lower numbers, e.g., those at the bottom 30%) and a sharp slope at
the vicinity of the worst lottery numbers (higher numbers, e.g., those at the top 30%). This reflects the
nature of the assignment process, showing how the lottery rank has no effect on relocation among those
who choose first and has a growing effect as those who choose later run out of preferable positions.
        An additional way to see this feature more directly takes advantage of the rankings of local labor
markets that had been solicited among the earlier cohorts as part of the allocation process. In Panel B of
Figure 2 we plot individuals' pre-placement ranking of the local labor market they were assigned to in
practice (where 1 is highest priority) against the percentile rank of their lottery number draw (within their
graduating cohort). Reflecting the patterns we just saw above, the figure first shows that students with the
best lottery ranks are effectively unrestricted in their choices. As they are the ones who make the choices
first, their highest priority options are still available, and they therefore end up being assigned to their first
choices. Then, as the lottery rank increases (that is, worse draws), the available choices increasingly narrow.
As a result, those with the worst lottery numbers are restricted in their early career choices, and they are
therefore assigned to markets that are low on their priority list. The combined patterns reflected in panels
A and B of Figure 2 will therefore guide our choice of research design which we describe in Section 4.
Namely, those at the lower range of lottery ranks are essentially unaffected and can serve as a natural control
group, and those at the highest range of lottery ranks are the most affected and can serve as a natural
treatment group.


3. Data
        We combine several administrative data sources, linked by person-level identifiers, with
information on all medical doctors in Denmark. We use the Educational Registers starting in 1980 to
identify all students ever enrolled in a Danish medical school through 2017. The Danish Authorization
Register provides us with information on all registrations of medical licenses and specializations through
2017. Our analysis population for the quasi-experiment is identified using information starting from 2001
on internship lotteries which we obtained from the Danish National Health Authority.
        In addition, we use the economic administrative registers from Statistics Denmark (up to 2019).
These data include administrative information on geographical location (to 2019), employers (to 2017),
income (to 2017), demographics (to 2019), and education (to 2017). Notably, we are also able to link

                                                        8
households using spousal and parent-child linkages (up to 2019). Together these data encompass a range
of life-cycle choices--including career paths, occupational choice, family formation, and geographical
location--which allows us to conduct a comprehensive analysis of the broad potential causal effects of
early careers.
        We supplement the administrative data with physicians' exit surveys, which they fill out following
positions they have held. In these surveys, which are conducted by the Regional Councils for Physicians'
Post-Graduate Education, interning physicians rank their workplace in a series of questions that are then
clustered into topic-based categories.


4. Empirical Framework
        Verification of Lottery. As the basis for our empirical analysis, we begin by establishing the validity
of the lottery in terms of random assignment. In Appendix B, we run specifications that regress the
graduating physicians' lottery rank on baseline characteristics available in our data. These include gender,
age, an indicator for having a registered partner, number of children in the household, and high-school GPA
rank. Consistent with random assignment, we find that these regressions have no predictive power, whether
we test the significance of the coefficients individually or jointly. In the appendix we also run the
corresponding specifications separately for males and females, with similar conclusions.
        Research Design. To analyze how early career labor market sorting affects longer-run life-cycle
outcomes, we employ an economically straightforward design based on the randomized lottery where we
compare outcomes of a treatment group to outcomes of a control group. Specifically, we identify the
dynamic causal effects of the internship lottery using the following estimating equation:

                                  =   ×  +   ×  ×  +  .                                                    (1)
                                                      

In this specification,  is the outcome of interest for individual  at time ;  is year relative to lottery,
which runs from year 0 up to year 10;  is a vector of indicators of time relative to the lottery; and we
cluster standard errors at the household level. The variable  is an indicator for being in the treatment
group or in the control group.
        We define the treatment group to be individuals with the worst lottery ranks (i.e., above a certain
upper cutoff rank), and we define the control group to be individuals with the best lottery ranks (i.e., below
a certain lower cutoff rank). This is motivated by Figure 2 and it maximizes the differential treatment
intensity across the differentially affected experimental groups, as it compares individuals who are most
restricted in their choices to individuals who are least restricted in their choices. In constructing these
groups, we need to make a choice of upper and lower lottery rank thresholds which we do in the following


                                                      9
way. First, to keep the groups balanced with a similar size, we use symmetric thresholds from above and
below. Second, we pivot the analysis around the 30% most treated and least treated (i.e., with cutoff ranks
0.3 and 0.7 as illustrated by the vertical lines in Figure 2), and we vary this bandwidth within a wide range
of 20 percentage-point from 20%-40% (in analysis presented in Appendix C for the main results). This
choice trades off increased power from higher treatment intensity with decreased power from reducing
sample sizes, so we investigate a broad range. Our research design that compares outcomes of a treatment
group to outcomes of a control group provides a standard and intuitive empirical framework, with treatment
effect coefficients that are economically directly interpretable. Beyond that, it does not impose functional
form assumptions on the underlying relationship between outcomes and lottery ranks (specifically, it does
not use the common linear specification where linearity seems less appropriate given the patterns in Figure
2). Still, we additionally run the corresponding statistically straightforward specifications that are linear in
lottery rank (which capture average changes per percentile rank point; see Appendix C).
        Our parameters of interest are  from equation (1), which estimate the dynamic causal effects of
the lottery treatment over a course of ten years. They capture the difference at each period  following
graduation between doctors who are unlucky and doctors who are lucky in terms of the lottery draw. Given
our research design, the "treatment" is the adverse event of sorting into less desirable local labor markets
and the internships they offer, as we illustrate and discuss in our first-stage analysis that follows. The first-
stage effects for a particular outcome of interest (such as the internship's local labor market) are estimated
using  from equation (1) for the immediate periods ('s) following the lottery. The longer-run impacts of
the treatment on a given life-cycle outcome--which are the target of our study--are estimated using 
from equation (1) for the later periods. We summarize the average longer-run effects based on the later half
of our analysis horizon (periods 6-10) using the following standard estimating equation:
                                         =  +  ×  +  ,                                                       (2)
where  captures the average longer-run treatment effect.
        Analysis Sample. Appendix D describes our analysis sample and provides summary statistics for
our treatment and control groups. Overall, the two groups are comprised of 6,076 physicians. Their average
age at the time of the lottery is about 28.5. About half have a partner at the baseline, where the average
number of children is 0.26. About 60 percent are female, with 2,396 males and 3,680 females in our sample.
Summary statistics that split the sample by gender are provided in the table.




                                                       10
5. Evidence: Causal Effects of Early Careers
    5.1. First-Stage Effects at Internship Period
         As a starting point, we characterize the nature of the treatment by investigating the effects of the
lottery on the entry-level labor market positions doctors sort into. This treatment bundle includes aggregate
characteristics of the local labor market they are allocated to and characteristics of the specific internships
they are matched with. The first-stage analysis sets the basis for interpreting the long-run effects of the
lottery. For ease of discussion, this subsection provides a general description of the quasi-experimental
variation at the internship period among the overall sample.8
         Based on the patterns we have seen earlier, we begin with the investigation of geographical sorting
and we study the overall desirability of an intern's assigned local labor market. As discussed above, we
characterize the desirability of a local labor market based on the average lottery rank of the interns who
choose to sort into it. We use these rankings to partition the markets into two groups of more desirable local
labor markets and less desirable local labor markets.9 In column 1 of Table 1 we study the degree to which
the lottery affects the probability of interning in a less desirable market. It shows that receiving the worst
lottery ranks leads to a significant 18.4 percentage point (pp) increase in the probability of sorting into less
desirable local labor markets on a counterfactual baseline of 11.6 pp.
         This represents a central dimension of the quasi-experimental variation in terms of sorting into
local labor markets. The desirability of the labor market is a strong predictor of some entry job dimensions
that are important for early career training and opportunities.10 We proceed to successively investigate and
discuss the direct first-stage effects on characteristics which capture aspects of the quality of training, nature
of exposure to knowledge and experience, and future career opportunities individuals face during the
internship period. Such analysis at the individual level suitably accounts for the full variation created by
the quasi-experimental allocation both across markets and across jobs within markets.
         The first measure of high-quality training and favorable professional networks is based on the share
of high-seniority colleagues. For this purpose, we look at established physicians (those that are at least
fifteen years out of medical school) who hold a medical PhD and we calculate their share out of all
established physicians within the labor market. The logic behind this measure is that doctors who hold a
medical PhD tend to occupy the key positions in the field. Using this measure, we find in column 2 of Table

8
  Appendix Table E.1 reports splits by gender and shows that males and females are exposed to quasi-experimental
variation of similar extent.
9
   This market partition is similar if we split locations based on the average pre-placement rankings of local labor
markets using the information on students' solicited priority lists.
10
   Appendix Table E.2 illustrates this point by showing the degree to which the desirability of a local labor market is
correlated with internship-related characteristics. As a supplement, we also provide in Appendix Table I.1 descriptive
information from national statistics that compares less desirable and more desirable markets in terms of amenities and
features of the healthcare market.

                                                          11
1 that unlucky lottery numbers decrease the exposure to high-seniority physicians during the internship by
59 log points. Aside from quality of training, this difference additionally captures variation in the type of
role models young physicians are exposed to and mentored by in the internship setting.
         Another key measure that speaks directly to the quality of training, as well as future career
opportunities through exposure to practical knowledge and professional networks, is the extent of
attachment to university, or teaching, hospitals. Leading teaching hospitals, which are typically located in
local labor markets at the vicinity of larger urban areas, are well-known to be the institutions where skill-
intensive and highly-specialized procedures are performed, state-of-the-art technologies are first adopted,
and innovative medical research is conducted.11 By definition, these hospitals aim to educate and provide
the highest-quality training to new physicians. Hence, whether the internship takes place in such a hospital
captures an important dimension of physicians' early careers through on-the-job training. Moreover, as key
players in the medical field often work and mentor in these hospitals, it stands as a boost to the starting
physicians' exposure to networks and future career opportunities. Notably, we find in column 3 of Table 1
that the quasi-experiment leads to a large effect in this context: graduating physicians in the treatment group
are 40 pp less likely to intern in university hospitals.
         Finally, we investigate the degree to which the lottery affects the probability that a physician interns
in a rural versus an urban community. We follow the formal definitions by Statistics Denmark which are
based on classifications at the level of municipalities (which are sub-divisions of counties). The urban/rural
divide is frequently used in the discussion of localities more broadly and in the characterization of
healthcare markets and physicians' post-graduate training more specifically.12 We note that a locality is
61.5 pp more likely to be rural when it is located in a less desirable local labor market (as shown in Appendix
Table E.2). In column 4 of Table 1 we find that receiving the worst lottery numbers increases the probability
that the physician interns in a rural municipality by 8.8 pp (on a baseline of 5.4 pp).
         We conclude this subsection by supplementing our analysis based on administrative registers with
analysis that uses complementary data from physicians' exit surveys, which they fill out at the conclusion
of positions they have held. We use these self-evaluated scores to study the impact of the lottery on the
quality and nature of the entry-level job experience in categories that are relevant for our analysis. To



11
   Using our administrative patient registers, Appendix Table E.3 illustrates this point by showing how university
hospitals offer exposure to more specialties and types of procedures as well as to more advanced medical technologies
(based on common measures in the literature such as the prevalence MRIs, see, e.g., Bhattacharya et al. 2013).
12
   For example, this characterization of healthcare markets in the U.S. is structurally embedded in the operation of
Medicare and its pricing schemes (see, e.g., Sloan and Edmunds 2012). Additionally, geographic imbalances in the
form of physician degree of concentration in rural versus urban areas are a pervasive phenomenon across the developed
world, and countries have taken several policy routes that aim to address rural shortages (see Simoens and Hurst 2006,
OECD 2012, Ono et al. 2014). One example is Medicare's Health Professional Shortage Area (HPSA) Physician
Bonus Program in the United States.

                                                         12
provide additional interpretation to these estimates, we also report the coefficients relative to a one standard
deviation of a given score measure, which relates to the extent to which variation in evaluations could be
attributed to the lottery treatment.
        Table 2 summarizes this analysis. The table shows that in all categories, individuals with the worst
lottery ranks are assigned during the internship period with workplaces that are ranked meaningfully lower
as compared to individuals with the best lottery ranks. This includes the following categories: (1) overall
evaluation of professional training and educational development; (2) work climate, which covers
assessments related to the work environment and professionalism in peer interactions, the workplace's
openness to interns inquiring and asking questions, as well as collaborations and sense of community; and
(3) mentorship and advising, which covers evaluations regarding the construction of a training plan,
frequency of follow-ups, and ongoing provision of feedback and advising related to professional and career
development. We refer to splits by gender for the survey responses later, as they become relevant for the
investigation of potential mechanisms that could explain the longer-run results.


     5.2. Long-Run Effects on Life-Cycle Choices
        We now turn to our main analysis and investigate how the internship lottery affects life-cycle
choices up to ten years after the draw. We divide the longer-run analysis into three categories of household
decisions: (1) location and local labor markets; (2) human capital investment and occupational choice; and
(3) household formation and fertility.
        5.2.1. Geographical Sorting
        We begin by studying the household's longer-run decision of geographical sorting. The choice of
geographical location directly affects the local labor market in which the household operates, with its
associated career opportunities, and it also influences the amenities available to the family. Indeed,
geographical location has emerged as an important determinant of life-cycle outcomes, from education, to
economic well-being, to intergenerational mobility, to health.13 As in our setting in which location is
directly related to internship placements (which is typical of medical training jobs in other developed
countries such as the U.S.; see, e.g., Brotherton and Etzel 2018), studying this household outcome is
applicable more generally to natural settings where entry-level jobs geographically spread out.
        We extend our analysis of the probability of sorting into differentially desirable local labor markets
to our entire analysis window. Figure 3 illustrates the dynamic effects of the lottery. It plots the  estimates
from equation (1) for periods 0 to 10, along with their 95-percent confidence intervals. The x-axis denotes

13
   See, for example, Chetty and Hendren (2018a,b) and Finkelstein et al. (2016) for the U.S. In our Danish setting
studies include, among others, Damm and Dustmann (2014), Kjærulff et al. (2015), Laird and Nielsen (2016), and
Eckert et al. (2019).

                                                       13
the year relative to the lottery, and the y-axis denotes the effect on this outcome. As illustrated in the figure,
recall that the early years capture the first-stage effect on the internship placement, and the later years
capture our main empirical target of the longer-run impact on households' decisions.
        Figure 3 first replicates our results from the previous subsection, showing how the internship lottery
leads to a large increase in the probability of interning in less desirable healthcare labor markets. This is
displayed by period 1 which is the period where the internship placement is in full effect. Notably, the
figure then reveals that the lottery has important lingering effects that persist in the long run throughout the
analysis window. Ten years after the lottery, individuals in the treatment group are 6.5 pp more likely to
sort into less desirable local labor markets relative to a counterfactual of 16 pp.
        Next, as we split the sample by gender, an important asymmetry unfolds. The figure reveals that
while both males and females have similar sorting patterns at the internship period, the long-run effect is
entirely driven by women. While males do not display effects in the long run, females display a 9.8 pp
increase in the propensity to sort into less desirable local labor markets (on a counterfactual of 14 pp).14
        We continue by some additional characterization of the labor markets physicians sort into in the
long run. As a measure that could capture prestige and skill concentration of a healthcare local labor market,
we look at the relative concentration of high-seniority colleagues. Specifically, we use our measure of the
market's share of certified physicians who hold a medical PhD, who, as we mentioned above, tend to hold
the high-ranked positions in the medical field. Based on equation (2), panel A of Table 3 shows a longer
run effect of 6.5 log points. With no detectable effect on men, there is an effect of 9.6 log points on the
local labor markets women sort to in the longer run.
        Another measure that we investigate, in panel B of Table 3, considers a locality's competitiveness
and desirability based on the relative concertation of physician peers. To narrow in on competition most
directly relevant to the locality in which a physician likely operates, we characterize peer concentration
within commuting zones. We define peers as doctors from an individual's own and adjacent cohorts, and
we normalize their count by the region's population. We find a long-run average effect of the lottery driven
by women, who operate in markets in which the concentration of peers is 6.3 log points lower.


        5.2.2. Human Capital Formation and Career Choices
        The time horizon of our analysis represents a pivotal period for longer-run career-defining choices.
These include human capital accumulation through graduate education, as well as occupational and career-
track choices.



14
  We find similar patterns when we consider the worst quartile of least desirable local labor markets, see Appendix
Figure C.1.

                                                        14
         Human Capital Investment: Graduate-Level Education. We first study a classic human capital
investment of obtaining a medical PhD, which also represents an occupational choice of a scientific research
career. This human capital choice stands as an important upward career move, as it provides access to
economically more favorable and prestigious positions (e.g., in university hospitals).15
         Table 4 studies as an outcome an indicator for the completion of medical PhD and correspondingly
sorting into a scientific track. It provides estimates for  using equation (1), starting from after year 5
which is when PhD completion begins to materialize following graduation from medical school. Column 1
provides the estimates for the full sample, and columns 2 and 3 provide estimates for males and females,
respectively. The results reveal a clear divergence. Males do not have any adverse effects as a result of the
treatment. However, females in the treatment group have significantly lower propensity to make this human
capital investment, with an average longer-run decrease of 3.25 pp on a counterfactual of 11.2 pp. By the
end of our analysis period, women's lower investment rate amounts to a large negative treatment effect of
5.4 pp in obtaining a PhD (on a counterfactual of 21.3 pp).
         Our findings directly relate to gender-biased sorting into scientific careers, with gender inequality
in science being a well-known phenomenon in the developed world (see, e.g., Holman et al. 2018, Huang
et al. 2020). In our setting, the male-female gap in holding a PhD in period 10 is 8.23 pp. This implies that
the treatment effect increases the gap by 25 percent, and that it can account for 20 percent of the observed
gap.16 Notably, these large effects are attributed to variation in the short internship period alone (out of the
lengthy training process of becoming a physician), underscoring just how important experiences at the very
early career could be over the course of the life-cycle.
         As key positions in the medical field are attached to university hospitals and tend to be held by
medical PhDs, a related result pertains to physicians' affiliation with university hospital in the long run as
a function of our quasi-experimental variation.17 Panel A of Table 5 summarizes these results, showing that
consistent with our findings so far, there are no effects on males but there are meaningful adverse effects
on women in the treatment group.
         Gender-Represented Specialties. We further investigate the differential occupational choice that
could reinforce gender norms by studying sorting into gender-represented occupations. We classify medical
specialties--which represent "occupations" in our setting--based on the share of females within a specialty
relative to their overall proportion. "Female-represented specialties" are defined as specialties with female

15
   Based on the register data, Appendix Figure F.1 illustrates within our setting the association of obtaining a PhD
with early lifetime investments, in terms of foregone income, and with high returns later in the life-cycle.
16
   These assessments assume that only individuals with the worst lottery numbers, i.e., those included in our treatment
group, are adversely affected. As they compose 30 percent of the sample, our calculations are performed as follows:
0.25 = (5.42 × 0.3)/(8.23 - 5.42 × 0.3), and 0.20 = (5.42 × 0.3)/8.23.
17
   Appendix Figure F.2 illustrates how such affiliation with university hospitals in the long run is a strong indicator
for economically favorable career trajectories.

                                                          15
share that is higher than this proportion, and "male-represented specialties" are defined as specialties with
female share that is lower than this proportion.18
         The quasi-experimental causal effects on this occupational choice are provided in panel B of Table
5 (which also accounts for specialization dynamics by period 10). Indeed, we find that females are more
likely to sort into their gender-represented specialty, where there is no longer run effect on males. Such
occupational sorting shapes physicians' career trajectories, as medical specialty choices in the residency
stage govern the field of specialty physicians can practice in the long run.
         Overall, we find in this subsection that female physicians in the treatment group, as opposed to
male physicians, end up forgoing important human capital investments they would otherwise engage in,
and they sort into economically less desirable stereotypical career paths at higher rates than they would
optimally prefer. Together, these findings show that--among the women only--adverse early working-life
experiences result in important career choices and outcomes that place them on disadvantaged paths.
Consequently, early career circumstances can preserve and amplify underlying structures of gender bias in
the labor market.

         5.2.3. Family Formation
         The post-graduation and early-career stages represent formative years with respect to family
formation.19 Hence, family-related decisions and career-related choices naturally intertwine. In this section,
we investigate the interplay between the labor market and the marriage market, by studying how early
careers can affect family formation choices in terms of partnership and fertility.
         In the analysis that follows we split our sample, based on individuals' partnership status at the
baseline pre-period, into the sub-group of individuals who were partnered (i.e., had a partner listed in the
demographic registers) and those who were not. Conceptually, the two sub-samples differ with respect to
the household decisions they face at the beginning of their careers. Partnered individuals enter the planning
period as a joint unit of two partners who make family planning choices. Non-partnered individuals are
additionally faced with a household formation choice through matching in the marriage market. We now
turn to study how household related outcomes are affected by the internship lottery in the longer run.
         We begin by analyzing the sample of individuals who were not partnered in the pre-period. For
these individuals, partnership and fertility could both be important operative margins. Table 6 summarizes
the effects on these outcomes. Panel A first studies the probability of having a partner, where we find no



18
   Plotting life-cycle income trajectories for the two classes of occupations, Appendix Figure F.3 illustrates how
female-represented specialties are economically less favorable compared to male-represented specialties.
19
   See Goldin and Katz (2008) for a related discussion. In terms of age, recall that in our setting the average age of
young physicians at the beginning of our quasi-experiment is 28.5.

                                                         16
detectable effects. That is, for both genders, the treatment and control groups are partnered in the longer
run at similar rates.
         However, interesting patterns arise when we move on to studying fertility choices. Panel B studies
the longer-run impact of the lottery on an individual's number of children. Whereas there are no effects on
men, women in treatment group exhibit an increase of 11.5 percent (=0.1422/1.2374) in the number of
children in their families as a result of the internship placement variation. Panels C and D break down this
result by studying the probability of having one child or more (i.e., becoming a parent) and the probability
of having more than one child. The results suggest that the treatment effect is more concentrated on higher
number of children: women in the treatment group are 7.1 pp more likely to have more than one child as
compared to women in the control group, which amounts to an effect of 16 percent.
         Appendix Table G.1 shows there are no such effects on individuals who were partnered in the pre-
period. This could suggest that the effects on women, in terms of number of children, may be less likely
driven by an underlying shift in family-bound preferences due to a labor market shock, but rather could be
related to differential matching in the marriage market among women who were not partnered. Consistent
with this conjecture, we find some evidence that the marriage patterns of pre-period unpartnered women in
the treatment group could differ as a result of the lottery.20
         The findings in this subsection of effects on family formation provide novel evidence of the far-
reaching impact of early careers, as they extend to an important aspect of the life-cycle that is not
immediately linked to the labor market. Moreover, they reveal how in the long run adverse events that are
local to the early career may alter women's trajectories from career-enhancing choices to family-oriented
considerations while not altering men's longer-run choices.


6. On the Anatomy of the Treatment Effects
         We have found causal impacts on females' sorting into local labor markets, human capital
investments, career choices, and family formation, in a direction that preserves and amplifies underlying
structures of gender bias in the labor market. Our analysis cleanly identifies a specific source of variation--
the very first periods of physicians' entry-level labor market. In that sense our paper is not targeted at
explaining or decomposing observed economy-wide differences across individuals with different
experiences or gender. Rather, it serves as a clean real-life laboratory that provides proof of concept for the
long-run impacts of early career and how they diverge across males and females. We find far-reaching



20
  Among pre-period unpartnered women who become partnered, women in the treatment group end up in less
balanced unions, with higher age gaps (in the direction of the husband) and with less assortative mating (in terms of
whether both partners earn a clinical medical degree). See Appendix Table G.2.

                                                         17
effects on career-defining and family choices from this experiment, suggesting that, over the entire
spectrum, early labor market experiences represent an important determinant of life-cycle trajectories.
        In this section, we supplement our main analysis with additional discussion and characterization of
the nature of the effects we have identified. We first explore candidate mechanisms, and we then discuss
additional insights that relate to the study of early careers.

     6.1. Mechanisms
        Our first-stage analysis has described the nature of our quasi-experiment as it pertains to medical
graduates of both genders and whereby males and females were exposed to similar variation in treatment.
Yet, our findings consistently show important differences in the causal effects of this treatment in the long
run on females as compared to males. The broad literature on gender has highlighted several potential
channels that could lead to gender differences in outcomes. Guided by this literature, we discuss some key
candidate channels that could be relevant in our setting. The first two recap and relate to analysis we have
already presented, and for the second two we provide additional analysis below.
        Family Considerations. The literature has underscored how family responsibilities could hinder
females' advancement in the labor market. Our identified differential effects on family formation by
gender--i.e., increases in fertility for females in the treatment group but not for males--suggest that the
interaction between family-considerations and career-considerations is a potential mechanism in the long-
run impacts we have uncovered. That is, our findings are consistent with the notion that women, unlike
men, may crowd out long-run career goals by becoming more oriented toward the family when faced with
adverse labor market events at the beginning of their working life.
        Competition Aversion. We have also found that females in the treatment group (and not males) are
to some extent more likely to sort in the long run into less competitive labor markets as measured by the
concentration of peers. Interestingly, this finding is consistent with recent work showing that women are
more likely to shy away from competition and to stop competing when they face adverse experiences.21
This could provide one potential explanation for the diverging patterns for males and females in response
to adverse early career events which has placed them on less competitive and less favorable trajectories.
        Preferences over Labor Markets. There is an important discussion in the gender literature about
whether gender differences in economic choices, such as college majors and occupations, stem from
diverging preferences or other factors such as diverging opportunities (see, e.g., Bertrand 2020). Our
application allows us to test this hypothesis in the context of physicians' preferences over local labor
markets. To do so, we utilize our measure for market desirability that reveals students' preferences through


 See, e.g., Gneezy et al. (2003), Niederle and Vesterlund (2007, 2011), Buser et al. (2014), Azmat et al. (2016),
21

Wasserman (2018), Iriberri and Rey-Biel (2019), Buser and Yuan (2019), and Cai et al. (2019).

                                                       18
their lottery-based choices. We construct these market rankings based on the average lottery rank of the
interns who choose to sort into it separately for males and females and compare across them.
         Figure 4 illustrates the results. Each dot represents a local labor market, where the x-axis denotes
male rankings and the y-axis denotes female rankings. We plot the fitted line, as well as the 45-degree line
which is the benchmark under non-differential rankings by gender. We also report the slope of the fitted
line, where the benchmark of non-differential ranking is 1. Overall, the estimation is notably close to the
benchmark case under the null that males and females have similar average priorities over the entry-level
markets.22 Hence, differential preferences over entry-level markets is an unlikely explanation in our setting
for the diverging long-run effects.
         Mentorship. Lastly, we turn to the literature that has underscored the potential role of mentors.23
Specifically, same-gender role models have been suggested as a mechanism for gender inequalities in field-
of-study and occupational choice. Even more, papers have found strong influences of the gender of role
models or mentors on females, with little (to no) impact on males. With this work in mind, we investigate
whether differential exposure to role models could provide an explanation in our setting.
         We use several measures to explore this hypothesis with regards to the treatment period of the
internship. First, we return to our earlier measure of exposure to high-seniority colleagues (as represented
by the share of senior physicians who hold a medical PhD), who could represent role-model figures and
potential mentors. In panel A of Table 7 we consider the first-stage treatment effect with respect to exposure
to same-gender high-seniority colleagues. Whereas during the internship men and women are affected to a
similar extent in terms of exposure to high-seniority colleagues overall (as shown in Appendix Table E.1),
we find that there is a marked divergence in exposure to same-gender potential role models at the females'
disadvantage.
         Second, in the internship exit surveys, interns list the senior colleague who had been assigned to
them as a direct mentor/supervisor at the internship entry job. Using these data, we find that being in the
treatment group of worst lottery numbers leads to a large decline in the probability of having a female
mentor (see panel B of Table 7). We also find that it leads to a large decline in the probability that the head
of the educational program (i.e., the internship) is female (see panel C of Table 7).
         Lastly, we use these exit-survey data to study the interns' evaluation of the mentorship they have
received. As we have described earlier, this category includes questions on the supervisor's training plan,
provision of feedback, and advising on professional and career development. In line with the differential



22
   We reach a similar conclusion if we instead use the information we have for a subsample about students' binding
pre-placement rankings of local labor markets as reported in priority lists (see Appendix Figure A.4).
23
   See, for example, Bettinger and Long (2005), Carrell et al. (2010), Blau et al. (2010), Dennehy and Dasgupta (2017),
Kofoed and mcGovney (2019), Porter and Serra (2020), and Ginther et al. (2020).

                                                          19
mentorship hypothesis, we find that females in the treatment group rate this aspect of the internship lower,
whereas there is no detectable effect on males (see panel D of Table 7).
         These findings are all in line with the notion that variation in mentorship could be an operative
channel in the long-run effects we have identified. They are also consistent with the literature which have
found significant effects of mentors' gender on females, with little to no effect on males.

     6.2. Discussion Points
         We conclude this section by discussing two additional points that offer some general insight into
the analysis of early careers.
         Earnings as an Insufficient Statistic. Earnings are an important aggregate that we commonly resort
to in the analysis of labor market outcomes, also in the study of gender inequality (see, e.g., Goldin 2014),
as it could capture variation in dimensions such as skill, education, and human capital investments.
However, earnings could be insufficient, and even misleading, for studying individuals' relative position in
the labor market in the analysis of early careers and other important long-run contexts more broadly due to
several classic reasons. In particular, by their very nature, financial compensating differentials may mask
adverse impacts on important job aspects and work attributes that are integral to the multi-dimensional
bundle of jobs and careers. These include, for example, prestige, work-hours effort and temporal flexibility,
and dis-amenities associated with locating in rural markets.24 Moreover, the returns to major (lengthy)
human capital investments could materialize only in the very long run, a classic analysis consideration that
is commonly known as the "life-cycle bias" (Black and Devereux 2011). In our context, the returns to a
medical PhD, for example, materialize on average as late as 15 years after graduation (see Appendix Figure
F.1). Reflecting these different points, we illustrate the broader conceptual notion of insufficiency in
Appendix Table H.1, which shows that a singular focus on earnings would have missed the significant long-
run effects that we have uncovered.
         In this respect, our setting offers two advantages. Primarily, we are able to study multiple aspects
of career-defining and life-cycle choices which are indicative of the very long-run economic position of
households. These choices are in and of themselves important economic choices that the labor economics
literature, and the gender literature in particular, have been highly interested in; namely, human capital
investments, labor market sorting, occupational choice, and family formation. Moreover, the nature of our


24
  Key papers on compensating differentials in the context of non-pecuniary job attributes more generally, and their
particular relevance to the study of gender more specifically, include, among others, Rosen (1986), Goldin and Katz
(2011), Goldin (2014), Mas and Pallais (2017), Wiswall and Zafar (2018), Arcidiacono et al. (forthcoming), and Le
Barbanchon et al. (forthcoming). In the context of job location dis-amenities, papers have found that average physician
earnings can be meaningfully higher in disadvantaged/rural areas (Ono et al. 2014, Gottlieb et al. 2020), and a range
of countries, including Denmark and the U.S., have policies in place that offer financial incentives to physicians who
operate in such locations (Simoens and J. Hurst 2006, Ono et al. 2014).

                                                          20
application sets forth a revealed preference logic. Physicians with the most favorable lottery ranks (those
in the control group) are effectively unrestricted, and they can always choose to follow the same paths that
are taken by physicians with the most unfavorable lottery ranks. Therefore, any average causal effect on
long run outcomes can be attributed to being induced by the lottery to make and bear the consequences of
lower priority choices.
        Policy Interactions. Many countries aim to more evenly distribute physicians across space to
disperse expertise where it is needed most, specifically, in rural and disadvantaged areas that traditionally
face challenges attracting physicians (Simoens and Hurst 2006; OECD 2012; Ono et al. 2014). This has
direct welfare implications, since it relates to equity in access to healthcare. The current policy achieves
this stated goal by allocating graduating physicians to less desirable markets at higher rates than they would
otherwise choose. Perturbing these initial choices then induces some persistent relocations that favor
disadvantaged areas. However, our results highlight a potential unintended cost of such policies: while
inducing more equal access to healthcare, inequality is fostered on a different margin, namely, gender. Only
female physicians bear the long-run allocation impact of the policy.


7. Conclusion
        Using a lottery that determines Danish physicians' entry-level internships, we identify significant
impacts of early labor market placements on longer-run career and life-cycle choices. These far-reaching
effects encompass longer-run local labor market sorting, human capital investment, occupational choice,
and family formation. We find that the long-run effects are entirely driven by females, thereby providing
evidence of a novel route that initiates and perpetuates gender inequality and gender-biased labor market
norms. The evidence suggests that preferences over labor markets cannot explain this gender divergence,
and we find support for differential family obligations, attitude toward competition, and same-gender role
models as potential operative mechanisms.
        Our analysis highlights how persistent gender inequality can arise even in an institutionally
equitable setting. As such, our findings imply that policies that aim to achieve outcome-based gender
equality cannot only rely on leveling the starting playing field. Rather, such policies should target the ways
in which these (potentially-equal) opportunities play out in practice and shape into gender-differential
choices over the course of the formative period of early careers. For example, are women deterred by
adverse events such that they give up on career goals and shift to more family-centered lives, whereas men
do not let such events alter their planned course? If so, more directed and targeted mentoring, as one
example, may allow enhancing the career success of women, as suggested by some recent important studies
that provide encouraging evidence.



                                                     21
References:
Altonji, J. G., Kahn, L. B., and Speer, J. D. (2016). Cashier or Consultant? Entry Labor Market Conditions, Field of
Study, and Career Success. Journal of Labor Economics, 34(1), 361­401.

Arcidiacono, P., Hotz, V.J., Maurel, A., and Romano, T. (Forthcoming). Ex Ante Returns and Occupational Choice.
Journal of Political Economy.

Arrow, K. J. (1963). Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics of Medical Care. American Economic Review, 53(5),
941­973.

Azmat, G., Calsamiglia, C., and Iriberri, N. (2016). Gender Differences in Response to Big Stakes. Journal of the
European Economic Association, 14(6), 1372­1400.

Azmat, G., and Ferrer, R. (2017). Gender Gaps in Performance: Evidence from Young Lawyers. Journal of Political
Economy, 125(5), 1306­1355.

Bhattacharya, J., Hyde, T., and Tu, P. (2013). Health Economics. Macmillan International Higher Education.

Bettinger, E.P., and Long, B.T. (2005). Do Faculty Serve as Role Models? The Impact of Instructor Gender on
Female Students. American Economic Review, 95(2), 152­157.

Bertrand, M. (2011). New Perspectives on Gender. In Handbook of Labor Economics, 4, 1543­1590.

Bertrand, M., Goldin, C., and Katz, L. F. (2010). Dynamics of the Gender Gap for Young Professionals in the
Financial and Corporate Sectors. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(3), 228­255.

Black, S.E., and Devereux, P.J. (2011). Recent Developments in Intergenerational Mobility. In Handbook of Labor
Economics, 4, 1487­1541.

Blau, F. D. and Kahn, L. M. (2017). The Gender Wage Gap: Extent, Trends, and Explanations. Journal of Economic
Literature, 55(3), 789­865.

Blau, F.D., Currie, J.M., Croson, R.T., and Ginther, D.K. (2010). Can Mentoring Help Female Assistant Professors?
Interim Results from a Randomized Trial. American Economic Review, 100(2), 348­52.

Brotherton, S. E., and Etzel, S. I. (2018). Graduate Medical Education, 2017-2018. JAMA, 320(10), 1051­1070.

Bursztyn, L., Fujiwara, T., and Pallais, A. (2017). `Acting Wife': Marriage Market Incentives and Labor Market
Investments. American Economic Review, 107(11), 3288­3319.

Buser, T., Niederle, M., and Oosterbeek, H. (2014). Gender, Competitiveness, and Career Choices. Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 129(3), 1409­1447.

Buser, T., and Yuan, H. (2019). Do Women Give Up Competing More Easily? Evidence from the Lab and the
Dutch Math Olympiad. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 11(3), 225­252.

Cai, X., Lu, Y., Pan, J., and Zhong, S. (2019). Gender Gap under Pressure: Evidence from China's National College
Entrance Examination. Review of Economics and Statistics, 101(2), 249­263.

Caliendo, M., Lee, W. S., and Mahlstedt, R. (2017). The Gender Wage Gap and the Role of Reservation Wages:
New Evidence for Unemployed Workers. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 136, 161­173.

Card, D., Cardoso, A. R., and Kline, P. (2016). Bargaining, Sorting, and the Gender Wage Gap: Quantifying the
Impact of Firms on the Relative Pay of Women. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(2), 633­686.



                                                         22
Carrell, S.E., Page, M.E., and West, J.E. (2010). Sex and Science: How Professor Gender Perpetuates the Gender
Gap. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(3), 1101­1144.

Cheng, Stephanie D. (2020). Careers Versus Children: How Childcare Affects the Academic Tenure-Track Gender
Gap.

Chetty, R., and Hendren, N. (2018a). The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational Mobility I: Childhood
Exposure Effects. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(3), 1107­1162.

Chetty, R., and Hendren, N. (2018b). The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational Mobility II: County-Level
Estimates. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(3), 1163­1228.

Cullen, Z. and Perez-Truglia, R. (2019). The Old Boys' Club Schmoozing and the Gender Gap.

Currie, J., and Schwandt, H. (2014). Short- and Long-Term Effects of Unemployment on Fertility. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 111(41), 14734­14739.

Damm, A. P., and Dustmann, C. (2014). Does Growing Up in a High Crime Neighborhood Affect Youth Criminal
Behavior? American Economic Review, 104(6), 1806­32.

Danish Ministry of Health (1989). Lægers Kliniske Videreuddannelse og arbejdstilrettelæggelse, betænkning nr.
1183, September 1989.

Dennehy, T.C., and Dasgupta, N. (2017). Female Peer Mentors Early in College Increase Women's Positive
Academic Experiences and Retention in Engineering. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114(23),
5964­5969.

Devereux, P. J. (2002). Occupational Upgrading and the Business Cycle. Labour, 16(3), 423­452.

Eckert, F., Walsh, C., and Hejlesen, M. (2019). The Return to Big City Experience: Evidence from Danish
Refugees.

Exley, C. L., and Kessler, J. B. (2019). The Gender Gap in Self-Promotion.

Field, E., Jayachandran, S., Pande, R., and Rigol, N. (2016). Friendship at Work: Can Peer Effects Catalyze Female
Entrepreneurship? American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 8(2), 125­53.

Finkelstein, A., Gentzkow, M., and Williams, H. (2016). Sources of Geographic Variation in Health Care: Evidence
from Patient Migration. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(4), 1681­1726.

Friedman, M. and Kuznets, S. (1954). Income from Independent Professional Practice. NBER.

Ginther, D.K., Currie, J.M., Blau, F.D., and Croson, R.T. (2020). Can Mentoring Help Female Assistant Professors
in Economics? An Evaluation by Randomized Trial. In AEA Papers and Proceedings, 110, 205­09.

Gneezy, U., Niederle, M., and Rustichini, A. (2003). Performance in Competitive Environments: Gender
Differences. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3), 1049­1074.

Goldin, C. (2014). A Grand Gender Convergence: Its Last Chapter. American Economic Review, 104(4), 1091­
1119.

Goldin, C., and Katz, L.F. (2008). Transitions: Career and Family Life Cycles of the Educational Elite. American
Economic Review, 98(2), 363­69.

Goldin, C., and Katz, L.F. (2011). The Cost of Workplace Flexibility for High-Powered Professionals. The Annals of
the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 638(1), 45­67.


                                                        23
Gottlieb, J. D., Polyakova, M., Rinz, K., Shiplett, H., and Udalova, V. (2020). Who Values Human Capitalists'
Human Capital? Healthcare Spending and Physician Earnings.

Holman, L., Stuart-Fox, D., and Hauser, C. E. (2018). The Gender Gap in Science: How Long until Women are
Equally Represented? PLoS biology, 16(4), e2004956.

Huang, J., Gates, A. J., Sinatra, R., and Barabási, A. L. (2020). Historical Comparison of Gender Inequality in
Scientific Careers across Countries and Disciplines. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(9),
4609­4616.

Iriberri, N., and Rey-Biel, P. (2019). Competitive Pressure Widens the Gender Gap in Performance: Evidence from
a Two-stage Competition in Mathematics. Economic Journal, 129(620), 1863­1893.

Jayachandran, S. (2015). The Roots of Gender Inequality in Developing Countries. Annual Review of Economics,
7(1), 63­88.

Kahn, L. B. (2010). The Long-Term Labor Market Consequences of Graduating from College in a Bad Economy.
Labour Economics, 17(2), 303­316.

Kjærulff, T., Schipperijn, J., Gislason, G., and Ersbøll, A. (2015). Association between Neighborhood
Socioeconomic Position and Risk of Incident Acute Myocardial Infarction in Denmark: A Spatial Analysis
Approach. International Journal of Epidemiology, 44(suppl 1), i278­i279.

Kleven, H., Landais, C., Posch, J., Steinhauer, A., and Zweimuller, J. (2019). Child Penalties across Countries:
Evidence and Explanations. In AEA Papers and Proceedings, 109, 122­26.

Kleven, H., Landais, C., and Søgaard, J. E. (2019). Children and Gender Inequality: Evidence from Denmark.
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 11(4), 181­209.

Kofoed, M.S., and mcGovney, E. (2019). The Effect of Same-Gender or Same-Race Role Models on Occupation
Choice: Evidence from Randomly Assigned Mentors at West Point. Journal of Human Resources, 54(2), 430­467.

Laird, J. and Nielsen, T. (2016). The Effects of Physician Prescribing Behaviors on Prescription Drug Use and
Labor Supply: Evidence from Movers in Denmark.

Le Barbanchon, T., Rathelot, R., and Roulet, A. (forthcoming). Gender Differences in Job Search: Trading off
Commute Against Wage. Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Liu, K., Salvanes, K. G., and Sørensen, E. Ø. (2016). Good Skills in Bad Times: Cyclical Skill Mismatch and the
Long-Term Effects of Graduating in a Recession. European Economic Review, 84, 3­17.

Lundberg, S., and Stearns, J. (2019). Women in Economics: Stalled Progress. Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 33(1), 3­22.

Mas, A., and Pallais, A. (2017). Valuing Alternative Work Arrangements. American Economic Review, 107(12),
3722­3759.

Niederle, M. and Vesterlund, L. (2007). Do Women Shy Away from Competition? Do Men Compete Too Much?
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(3), 1067­1101.

Niederle, M. and Vesterlund, L. (2011). Gender and Competition. Annual Review of Economics, 3(1), 601­630.

OECD (2012). Health at a Glance 2011: OECD Indicators 2011. OECD Publishing, Paris.

Olivetti, C. and Petrongolo, B. (2016). The Evolution of Gender Gaps in Industrialized Countries. Annual Review of
Economics, 8(1), 405­434.



                                                         24
Ono, T., Schoenstein, M., and Buchan, J. (2014). Geographic Imbalances in Doctor Supply and Policy Responses.
OECD Health Working Paper.

Oreopoulos, P., von Wachter, T., and Heisz, A. (2012). The Short- and Long-Term Career Effects of Graduating in a
Recession. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4(1), 1­29.

Oyer, P. (2006). Initial Labor Market Conditions and Long-Term Outcomes for Economists. Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 20(3), 143­160.

Porter, C., and Serra, D. (2020). Gender Differences in the Choice of Major: The Importance of Female Role
Models. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 12, 226­254.

Raaum, O., and Røed, K. (2006). Do Business Cycle Conditions at the Time of Labor Market Entry Affect Future
Employment Prospects? Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(2), 193­210.

Rosen, S. (1986). The Theory of Equalizing Differences. In Handbook of labor economics, 1, 641­692.

Rothstein, J. (2020). The Lost Generation? Labor Market Outcomes for Post Great Recession Entrants. NBER
Working Paper No. 27516.

Rubinstein, Y., and Weiss, Y. (2006). Post Schooling Wage Growth: Investment, Search and Learning. In Handbook
of the Economics of Education, 1, 1­67.

Sarsons, H. (2019). Interpreting Signals in the Labor Market: Evidence from Medical Referrals.

Schwandt, H., and von Wachter, T. (2019). Unlucky Cohorts: Estimating the Long-term Effects of Entering the
Labor Market in a Recession in Large Cross-sectional Data Sets. Journal of Labor Economics, 37, 161­198.

Schwandt, H., and von Wachter, T. (2020). Socioeconomic Decline and Death: Midlife Impacts of Graduating in a
Recession. NBER Working Paper No. 26638.

Simoens, S., and Hurst, J. (2006). The Supply of Physician Services in OECD Countries. OECD Health Working
Paper.

Sloan, F.A., and Edmunds, M. eds. (2012). Geographic Adjustment in Medicare Payment: Phase I: Improving
Accuracy. National Academies Press.

von Wachter, Till. (2020). The Persistent Effects of Initial Labor Market Conditions for Young Adults and Their
Sources. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 34(4), 168­194.

Wasserman, M. (2018). Gender Differences in Politician Persistence.

Wasserman, M. (2019). Hours Constraints, Occupational Choice, and Gender: Evidence from Medical Residents.

Weiss, Y. (1986). The Determination of Life Cycle Earnings: A Survey. In Handbook of Labor Economics, 1, 603­
640.

Wiswall, M., and Zafar, B. (2018). Preference for the Workplace, Investment in Human Capital, and Gender.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(1), 457­507.

Zeltzer, D. (2020). Gender Homophily in Referral Networks: Consequences for the Medicare Physician Earnings
Gap. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 12, 169­197.




                                                        25
                         Figure 1: Timeline of Physician Training in Denmark




Notes: This figure summarizes the timeline of Danish physicians' training, which captures the early stages of their
career.




                              Figure 2: Nature of Placement to Internships

             Panel A: Relocation Distance                                 Panel B: Assigned Priority




Notes: These figures study the nature of placement to internships. In panel A, we calculate for each student the
distance between their municipality of residence at the time of the lottery and their municipality of the internship,
which captures their "relocation distance." We then plot a graduating student's relocation distance against the
student's lottery rank. In panel B, we use the rankings of local labor markets that had been solicited among the earlier
cohorts as part of the allocation process. We plot individuals' pre-placement ranking of the local labor market they
were assigned to in practice (where 1 is highest priority) against the percentile rank of their lottery number draw
(within their graduating cohort).
              Figure 3: Effects of Early Careers on Long-Run Geographical Sorting


                                         Panel A: Effects on Overall Sample




                                              Panel B: Effects by Gender
                               Males                                                      Females




Notes: This figure plots the dynamic effects of the lottery on the probability of sorting into less desirable local labor
markets. We plot the  estimates from equation (1) for periods 0 to 10, along with their 95-percent confidence
intervals. The x-axis denotes the year relative to the lottery, and the y-axis denotes the effect on the studied outcome.
As illustrated in the figure, the early years capture the first-stage effect on the internship position, and the later years
capture our main empirical target of the longer-run impact on households' decisions. Panel A includes the overall
sample, and panel B splits the sample by gender.
                    Figure 4: Preferences over Local Labor Markets by Gender




Notes: This figure compares females' and males' revealed preferences over entry-level local labor markets. We use
our measure for market desirability that reveals students' preferences through their lottery-based choices. We
construct these market rankings based on the average lottery rank of the interns who choose to sort into it, separately
for males and females, and compare across them. Each dot represents a local labor market, where the x-axis denotes
male rankings and the y-axis denotes female rankings. We plot the fitted line, as well as the 45-degree line which is
the benchmark under non-differential rankings by gender. We also report the slope of the fitted line, where the
benchmark of non-differential ranking is 1.
                         Table 1: First-Stage Effects at Internship Period


                               Less Desirable     High-Seniority   University     Rural Location
                               Labor Market        Colleagues    Hospital (prob.)    (prob.)
                                   (prob.)             (log)
                                     (1)                (2)            (3)              (4)
          Treatment Effect       0.1844***          -0.5897***     -0.3999***       0.0883***
                                  (0.0101)           (0.0201)       (0.0116)        (0.0075)
          Constant               0.1164***          -2.3352***      0.6280***       0.0539***
                                  (0.0058)           (0.0122)       (0.0088)        (0.0041)
          Individuals               6,076             5,743           6,076           6,076



Notes: This table characterizes the first-stage effects of the lottery at the internship period. Column 1 studies
the desirability of an intern's assigned local labor market. We characterize the desirability of a local labor
market based on the average lottery rank of the interns who choose to sort into it. We use these rankings to
partition the markets into two groups of more desirable local labor markets and less desirable local labor
markets, and we study the degree to which the lottery affects the probability of interning in a less desirable
market. Column 2 studies high-quality training and favorable professional networks based on the share of high-
seniority colleagues. For this purpose, we look at established physicians (those that are at least fifteen years
out of medical school) who hold a medical PhD, and we calculate their share out of all established physicians
within the labor market. Column 3 studies the extent of attachment to university, or teaching, hospitals. Column
4 studies the probability that the physician interns in a rural versus urban municipality. Robust standard errors
clustered at the individual level are reported in parentheses. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01
                                 Table 2: Internship Self-Evaluations

                                                              Estimate     Measure SD      Estimate/SD
        Category
        Overall Evaluation             Treatment Effect      -0.4482***         1.70           -0.26
                                                              (0.0597)
                                       Constant               7.4887***
                                                              (0.0410)

        Work Climate                   Treatment Effect      -0.5634***         2.08           -0.27
                                                              (0.0731)
                                       Constant               6.8969***
                                                              (0.0502)

        Mentorship and Advising        Treatment Effect      -0.3278***         1.79           -0.18
                                                              (0.0632)
                                       Constant               7.1215***
                                                              (0.0434)
                                       Individuals              3,193

Notes: This table uses data from physicians' exit surveys in which interning physicians rank their workplace
in a series of questions that are clustered into topic-based categories. For a subsample for whom these data are
available, the table studies how the lottery rank affects the quality and nature of entry-level jobs among interns
based on these self-evaluated scores in categories that are relevant for our analysis. To provide additional
interpretation to these estimates, we also report the coefficients relative to a one standard deviation of a given
score measure, which relates to the extent to which variation in evaluations could be attributed to the lottery
treatment. Robust standard errors clustered at the individual level are reported in parentheses. * p < .10, ** p <
.05, *** p < .01
       Table 3: Effects of Early Careers on Long-Run Sorting into Labor Markets


                                                        All            Males         Females
                                                        (1)             (2)            (3)
              A. High-Seniority Colleagues
              Average Treatment Effect               -0.0653***       -0.0196       -0.0964***
                                                      (0.0151)        (0.0234)       (0.0199)
              Constant                               -2.0981***      -2.1232***     -2.0815***
                                                      (0.0102)        (0.0168)       (0.0128)
              Individuals                               3,696           1,475          2,221

              B. Concentration of Peers
              Average Treatment Effect               -0.0438***       -0.0163       -0.0627***
                                                      (0.0101)        (0.0155)       (0.0134)
              Constant                               -7.5908***      -7.5967***     -7.5869***
                                                      (0.0066)        (0.0105)       (0.0086)
              Individuals                               3,716           1,479          2,237

Notes: This table studies the long-run effects of the lottery on the local labor markets physicians sort into,
based on equation (2). Panel A studies the share of high-seniority colleagues, and panel B studies the relative
concertation of physician peers. Robust standard errors clustered at the individual level are reported in
parentheses. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01
              Table 4: Effects of Early Careers on Human Capital Investment


                                                  All               Males             Females
                                                  (1)                (2)                (3)
             Treatment Effect at t
                                        6      -0.0052             0.0053             -0.0125*
                                               (0.0072)           (0.0146)            (0.0067)
                                        7      -0.0102             0.0171            -0.0295***
                                               (0.0099)           (0.0186)            (0.0105)
                                        8      -0.0168             0.0040             -0.0330**
                                               (0.0127)           (0.0223)            (0.0146)
                                        9      -0.0214             0.0094             -0.0444**
                                               (0.0148)           (0.0251)            (0.0178)
                                      10       -0.0275             0.0055            -0.0542***
                                               (0.0171)           (0.0282)            (0.0209)
             Counterfactual at t = 10           0.2364             0.2697              0.2131

             Average Treatment Effect           -0.0147            0.0093            -0.0325***
             Effect                            (0.0096)           (0.0177)            (0.0104)
             Constant                          0.1359***          0.1711***           0.1121***
                                               (0.0069)           (0.0124)            (0.0080)

             Individuals                         3,857              1,551              2,306


Notes: This table studies as an outcome an indicator for the completion of medical PhD. It provides estimates
for  using equation (1), starting from after year 5 which is when PhD completion begins to materialize
following graduation from medical school. Column 1 provides the estimates for the full sample, and columns
2 and 3 provide estimates for males and females, respectively. Robust standard errors clustered at the individual
level are reported in parentheses. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01
                   Table 5: Effects of Early Careers on Occupational Sorting


   A. Affiliation with University Hospitals
                                                           All                Males              Females
   Average Treatment Effect                            -0.0369***            -0.0063            -0.0577***
                                                        (0.0121)            (0.0190)             (0.0155)
   Constant                                             0.4520***           0.4627***            0.4448***
                                                        (0.0085)            (0.0134)             (0.0111)
   Individuals                                            4,601               1,830                2,771

   B. Gender-Represented Specialties
                                                          All                 Males              Females
   Average Treatment Effect                            0.0193***             0.0065              0.0282***
                                                       (0.0060)             (0.0092)             (0.0079)
   Constant                                            0.0728***            0.0706***            0.0743***
                                                       (0.0039)             (0.0063)             (0.0050)
   Individuals                                           4,250                1,706                2,544

   Treatment at t = 10                                 0.0369**              0.0090              0.0578***
                                                       (0.0165)             (0.0238)             (0.0224)
   Constant                                            0.2242***            0.1931***            0.2459***
                                                       (0.0114)             (0.0169)             (0.0153)
   Individuals                                           2,709                1,123                1,586


Notes: This table studies the long-run effects of the lottery on occupational sorting, based on equation (2).
Panel A studies the probability of being affiliated with a university hospital, and panel B studies the probability
of sorting into a physician's gender-represented specialty. Robust standard errors clustered at the individual
level are reported in parentheses. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01
 Table 6: Effects of Early Careers on Family Formation--Non-Partnered Individuals


          A. Partnership
                                                  All                Males            Females
          Average Treatment Effect              0.0070              -0.0025            0.0142
                                               (0.0168)            (0.0242)           (0.0231)
          Constant                             0.7760***           0.8003***          0.7576***
                                               (0.0118)            (0.0168)           (0.0163)
          Individuals                            2,144                917               1,227
          B. Number of Children
                                                  All                Males            Females
          Average Treatment Effect              0.0807*             -0.0001           0.1422***
                                               (0.0415)            (0.0630)           (0.0549)
          Constant                             1.2077***           1.1685***          1.2374***
                                               (0.0293)            (0.0449)           (0.0387)
          Individuals                            2,148                919               1,229
          C. One Child or More
                                                  All                Males            Females
          Average Treatment Effect              0.0351*             0.0202             0.0464*
                                               (0.0187)            (0.0289)           (0.0244)
          Constant                             0.6791***           0.6567***          0.6961***
                                               (0.0135)            (0.0208)           (0.0177)
          Individuals                            2,148                919               1,229
          D. More than One Child
                                                  All                Males            Females
          Average Treatment Effect              0.0331*             -0.0165           0.0709***
                                               (0.0194)            (0.0290)           (0.0260)
          Constant                             0.4411***           0.4262***          0.4524***
                                               (0.0138)            (0.0206)           (0.0185)
          Individuals                            2,148                919               1,229


Notes: This table studies the long-run effects of the lottery on family formation choices among the sample of
individuals who were not partnered in the pre-period, based on equation (2). Panel A studies the probability of
becoming partnered, panel B studies the number of children, panel C studies the probability of having one
child or more, and panel D studies the probability of having more than one child. Robust standard errors
clustered at the individual level are reported in parentheses. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01
                          Table 7: Mentorship as a Potential Mechanism

                   A. Same-Gender High-Seniority Colleagues
                                                                  Males           Females
                   Treatment Effect                             -0.4801***       -0.7046***
                                                                 (0.0320)         (0.0300)
                   Constant                                     -3.0569***       -3.1541***
                                                                 (0.0189)         (0.0183)
                   Individuals                                     2,247            3,456
                   B. Assignment to Female Mentor
                                                                   Males          Females
                   Treatment Effect                             -0.1017***       -0.1189***
                                                                 (0.0286)         (0.0219)
                   Constant                                      0.4376***        0.4976***
                                                                 (0.0188)         (0.0154)
                   Individuals                                     1,177            2,016
                   C. Female Head of Educational Program
                                                                   Males          Females
                   Treatment Effect                             -0.1043***       -0.0828***
                                                                 (0.0281)         (0.0216)
                   Constant                                      0.4090***        0.4262***
                                                                 (0.0185)         (0.0152)
                   Individuals                                     1,177            2,016
                   D. Evaluation of Mentorship
                                                                  Males           Females
                   Treatment Effect                              -0.1509         -0.4264***
                                                                (0.1019)          (0.0807)
                   Constant                                     7.0663***         7.1574***
                                                                (0.0672)          (0.0566)
                   SD                                              1.75              1.68
                   Effect/SD                                      -0.09             -0.25
                   Individuals                                    1,177             2,016

Notes: This table investigates whether differential exposure to role models during the internship could provide
an explanation for the gender differences in the quasi-experimental long-run treatment effects. Panel A studies
exposure to same-gender high-seniority colleagues. Using the internship exit surveys, panel B studies the
probability of being assigned a female mentor, panel C studies the probability that the head of the educational
program is female, and panel D studies the interns' evaluation of the mentorship they have received. Robust
standard errors clustered at the individual level are reported in parentheses. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01
Appendix
Appendix A: Choice Considerations
        While in practice the distribution of positions across location by lottery rank display similar patterns over
time, it is worth discussing some choice considerations and how they may have differed as the exact implementation
of the allocation process has changed. With the structures of the matching process we describe in the text, individuals'
equilibrium best-response strategy at each stage is to choose the option that maximizes their expected utility payoff,
based on their individual preferences and their expectations over other students' equilibrium play. For later cohorts,
this simply implies choosing their most preferred option among the options that are still available at the time they
make their choice. For earlier cohorts, there are additional potential considerations to take into account. To the extent
that differential job aspects within a county play a role (that is, aspects that go beyond the local labor market and its
average internship-related characteristics), the process implies that at the first step of ranking counties some
consideration may be given to one's place in line for making a choice. For example, it may be preferable (along some
job dimension) to be first in line in a worse labor market than the last in line in a better labor market. In addition,
local labor markets and the average characteristics of the jobs they offer have aspects that people may agree upon
("vertical" quality, e.g., interning in a teaching hospital) and aspects that could be individual specific (i.e.,
"horizontal" quality whose valuation can differ across individuals, e.g., a county's proximity to family). We now turn
to explore how these choice considerations play out in practice using the information on the binding pre-placement
rankings of local labor markets among earlier cohorts.
        First, we consider the rankings by those with the best lottery numbers (the bottom 30%, as an example) as
compared to the rankings by those with the worst lottery numbers (the top 30%). To the degree that students view
their position in line for making a choice within a market as important--i.e., if dimensions of specific open jobs
within a market are deemed relatively important beyond the average characteristics of the labor market itself--we
would expect systematic differences in these groups' rankings over labor markets. If, on the other hand, the choice
of local labor market is what dominates students' preferences regarding where to intern--due to the bundle of the
entry-level job experience they offer--we would expect similarities in their overall rankings. Panel A of Appendix
Figure A.1 compares the average rankings of labor markets across the two groups. Each dot represents a local market,
and we plot the fitted line as well as the 45-degree line which is the benchmark under non-differential rankings. We
also report the slope of the fitted line, where the benchmark null of non-differential ranking is 1. The figure is
consistent with the second hypothesis, i.e., that the choice of labor market itself leads students' rankings in the first
step of the allocation process. The average rankings of markets across the two groups line up around the 45-degree
line, and we cannot reject the benchmark null of a coefficient of 1.
        Second, we consider the degree to which the rankings of the labor markets are agreed upon among the new
physicians, as compared to diverging across them due to individual specific preferences. One way to do so is to
compare the rankings of labor markets across a random split of our analysis sample. If students tend to agree on the
value of characteristics of labor markets, we would expect the overall average rankings of the two random subsamples
to align on the 45-degree line; and if preferences are completely idiosyncratic (an extreme case), there should be no
systematic relationship across the two groups' rankings. Panel B of Appendix Figure A.1 shows that the average
rankings of the local labor markets across the two groups line up around the 45-degree line, and we cannot reject the
benchmark null of a coefficient of 1 which represents ranking comparability. We note that while this finding suggests
there is a degree of general agreement over labor market rankings across students, it does not mean there are no
components of idiosyncratic preferences (over "horizontal" quality). In fact, the observation that the two groups'
rankings do not perfectly align on the 45-degree is in itself an indication of the natural presence of individual specific
considerations.
                      Appendix Figure A.1: Labor Market Rankings across Subsamples
                                   Panel A: Best vs. Worst Lottery Numbers




                                  Panel B: Random Split of Analysis Sample




Notes: These figures compare the average rankings of local labor markets using the information on the binding pre-
placement rankings of labor markets among earlier cohorts. Panel A compares the average rankings across those with
the best lottery numbers (the bottom 30%) and those with the worst lottery numbers (the top 30%), and panel B
compares the average rankings of labor markets across a random split of our analysis sample. In both panels, each
dot represents a local market, and we plot the fitted line as well as the 45-degree line which is the benchmark under
non-differential rankings. We also report the slope of the fitted line, where the benchmark null of non-differential
ranking is 1.
                                   Appendix Figure A.2: Relocation Distance




Notes: This figure plots a graduating student's relocation distance against the student's lottery rank, where we split
cohorts around year 2008.


                           Appendix Figure A.3: Labor Market Rankings over Time




Notes: This figure compares the effective rankings of local labor markets across earlier cohorts and later cohorts.
These location-based preferences, as revealed through choices, are constructed such that we characterize the
desirability of a labor market (i.e., a county) based on the average lottery rank of the interns who choose to sort into
it.
                  Appendix Figure A.4: Preferences over Local Labor Markets by Gender




Notes: This figure compares females' and males' priority rankings over entry-level local labor markets. We use the
information we have for a subsample about students' binding pre-placement rankings of local labor markets as
reported in priority lists. We assign to each local labor market its average priority by gender, and we then compare
these priority rankings across males and females. Each dot represents a local labor market, where the x-axis denotes
male rankings and the y-axis denotes female rankings. We plot the fitted line, as well as the 45-degree line which is
the benchmark under non-differential rankings by gender. We also report the slope of the fitted line, where the
benchmark of non-differential ranking is 1.
Appendix B: Verification of Lottery


                                                Appendix Table A.1
                                              Overall Sample          Males             Females
                                                    (1)                (2)                (3)
                   Gender                         0.0074
                                                (0.0060)
                   Age                            0.0004             -0.0008             0.0014
                                                (0.0013)             (0.0020)           (0.0018)
                   Partnered                      0.0086              0.0084             0.0089
                                                (0.0063)             (0.0100)           (0.0081)
                   Number of Children            -0.0030             -0.0039            -0.0033
                                                (0.0058)             (0.0099)           (0.0073)
                   GPA Rank                       0.0048              0.0025             0.0068
                                                (0.0104)             (0.0162)           (0.0136)
                   Observations                   10,017               3,939              6,078
                   R-Squared                      0.0004              0.0003             0.0003
                   F-Statistic                     0.74                 0.25               0.48
                   p-Value                        0.5959              0.9082             0.7507



Notes: This table tests the validity of the lottery in terms of random assignment. We run specifications that regress
the graduating physicians' lottery rank on baseline characteristics available in our data. These include gender, age,
an indicator for having a registered partner, number of children in the household, and high-school GPA rank. Robust
standard errors are reported in parentheses, and we also report the p-value of the F-test for the joint predictive power
of the specifications we run. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01
Appendix C: Research Design--Alternative Specifications


               Appendix Table C.1: Sorting into Less Desirable Local Labor Markets


All
                                                   Percentile
                              20          25           30          35          40        Linear
                              (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
 Treat                     0.0527***   0.0586***   0.0538***    0.0469***   0.0476***   0.0773***
                           (0.0149)    (0.0135)     (0.0122)    (0.0114)    (0.0106)    (0.0164)
 Constant                  0.1710***   0.1737***   0.1689***    0.1723***   0.1699***   0.1536***
                           (0.0100)    (0.0090)     (0.0082)    (0.0077)    (0.0071)    (0.0091)
 Individuals                 2,852       3,557       4,250        4,941       5,642       7,037

Males
                                                   Percentile
                              20          25           30          35          40        Linear
                              (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
 Treat                      0.0107      0.0104       0.0152      0.0190      0.0236      0.0290
                           (0.0229)    (0.0209)     (0.0191)    (0.0179)    (0.0167)    (0.0257)
 Constant                  0.1805***   0.1934***   0.1883***    0.1876***   0.1841***   0.1811***
                           (0.0160)    (0.0147)     (0.0134)    (0.0125)    (0.0115)    (0.0146)
 Individuals                 1,138       1,436        1,706       1,948       2,230       2,798

Females
                                                   Percentile
                              20          25           30          35          40        Linear
                              (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
 Treat                     0.0812***   0.0918***   0.0802***    0.0653***   0.0634***   0.1096***
                           (0.0196)    (0.0176)     (0.0159)    (0.0147)    (0.0136)    (0.0213)
 Constant                  0.1645***   0.1602***   0.1558***    0.1623***   0.1606***   0.1352***
                           (0.0127)    (0.0113)     (0.0103)    (0.0097)    (0.0090)    (0.0116)
 Individuals                 1,714       2,121       2,544        2,993       3,412       4,239
               Appendix Table C.2: Human Capital Investment


All
                                          Percentile
                   20           25            30           35           40        Linear
                   (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)
 Treat          -0.0222*     -0.0186*      -0.0147      -0.0083      -0.0043     -0.0183
                (0.0117)     (0.0103)      (0.0096)    (0.0089)     (0.0083)    (0.0127)
 Constant       0.1390***    0.1337***    0.1359***    0.1331***    0.1314***   0.1391***
                (0.0086)     (0.0075)      (0.0069)    (0.0064)     (0.0059)    (0.0075)
 Individuals      2,588        3,224        3,857        4,482        5,124       6,386

Males
                                          Percentile
                    20          25            30          35           40        Linear
                    (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)
 Treat           -0.0021      0.0105        0.0093      0.0174       0.0177      0.0115
                (0.0219)     (0.0191)      (0.0177)    (0.0166)     (0.0153)    (0.0236)
 Constant       0.1819***    0.1670***    0.1711***    0.1687***    0.1661***   0.1701***
                (0.0155)     (0.0134)      (0.0124)    (0.0114)     (0.0106)    (0.0136)
 Individuals      1,040        1,304         1,551       1,770        2,027       2,538

Females
                                          Percentile
                    20           25           30           35           40        Linear
                    (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)
 Treat          -0.0361***   -0.0397***   -0.0325***   -0.0262***   -0.0195**   -0.0390***
                 (0.0123)     (0.0110)     (0.0104)     (0.0097)    (0.0091)     (0.0136)
 Constant       0.1095***     0.1106***   0.1121***     0.1095***   0.1083***    0.1185***
                 (0.0096)     (0.0087)     (0.0080)     (0.0073)    (0.0067)     (0.0084)
 Individuals      1,548         1,920       2,306         2,712       3,097        3,848
      Appendix Table C.3: Probability of Having More than One Child among Non-Partnered Individuals


All
                                                             Percentile
                                     20            25             30          35            40          Linear
                                    (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)
 Treat                            0.0415*       0.0383*        0.0331*      0.0174        0.0122        0.0310
                                 (0.0235)      (0.0212)       (0.0194)     (0.0181)      (0.0168)      (0.0258)
 Constant                        0.4425***     0.4400***     0.4411***     0.4461***     0.4526***     0.4447***
                                 (0.0166)      (0.0150)       (0.0138)     (0.0128)      (0.0119)      (0.0149)
 Individuals                       1,471         1,816          2,148        2,486         2,864         3,581

Males
                                                             Percentile
                                     20            25            30            35            40          Linear
                                    (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
 Treat                            0.0086        -0.0050       -0.0165       -0.0298       -0.0373       -0.0328
                                 (0.0357)      (0.0318)       (0.0290)     (0.0272)      (0.0253)      (0.0388)
 Constant                        0.4254***     0.4259***     0.4262***     0.4302***     0.4356***     0.4375***
                                 (0.0251)      (0.0226)       (0.0206)     (0.0195)      (0.0182)      (0.0227)
 Individuals                        609           775           919          1,050         1,219         1,508

Females
                                                             Percentile
                                     20           25             30           35            40          Linear
                                    (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)
 Treat                           0.0648**      0.0711**      0.0709***     0.0529**      0.0488**      0.0783**
                                 (0.0311)      (0.0282)       (0.0260)     (0.0239)      (0.0223)      (0.0343)
 Constant                        0.4551***     0.4506***     0.4524***     0.4579***     0.4653***     0.4496***
                                 (0.0222)      (0.0201)       (0.0185)     (0.0169)      (0.0158)      (0.0198)
 Individuals                        862          1,041         1,229         1,436         1,645         2,073


Notes: These tables investigate the robustness of our design by studying the effects on our main outcomes when we
vary the percentiles that define the treatment and control groups. Columns 1-5 report estimates for long-run effects
based on specification (2). Column 6 estimates a version of specification (2) that is linear in lottery rank. Robust
standard errors clustered at the individual level are reported in parentheses. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01
Appendix Table C.4: Effects of Early Careers on Long-Run Outcomes--Graduation Round Fixed Effects

Panel A: Sorting into Less Desirable Local Labor Markets

                                                    All          Males       Females
                                                    (1)           (2)           (3)
                              Treat              0.0538***      0.0139       0.0801***
                                                 (0.0122)      (0.0190)      (0.0159)
                              Constant           0.1689***     0.1890***     0.1558***
                                                 (0.0081)      (0.0133)      (0.0102)
                              Individuals          4,250         1,706         2,544

Panel B: Human Capital Investment

                                                    All          Males        Females
                                                     (1)          (2)            (3)
                              Treat               -0.0143       0.0101       -0.0312***
                                                 (0.0096)      (0.0177)       (0.0103)
                              Constant           0.1357***     0.1706***      0.1114***
                                                 (0.0069)      (0.0124)       (0.0079)
                              Individuals          3,857         1,551          2,306

Panel C: Probability of Having More than One Child among Non-Partnered Individuals

                                                    All          Males       Females
                                                    (1)            (2)          (3)
                              Treat               0.0321*       -0.0244      0.0708***
                                                 (0.0193)      (0.0288)      (0.0257)
                              Constant           0.4416***     0.4302***     0.4524***
                                                 (0.0136)      (0.0202)      (0.0183)
                              Individuals          2,148          919          1,229



Notes: These tables investigate the robustness of the results for our main long-run outcomes to the inclusion of
graduation round fixed effects based on specification (2). Robust standard errors clustered at the individual level are
reported in parentheses. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01
                   Appendix Figure C.1: Sorting into Least Desirable Local Labor Markets


                                        Panel A: Effects on Overall Sample




                                             Panel B: Effects by Gender
                              Males                                                     Females




Notes: This figure plots the dynamic effects of the lottery on the probability of sorting into the worst quartile of least
desirable local labor markets. We plot the  estimates from equation (1) for periods 0 to 10, along with their 95-
percent confidence intervals. The x-axis denotes the year relative to the lottery, and the y-axis denotes the effect on
the studied outcome. Panel A includes the overall sample, and panel B splits the sample by gender.
Appendix D: Analysis Sample Summary Statistics


                                                Appendix Table D.1


                                                  Control Treatment Difference P-Value
                                                    (1)      (2)        (3)      (4)
                       A. Overall Sample
                       Female                      0.5999      0.6114       -0.0115     0.3576
                       Partnered                   0.4964      0.5079       -0.0115     0.3700
                       Age                        28.5096     28.5206       -0.0111     0.8606
                       GPA Rank                    0.5021      0.5047       -0.0026     0.7246
                       Number of Children          0.2669      0.2644        0.0025     0.8694
                       Number of Individuals        3,024       3,052
                       B. Males
                       Partnered                   0.4636      0.4696       -0.0060     0.7681
                       Age                        28.6455     28.5995        0.0460     0.6665
                       GPA Rank                    0.5052      0.4986        0.0066     0.5871
                       Number of Children          0.2280      0.2184        0.0096     0.6654
                       Number of Individuals        1,210       1,186
                       C. Females
                       Partnered                   0.5182      0.5322       -0.0140     0.3964
                       Age                        28.4190     28.4705       -0.0516     0.5047
                       GPA Rank                    0.5000      0.5085       -0.0086     0.3652
                       Number of Children          0.2928      0.2935       -0.0008     0.9682
                       Number of Individuals        1,814       1,866



Notes: This table provides summary statistics for the analysis sample in the year prior to the internship lottery. Panel
A provides statistics for the entire sample, and panels B and C split the sample by gender. Characteristics include
gender, age, an indicator for having a registered partner, number of children in the household, and high-school GPA
rank. Column 1 displays means for our control group, and column 2 displays means for our treatment group. Column
3 provides the differences between column 1 and column 2. Column 4 reports the p-values of the test statistics (t-
statistics for continuous variables and z-statistics for binary variables) of the differences in column 3.
Appendix E: First-Stage Effects at Internship Period


                   Appendix Table E.1: First-Stage Effects at Internship Period by Gender

                                                             All            Males          Females
                   A. Less Desirable Labor Market
                   Treatment Effect                       0.1844***       0.1961***        0.1767***
                                                          (0.0101)        (0.0161)         (0.0131)
                   Constant                               0.1164***       0.1083***        0.1218***
                                                          (0.0058)        (0.0089)         (0.0077)
                   Individuals                              6,076           2,396            3,680

                   B. High-Seniority Colleagues
                   Treatment Effect                      -0.5897***       -0.5865***      -0.5921***
                                                          (0.0201)         (0.0336)        (0.0250)
                   Constant                              -2.3352***       -2.3473***      -2.3272***
                                                          (0.0122)         (0.0202)        (0.0153)
                   Individuals                              5,743            2,248           3,495

                   C. University Hospital
                   Treatment Effect                      -0.3999***       -0.3845***      -0.4099***
                                                          (0.0116)         (0.0186)        (0.0149)
                   Constant                               0.6280***        0.6223***      0.6318***
                                                          (0.0088)         (0.0139)        (0.0113)
                   Individuals                              6,076            2,396           3,680

                   D. Rural vs. Urban Locality
                   Treatment Effect                       0.0883***       0.0961***        0.0830***
                                                          (0.0075)        (0.0116)         (0.0099)
                   Constant                               0.0539***       0.0430***        0.0612***
                                                          (0.0041)        (0.0058)         (0.0056)
                   Individuals                              6,076           2,396            3,680

Notes: This table characterizes the first-stage effects of the lottery at the internship period by gender. Panel A studies
the desirability of an intern's assigned local labor market. We characterize the desirability of a local labor market
based on the average lottery rank of the interns who choose to sort into it. We use these rankings to partition the
markets into two groups of more desirable local labor markets and less desirable local labor markets, and we study
the degree to which the lottery affects the probability of interning in a less desirable market. Panel B studies high-
quality training and favorable professional networks based on the share of high-seniority colleagues. For this purpose,
we look at established physicians (those that are at least fifteen years out of medical school) who hold a medical PhD,
and we calculate their share out of all established physicians within the labor market. Panel C studies the extent of
attachment to university, or teaching, hospitals. Panel D studies the probability that the physician interns in a rural
versus urban municipality. Robust standard errors clustered at the individual level are reported in parentheses. * p <
.10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01
                   Appendix Table E.2: Characteristics of Less Desirable Local Labor Markets


                                               High-Seniority   University     Rural Location
                                                Colleagues    Hospital (prob.)    (prob.)
                                                    (log)
                                                     (1)            (2)              (3)
                         Less Desirable          -0.7603***     -0.3064***       0.6153***
                         Labor Market             (0.1737)       (0.0796)        (0.1451)
                         Constant                -2.5805  ***
                                                                 0.4034 ***
                                                                                  0.0130
                                                  (0.1268)       (0.0581)        (0.1059)

  Notes: This table shows the degree to which the desirability of a local labor market is correlated with internship-
  related and location characteristics. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01




                                Appendix Table E.3: Features of University Hospitals


             Number of Number of       Number of     Number of Number of      Having a    Number of    Having an Number of
              Unique   Admissions      Specialties   Procedures   Unique        CT        CT Scans       MRI     MRI Scans
              Patients                                          Procedures    Scanner                   Scanner
University   44,034***    77,639***       6.6***     35,503***     669***      0.23***     28,633**     0.41***     18,298***
Hospital      (9,326)     (17,962)        (1.7)       (9,342)     (169.2)      (0.06)      (12,332)     (0.08)       (5,870)
Constant     42,403***    82,741***       9.9***     28,947***     816***      0.75***     12,839***    0.58***      6,380***
              (5,478)     (12,223)        (1.1)       (4,283)      (95.1)      (0.06)       (2,165)     (0.07)       (1,232)

  Notes: This table studies across Danish hospitals (51 in total nationally) the correlations between a series of healthcare
  utilization measures and a hospital being a university hospital. These measures are calculated for each hospital based
  on the administrative patient registers. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01
Appendix F: Life-Cycle Income Trajectories
                                     Appendix Figure F.1: Medical PhD




                        Appendix Figure F.2: Affiliation with University Hospitals




                           Appendix Figure F.3: Gender-Represented Specialties




Notes: These figures plot income paths by years since graduation for the sample of all Danish physicians. Shaded
areas represent 95-percent confidence intervals. We use a comprehensive measure of income from any source,
including pre-tax earnings, capital income, government transfers, and self-employment business revenues.
Appendix G: Effects of Early Careers on Family Formation Choices
                 Appendix Table G.1: Effects on Family Formation--Partnered Individuals
              A. Partnership
                                                      All                Males             Females
              Average Treatment Effect              0.0008              0.0153              -0.0078
                                                   (0.0097)            (0.0145)            (0.0129)
              Constant                             0.9226***           0.9244***           0.9215***
                                                   (0.0072)            (0.0114)            (0.0093)
              Individuals                            2,312                840                1,472
              B. Number of Children
                                                      All                Males             Females
              Average Treatment Effect              -0.0231             -0.0376             -0.0142
                                                   (0.0376)            (0.0642)            (0.0464)
              Constant                             2.0962***           2.0891***           2.1001***
                                                   (0.0273)            (0.0492)            (0.0324)
              Individuals                            2,317                844                1,473
              C. One Child or More
                                                      All                Males             Females
              Average Treatment Effect              0.0038              0.0221              -0.0068
                                                   (0.0101)            (0.0172)            (0.0126)
              Constant                             0.9256***           0.9138***           0.9322***
                                                   (0.0074)            (0.0133)            (0.0088)
              Individuals                            2,317                844                1,473
              D. More than One Child
                                                      All                Males             Females
              Average Treatment Effect              -0.0089             0.0093              -0.0190
                                                   (0.0151)            (0.0254)            (0.0189)
              Constant                             0.8109***           0.7869***           0.8244***
                                                   (0.0108)            (0.0188)            (0.0131)
              Individuals                            2,317                844                1,473

       Appendix Table G.2: Marriage Market Matching Patterns among Non-Partnered Individuals
                Age Gap                                             All          Males          Females
                Average Treatment Effect                          0.2830        -0.1673         0.6175**
                                                                (0.2016)       (0.2478)        (0.2638)
                Constant                                          0.1536      -1.5456***       1.5100***
                                                                (0.1386)       (0.1743)        (0.1847)
                Individuals                                        1,788          777            1,011
                Assortative Matching--Medical Degree                All          Males          Females
                Average Treatment Effect                         -0.0337        -0.0012        -0.0619**
                                                                (0.0250)       (0.0395)        (0.0314)
                Constant                                        0.2942***      0.3483***       0.2502***
                                                                (0.0181)       (0.0279)        (0.0234)
                Individuals                                        1,490          659             831
Notes: Appendix Table G.1 studies the long-run effects of the lottery on family formation choices among the sample
of individuals who were partnered in the pre-period. Appendix Table G.2 studies the marriage patterns of pre-period
unpartnered individuals in terms of spousal age gap (in the direction of the partner) and assortative mating in terms
of whether both partners earn a clinical medical degree. The tables report estimates based on specification (2). Robust
standard errors clustered at the individual level are reported in parentheses. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01
Appendix H: Earnings as an Insufficient Statistic

                                                 Appendix Table H.1


                                                    All                Males              Females
                  Earnings
                  Average Treatment               6,575              11,750                1,135
                  Effect                         (5,425)             (9,110)              (5,802)
                  Constant                      591,316***          664,811***           543,388***
                                                 (3,729)             (6,355)              (3,969)
                  Individuals                     4,195               1,674                2,521

                  Log Earnings
                  Average Treatment               0.0142              0.0281               0.0016
                  Effect                         (0.0116)            (0.0195)             (0.0134)
                  Constant                      13.2368***          13.3466***           13.1650***
                                                 (0.0082)            (0.0144)             (0.0091)
                  Individuals                      4,137               1,657                2,480


Notes: This table studies the longer-run effects of the lottery on earnings, based on equation (2). Earnings are
winsorized at their 99th percentile. Robust standard errors clustered at the individual level are reported in parentheses.
*
  p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01
Appendix I: Location Characteristics


                   Appendix Table I.1: Characteristics of Healthcare Local Labor Markets

                                                                                     Labor Market Desirability
                                                                                        More              Less
                                                                                      Desirable        Desirable
Demographics               Population density (per sq km, levels)                       1,955               91
                           Population size, million (levels)                             3.53              2.10
                           Share 25-64 year-old with higher education                    34.1             -12.3
                           DI per 100                                                    5.8              +2.0
Amenities and Norms        Home prices per square meter (DKK)                          16,820            -8,861
                           Annual income (DKK)                                        400,979           -46,242
                           Revenue from income tax per capita (DKK)                    39,844            -3,629
                           Places in daycare per 100                                    43.89            -22.67
                           Proportion of women elected officials                         34.9              -6.4
                           Expenditure on culture, sports, and leisure (per cap.)       1,680            -114
Health and Healthcare      Primary care expenditure per capita (DKK)                     462             +89
                           Hospital visits per capita                                    0.84           +0.11
                           Daily smokers, %                                              16.2            +1.9
                           CT scans                                                    15,288           -6,245
                           MRI scans                                                    8,351           -3,904

Notes: This table provides descriptive information from national statistics that compares less desirable and more
desirable counties across different amenities and features of the healthcare market. The first two characteristics are
reported in averages, and the rest of the characteristics are reported as the averages for the more desirable counties
and the deviation from these averages for the less desirable counties.
Appendix J: Specialty Grouping
                                                Appendix Table J.1
                      Specialty                                            Specialty Group
                      Panel A: Male-Represented
                      Thorax Surgery                                       Surgery
                      Orthopedic Surgery                                   Surgery
                      General Surgery                                      Surgery
                      Neurosurgery                                         Surgery
                      Internal Medicine                                    Internal medicine
                      Clinical Biochemistry                                Transverse specialties
                      Otorhinolaryngology                                  Surgery
                      Internal Medicine: Cardiology                        Internal medicine
                      Ophthalmology                                        Surgery
                      Vascular Surgery                                     Surgery
                      Anesthesiology                                       Transverse specialties
                      Internal Medicine: Gastroenterology and
                      Hepatology                                           Internal medicine
                      Urology                                              Surgery
                      Panel B: Female-Represented
                      Internal Medicine: Hematology                        Internal medicine
                      Clinical Microbiology                                Transverse specialties
                      Neuro Medicine                                       Other
                      Clinical Immunology                                  Transverse specialties
                      Clinical Physiology and Nuclear Medicine             Transverse specialties
                      Occupational Medicine                                Other
                      General Medicine                                     General medicine
                      Internal Medicine: Rheumatology                      Internal medicine
                      Internal Medicine: Pulmonary Diseases                Internal medicine
                      Radiology                                            Transverse specialties
                      Internal Medicine: Endocrinology                     Internal medicine
                      Plastic Surgery                                      Surgery
                      Psychiatry                                           Psychiatry
                      Internal Medicine: Nephrology                        Internal medicine
                      Dermato-Venerology                                   Other
                      Clinical Pharmacology                                Transverse specialties
                      Internal Medicine: Infectious Diseases               Internal medicine
                      Gynecology and Obstetrics                            Surgery
                      Pathological Anatomy and Cytology                    Transverse specialties
                      Public Medicine                                      Other
                      Pediatrics                                           Other
                      Clinical Oncology                                    Other
                      Internal Medicine: Geriatrics                        Internal medicine
                      Forensic medicine                                    Other
                      Clinical Genetics                                    Transverse specialties
                      Child and Youth Psychiatry                           Psychiatry


Notes: This table classifies medical specialties by gender representativeness based on the share of females within a
specialty relative to their overall proportion. "Female-represented specialties" are specialties with female share that
is higher than this proportion, and "male-represented specialties" are specialties with female share that is lower than
this proportion.
