                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    SIMPLE AND CREDIBLE VALUE-ADDED ESTIMATION USING CENTRALIZED
                         SCHOOL ASSIGNMENT

                                        Joshua Angrist
                                           Peter Hull
                                        Parag A. Pathak
                                     Christopher R. Walters

                                      Working Paper 28241
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28241


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020




Our thanks to Jimmy Chin and Raymond Han for outstanding research assistance and to MIT
SEII program managers Eryn Heying and Anna Vallee for invaluable administrative support. We
thank seminar participants at Berkeley for helpful input. Financial support from Arnold Ventures/
LJAF and the National Science Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. Pathak also thanks the
W.T. Grant Foundation for research support. The research described here was carried out under
data use agreements between the New York City and Denver public school districts and MIT.
We're grateful to these districts for sharing data. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w28241.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Joshua Angrist, Peter Hull, Parag A. Pathak, and Christopher R. Walters. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Simple and Credible Value-Added Estimation Using Centralized School Assignment
Joshua Angrist, Peter Hull, Parag A. Pathak, and Christopher R. Walters
NBER Working Paper No. 28241
December 2020
JEL No. C11,C21,C26,C52,I21,I28,J24

                                         ABSTRACT

Many large urban school districts match students to schools using algorithms that incorporate an
element of random assignment. We introduce two simple empirical strategies to harness this
randomization for value-added models (VAMs) measuring the causal effects of individual
schools. The first estimator controls for the probability of being offered admission to different
schools, treating the take-up decision as independent of potential outcomes. Randomness in
school assignments is used to test this key conditional independence assumption. The second
estimator uses randomness in offers to generate instrumental variables (IVs) for school
enrollment. This procedure uses a low-dimensional model of school quality mediators to solve
the under-identification challenge arising from the fact that some schools are under-subscribed.
Both approaches relax the assumptions of conventional value-added models while obviating the
need for elaborate nonlinear estimators. In applications to data from Denver and New York City,
we find that models controlling for both assignment risk and lagged achievement yield highly
reliable VAM estimates. Estimates from models with fewer controls and older lagged score
controls are improved markedly by IV.

Joshua Angrist                                  Parag A. Pathak
Department of Economics, E52-436                Department of Economics, E52-426
MIT                                             MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue                         77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139                             Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER                                        and NBER
angrist@mit.edu                                 ppathak@mit.edu

Peter Hull                                      Christopher R. Walters
University of Chicago                           Department of Economics
5757 South University Avenue                    University of California, Berkeley
Chicago, IL 60637                               530 Evans Hall #3880
and NBER                                        Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
hull@uchicago.edu                               and NBER
                                                crwalters@econ.berkeley.edu
1    Introduction
Policymakers and families increasingly rely on achievement-based measures of school quality
to make high-stakes decisions. Families use school quality information to decide where to
enroll and, in some cases, where to live. School leaders and policy-makers use the same
sort of information when deciding whether to close, restructure, or expand schools. In
a parallel development, a growing number of school districts use centralized, algorithmic
assignment schemes to match students and schools. Boston, Denver, and New York City
(NYC), for instance, use deferred acceptance (DA) algorithms to assign students to seats.
Many of these centralized assignment systems incorporate random lottery numbers to break
ties between otherwise similar students. A growing econometric literature shows how the
resulting randomness in seat assignment identifies causal effects of school attendance.
    This paper introduces two new empirical strategies that exploit randomness in centralized
school assignment to measure individual school quality. The key to both approaches is a
vector of school assignment propensity scores which characterize each student's probability
of assignment to each school. In general, the propensity score for treatment assignment is the
probability of assignment conditional on a vector of confounding variables; Rosenbaum and
Rubin (1983) show that treatments that are independent of potential outcomes conditional
on potential confounders are also independent of potential outcomes conditional on the
propensity score. Abdulkadiro   glu et al. (2017, 2019) extend this result to matching markets
for schools, deriving formulas that quantify assignment risk in centrally assigning districts.
    Empirical work exploiting school assignment propensity scores has so far mostly aimed to
capture causal effects of attendance in particular sectors, such as charter schools, rather than
individual schools. Estimates of such effects are useful for understanding average sectoral
differences, but high stakes decisions for households and policymakers typically hinge on
measures of individual school quality. Our aim here is to use school assignment propensity
scores to estimate individual school value-added. An important econometric challenge in this
context arises because many schools are under-subscribed, that is, they have fewer applicants
than seats. A conventional two-stage least squares (2SLS) model that uses school offers to
instrument individual school attendance is therefore under-identified. Moreover, many over-
subscribed schools face weak demand and, consequently, yield a weak first stage. This paper
tackles the econometric issues arising in such common school assignment scenarios.
    Our first empirical strategy presumes that the only sources of selection bias in value-
added estimates are the applicant characteristics integral to school matching, such as where
to apply and the priority status that a school assigns its applicants. This amounts to
the presumption that compliance with conditionally randomized offers is independent of



                                               1
potential outcomes. We refer to this empirical strategy as a risk-controlled value-added
model (RC VAM). The conditional independence assumption underlying RC VAM echoes
that invoked in the Dale and Krueger (2002, 2014) and Mountjoy and Hickman (2020) studies
of the earnings consequences of elite college attendance. Importantly, however, centralized
school assignment facilitates validation of such conditional independence assumptions, a
feature not seen in previous applications of this sort of identification strategy.
    Our second estimator uses randomized school offers as instrumental variables (IVs) for
school attended, conditional on the school assignment propensity score. Score conditioning
ensures the validity of offer dummies as instruments, but under-subscription makes a con-
ventional IV approach intractable. Our IV VAM approach solves the under-identification
problem by modeling school value-added as a function of a few mediating school characteris-
tics, estimated via the "many invalid instruments" framework of Koles´     ar et al. (2015). The
IV VAM estimates are then used to construct empirical Bayes posterior predictions of value-
added for individual schools. This approach builds on previous empirical Bayes strategies
that combine observational and quasi-experimental estimates (Angrist et al., 2016, 2017;
Chetty and Hendren, 2018; Hull, 2018) but which can be handicapped by computational
complexity and the need for a host of auxiliary modeling assumptions. We show here how
information on school characteristics and assignment risk can be used to simplify IV VAM
estimation in markets where schools are under-subscribed.
    The tools developed here are illustrated by estimating school value-added in Denver and
NYC, two large urban districts that centralize public school assignment. Denver matches
students to schools in a unified enrollment scheme that employs a single random lottery
number as tie-breaker. The Denver school assignment propensity score is estimated using
recent theoretical results on school assignment risk under DA with lottery tie-breaking (Ab-
dulkadiro  glu et al., 2017). Admission offers to traditional NYC public schools are determined
by a match that combines lottery and non-lottery tie-breakers (the latter are relevant for
applicants to New York's "screened schools"). NYC school assignment scores are therefore
estimated using the theoretical results on assignment risk in matching markets with mixed
multiple tie-breaking derived in Abdulkadiro     glu et al. (2019).
    Estimates from both cities suggest that RC VAM does a remarkably good job of con-
trolling selection bias. Statistical tests that exploit quasi-experimental offer variation fail to
reject the key conditional independence assumption underlying this first approach. Perhaps
surprisingly, RC VAM appears to be reliable even for NYC high schools, where the lagged
achievement controls included in the RC VAM model differ from the SAT score we use as an
outcome. RC VAM estimates also beat conventional VAM estimates on mean-squared error
(MSE) grounds, with bias reductions more than offsetting the modestly increased variance


                                                2
from using narrower variation.
    Because RC VAMs controlling for risk and lagged achievement appear to be virtually
unbiased, there's little scope for IV VAM to improve upon them. We show, however, that IV
VAM reduces bias and MSE for VAMs estimated with fewer controls than those specified by
the RC procedure. IV VAM also boosts the accuracy of VAMs that rely on older measures
of lagged achievement for estimation. This scenario is inspired by the 2020 COVID-19 pan-
demic, when few school districts were able to test as originally scheduled. Our encouraging
results in this context suggest that IV VAM is likely to be useful in other situations where
information on lagged outcomes is dated or unavailable.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 outlines a conceptual
framework for school value-added estimation and testing in districts that centralize school
assignment. Sections 3 and 4 describe our two new estimation strategies. Empirical results
are discussed in Section 5. Section 6 summarizes and points to directions for further work.


2     Econometric Framework
Our theoretical analysis adds to a burgeoning literature developing VAM methodology. Much
of this work is inspired by the pioneering Kane and Staiger (2008) study of teachers, which
applies empirical Bayes estimation to the study of teacher value-added. Key extensions
and VAM applications exploiting quasi-experimental variation include Chetty et al. (2014a)
for teachers and Deming (2014) and Angrist et al. (2017) for schools. Applications of an
empirical Bayes framework for value-added estimation to other settings include Chetty and
Hendren (2018), Hull (2018), and Abaluck et al. (2020). As in these previous studies, the
foundation of our approach is a causal model describing the effects of attendance at individual
schools on student outcomes. We next describe this setup.


2.1    Setting
Consider a population of N students, each attending one of J schools in a district. Let
Yij denote the potential outcome of student i when enrolled at school j . These potential
outcomes are described by a constant-effects model:

                                Yij = j + i ,   j  {1, . . . , J },                         (1)

where j = E [Yij ] and i  Yij - E [Yij ]. For any two schools, j and k , the difference j - k
is the causal effect of attending j rather than k , that is, a comparison of school value-added.



                                                3
Equation (1) is a constant-effects VAM because the common residual, i , implies that Yij - Yik
is the same for all students. We refer to i as student i's ability.
    It is convenient to adopt a parameterization that measures value-added relative to the
average for the district. Let Dij denote an indicator equal to one if student i attends school
j . Observed outcomes Yi can then be written:

                                                   J
                                      Yi = 0 +           j Dij + i ,                                  (2)
                                                  j =1


             1   J
where 0 = J      j =1 j and j = j - 0 .
    The value-added parameters in equation (2) describe the effect of randomly generated
changes in school enrollment on the dependent variable. Since school enrollment is not
randomly assigned, however, these causal parameters need not coincide with differences in
average student outcomes across schools. Schools that attract higher-ability students tend
to have better average outcomes, regardless of value-added. In the context of equation (2),
this selection bias manifests as correlation between Dij and i . Consequently, a regression
of Yi on Dij need not coincide with the causal model, equation (2).


2.2     Centralized Assignment
Centralized school assignment schemes ("matches," for short) provide a source of identifying
information that we use to overcome selection bias. Centralized matches ask students to
submit rank-ordered preferences over schools, while also granting potential applicants a pri-
ority at each school.1 Assignments are often made by a deferred acceptance (DA) algorithm
that takes preferences and priorities as inputs. Match-generated offers are also determined
by a tie-breaking variable, often randomly assigned, that distinguishes between students who
have the same preferences and priorities. DA matches output a single school assignment for
each student. Students may choose to enroll where matched, or enter a later less systematic
round producing negotiated assignments. With random tie-breaking, offers are randomly
assigned conditional on preferences and priorities. Because many students enroll where of-
fered, dummies indicating school offers can be used as instrumental variables for the school
enrollment dummies in equation (2).
    Preferences and priorities are captured by a partial ordering i of schools on student i's
preference list, and by student i's priority ij at each school j . The vector i = (i1 , ..., iJ )
collects a student's priorities at all schools. A student's type, denoted i , is the combination
   1
     Priorities are non-stochastic tie-breakers. For example, many schools admit the siblings of currently
enrolled students before considering others.



                                                    4
of preferences and priorities, that is, i  ( i , i ). Let Zij denote an indicator equal to one
when the match offers student i a seat at school j , and collect these indicators in the vector
Zi = (Zi1 , ..., ZiJ ) . The conditional random assignment of Zi is then summarized as follows:

Assumption CRA. Student ability is independent of school assignments conditional on
type: i  Zi | i .

    The maintained Assumption CRA suggests that we can estimate the causal effects of
school assignment by comparing the outcomes of students within strata defined by type. In
practice, however, we see nearly as many preference and priority combinations as there are
students in a match. Consequently, full type conditioning is impractical.
    To solve the problem of a high-dimensional conditioning set, we pool students of different
types in a manner that preserves conditional independence of offers and potential outcomes.
Pooling relies on the school assignment propensity score, computation of which uses theoreti-
cal results in Abdulkadiro glu et al. (2017, 2019). Student i's propensity score for assignment
to school j is defined as:

                                     pij  Pr(Zij = 1|i ).                                    (3)

The pij are school assignment rates determined by repeatedly running the assignment algo-
rithm, redrawing tie-breakers each time, while holding preferences and priorities fixed. The
vector pi = (pi1 , ..., piJ ) collects student i's propensity scores for all schools.
    As first shown by Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983), random assignment conditional on a
vector of controls implies conditional random assignment given the propensity score obtained
conditional on these controls. In our setup, this result can be stated as:

Lemma 1. Under Assumption CRA, student ability is independent of school assignments
conditional on assignment risk: i  Zi | pi .

In other words, where school assignment is random conditional on type, assignment is also
random conditional on the school assignment propensity score.
    Why is this conditional independence property useful? As in a complex stratified ran-
domized trial, a signal feature of the school assignment setting is that the propensity score is
a coarse function of observed conditioning variables. In particular, while type varies widely,
assignment scores are determined by a few school-level cutoffs. In view of this, researchers
have long used propensity-score conditioning to control for confounding variables in esti-
mates of causal effects. Score control is especially straightforward in a linear constant-effects
model like equation (2). In this case, it's enough to subtract scores from offer dummies.
Specifically, we have the following corollary to Lemma 1:


                                               5
Corollary 1. Under Assumption CRA, student ability is orthogonal to risk-adjusted school
assignments: E [i (Zij - pij )] = 0 for each j .

    By virtue of the Corollary, the set of risk-adjusted offer dummies, Zij - pij , can be used
as instruments for the set of enrollment dummies, Dij , in equation (2). The reasoning that
yields this result parallels that employed in the partially linear framework pioneered by
Robinson (1988), applied here to IV. A two-stage least squares (2SLS) procedure that uses
offers as instruments for school enrollment while controlling for the corresponding propensity
scores is equivalent to a 2SLS estimator that uses residuals from a regression of offers on
school assignment scores as instruments. Since pij = E [Zij | i ], the auxiliary regression
residual in this case is Zij - pij . The appendix fleshes out the details behind this argument.2


2.3     The Under-subscription Challenge
Abdulkadiro   glu et al. (2017, 2019) use orthogonality conditions analogous to those described
by Corollary 1 to estimate effects of attending groups of schools seen as belonging to a
particular sector, such as charter schools. This work treats assignment to a given sector as
an instrument for sector enrollment, controlling for the relevant assignment propensity score.
When the sector of interest consists of charter schools, for example, risk adjustment is based
on the probability of being assigned a seat at any charter school participating in the match.
    Use of centralized assignment to estimate individual school value-added is more challeng-
ing because many schools are under-subscribed in the sense of having more available seats
than applicants who rank the school highly. Under-subscription of an entire sector is much
less likely than individual school under-subscription. The propensity score for an under-
subscribed school equals either zero or one for all applicants, depending on how each appli-
cant ranks the school. Consequently, Zij = pij for such schools, implying risk-adjusted offers
are degenerate. With under-subscription a causal VAM model like equation (2) is under-
identified because the number of endogenous variables exceeds the number of non-degenerate
instruments. The next two sections introduce strategies for addressing this problem.


3       Risk-Controlled VAM
Our first approach to estimate value-added uses propensity score conditioning to eliminate
selection bias. This strategy is predicated on the assumption that conditional on applicant
type and potentially a vector of other observed pre-assignment covariates, Xi , school choice
    2
     Other proofs appear in the appendix as well. Borusyak and Hull (2020) discuss this kind of instrument
adjustment in a broad class of research designs.



                                                    6
is independent of potential outcomes and is therefore as good as randomized. We think of
the Xi as conventional VAM controls; these include, for example, lagged test scores. To
formalize this identifying assumption, let Di = (Di1 , ..., DiJ ) be a vector collecting the J
school enrollment indicators. We then have the conditional independence assumption:

Assumption CIA. Student ability is independent of school enrollment conditional on stu-
dent characteristics and assignment risk: i  Di | (pi , Xi ).

Our risk-controlled (RC) VAM estimator amounts to a regression on school attendance dum-
mies with controls for pi and Xi .
    To motivate this approach, note first that because school assignment offers are randomly
assigned conditional on type, it must be true that (i , Xi )  Zi | i . Hence, Lemma 1 can
be modified to say:

                                           i  Zi | (pi , Xi ).                                          (4)

Assumption CIA therefore follows from Lemma 1 in a scenario in which all match partic-
ipants accept any offer yielded by the match. More generally, Assumption CIA overcomes
the identification challenge raised by under-subscription by requiring that compliance with
conditionally randomized school assignment offers be as-good-as-randomized conditional on
applicant type and covariates. Conventional VAM estimates invoke a stronger version of CIA
by requiring conditional independence to hold conditional on covariates alone. Our desire to
nest the conventional setup motivates inclusion of Xi in the RC VAM conditioning set.
    The nature of Assumption CIA is illuminated by showing it to be a central-assignment
analog of the Dale and Krueger (2002, 2014) identification strategy for the returns to college
selectivity. The Dale and Krueger approach assumes that college enrollment decisions are
made independently of potential outcomes conditional on student application choices and
college admission offers. In particular, these studies argue that application choices and ad-
mission results are likely to capture stable and systematic features of applicants' preferences
and qualifications, while subsequent offer take-up decisions reflect idiosyncratic variation
unrelated to potential outcomes.3 College application choices are a decentralized analog of
the preference component of applicant type in a centralized match, while admission offer
take-up is analogous to offer compliance.
    This analogy suggests a close connection between the RC VAM and Dale and Krueger
identification strategies, a relationship formalized in the following result:
   3
     Mountjoy and Hickman (2020) apply this strategy to estimate effects of college selectivity using admin-
istrative data from Texas. Abdulkadiro glu et al. (2020) use a similar strategy to identify the determinants
of parental preferences for NYC schools.


                                                     7
Lemma 2. Given (i , Xi )      Zi | i , Assumption CIA is implied by conditional independence
of student ability and enrollment given student characteristics, assignment risk, and school
assignments: i     Di | (pi , Xi , Zi ) = i  Di | (pi , Xi ).

At first blush, the Dale and Krueger strategy includes an extra set of conditioning variables:
the admissions offers, Zi . Lemma 2 shows, however, that our CIA assumption follows from
an extended conditional independence assumption that adds school assignment offers to
the conditioning set, so that realized-offer conditioning is unnecessary. Lemma 2 therefore
translates Dale-and-Krueger reasoning from the decentralized multi-offer college admissions
world to a centralized single-offer setting.
   We implement RC VAM using ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions of the form:

                                  Yi = 0 +          j Dij + Xi  + g (pi ) + i ,                             (5)
                                                j


where Xi is a conventional VAM control vector and the function g (pi ) parameterizes control
for assignment risk. This function includes linear terms in the elements of pi and a set of
dummy variables indicating when each pij equals zero. In a model with Zi on the right-hand
side, control for a linear function of pi is equivalent to estimation with dummies for all points
of support in the assignment score distribution.4 We're interested in the effects of school
enrollment rather than offer effects, however. Dummies for zero risk therefore amount to an
additional nonlinear control for applicant type. Control for zero-risk dummies is motivated
by the fact that those with zero risk of an offer at j are almost all non-applicants to j . In
the spirit of Dale and Krueger (2002), application behavior seems likely to be a potential
source of omitted variables bias in cross-school comparisons. This parsimonious specification
of g (pi ) has 2J terms in a district with J schools.

Testing the CIA with Centralized Assignment

The j in (5) coincide with causal value-added parameters j when the controls in equation
(5) are sufficient to eliminate selection bias. This leads to the following null hypothesis for
the validity of RC VAM and other OLS VAM estimators:

                                        H0 : j = j ;       j  {1, . . . , J }.                              (6)

   A simple example shows how randomized offers can be used to test H0 . Suppose J = 2
and normalize intercepts so that 1 and 1 measure causal and OLS value-added of school
   4
       This follows from multivariate regression algebra and the fact that pi = E [Zi |i ] = E [Zi |pi ].



                                                          8
1 relative to school 2. Suppose also that every student faces the same risk of assignment to
school 1, so that pi1 is constant, and omit the additional VAM controls Xi . Under H0 , the
OLS residual i is then equal to ability, i . Corollary 1 therefore implies that instrument Zi1
is mean-independent of i :

                                   E [i |Zi1 = 1] - E [i |Zi1 = 0] = 0.                           (7)

Substituting for i in this expression using a simplified (5) yields:

          (E [Yi |Zi1 = 1] - 1 E [Di1 |Zi1 = 1]) - (E [Yi |Zi1 = 0] - 1 E [Di1 |Zi1 = 0]) = 0.    (8)

Rearranging and using the fact that 1 = E [Yi |Di1 = 1] - E [Yi |Di1 = 0], we have:

                  E [Yi |Zi1 = 1] - E [Yi |Zi1 = 0]
                                                     = E [Yi |Di1 = 1] - E [Yi |Di1 = 0].         (9)
                 E [Di1 |Zi1 = 1] - E [Di1 |Zi1 = 0]

The left side of this expression is an IV estimand using Zi1 to instrument Di1 . A test of H0
that checks orthogonality of i and Zi1 is therefore a Hausman (1978) test for equality of
school 1 enrollment effects estimated by IV and OLS.
    To extend this test to the general version of equation (5), note that even when L < J ,
H0 implies i is orthogonal to all risk-adjusted school offers. This orthogonality yields L
restrictions (one for each oversubscribed school) of the form:

                                 E [i (Zi - pi )] = 0;          {1, . . . , L}.                  (10)

    The restrictions in (10) are evaluated using the regression version of the Sargan test for
instrument-error orthogonality.5 Let    ^i denote the RC VAM residuals generated by OLS
estimation of (5). The restrictions in (10) are tested by asking whether 1 = · · · = L = 0 in
the regression equation:

                                            L            L
                               ^i = 0 +           Zi +        µ pi + Xi  + i ,                   (11)
                                            =1           =1


where indexes dummies Zi indicating offers at L < J over-subscribed schools. The propen-
sity score controls on the right hand side ensure that this procedure tests risk-adjusted
offer-residual orthogonality. The covariates Xi are included to increase statistical precision.
    The omnibus specification test based on (11) admits a useful decomposition that distin-
   5
       Detailed in, e.g., Hausman (1983).




                                                     9
guishes VAM bias on average from the bias of estimates for specific schools. Introduced by
Angrist et al. (2016), this decomposition builds on the following forecast regression:

                                             j = j + j ,                                              (12)

where j is defined so as to be uncorrelated with j in the population of schools. Parameter
 is a forecast coefficient summarizing the degree to which RC VAM parameters predict
                                                                        2
causal value-added. Forecast residuals, j , have variance denoted         . In the absence of
                                       2
selection bias, j = j , so  = 1 and      = 0. More generally,  summarizes the reliability of
                                           2
RC VAM predictions. At the same time,        characterizes idiosyncratic school-specific biases
that average to zero over schools.
    Assuming the residual i is conditionally homoskedastic, the omnibus test statistic eval-
uating 1 = · · · = L = 0 in equation (11) can be written as the sum of a test of forecast bias
and a test of idiosyncratic bias. The omnibus test statistic is:

                                         (Y - D^ ) PZ (Y - D^)
                                   T =              2
                                                               .                                      (13)
                                                   ^

Appendix A.3 shows that this can be written:

                                (^ - 1)2         (Y - D^^) PZ (Y - D^^)
                     T =    2              - 1
                                               +            2
                                                                        ,                             (14)
                           ^ (^
                               D PZ D    ^)                ^

where Y is a vector collecting observations of Yi , D is a matrix collecting observations of
Di , ^ is a vector collecting the OLS estimates of j , PZ is the projection matrix for the set
of oversubscribed assignments Z after partialling out controls,   ^ 2
                                                                      = N1     ^2
                                                                             i i estimates the
variance of i , and  ^ = (^ D PZ D   ^ )-1 (^
                                             D PZ Y ) is the 2SLS estimate of the forecast co-
efficient computed by using oversubscribed offer dummies to instrument RC VAM estimates
of value-added at the school attended by student i.6
    The first term in the decomposition of T is a Wald statistic testing  = 1 (the denomina-
tor of this term estimates the variance of   ^). The second term is the Sargan (1958) statistic
testing overidentifying restrictions induced by the 2SLS procedure generating      ^. The dis-
tinction between these tests is illuminated by substituting the forecast regression, (12), into
the causal model, (2), to obtain

                                     Yi = 0 + j (i) + i + j (i) ,                                     (15)
   6
     Specifically, PZ = Z (Z Z )-1 Z , where Z = Z - C (C C )-1 C Z , with matrix C collecting obser-
vations on risk controls and covariates on the right-hand side of (11). In large samples, the elements of Z
coincide with risk-adjusted offers, Zij - pij .



                                                    10
where j (i) = j Dij j is the OLS VAM coefficient for student i's school and j (i) = j Dij j
is the corresponding forecast residual. By Corollary 1, risk-adjusted school offers, Zij -pij , are
orthogonal to i . Under H0 , we also have j (i) = 0. Together, these restrictions imply that the
Zi - pi are valid instruments for j (i) in equation (15). The first term of equation (14) asks
whether the estimated forecast coefficient yielded by these instruments is indeed statistically
indistinguishable from one. Paralleling a Sargan test of instrument-error orthogonality, the
second term asks whether the individual IV estimates computed using one instrument at a
time are statistically indistinguishable from one another (whether they're equal to one or
not). Maintaining orthogonality of the instruments with i , this amounts to a test of j (i) = 0
since j (i) = 0 typically makes one-at-a-time IV estimates diverge.7


4       IV VAM in Under-identified Models
Centralized assignment generates random variation in school offers that identify key features
of the value-added distribution even when OLS VAM estimates are biased. Our IV VAM
estimator exploits this variation by integrating a low-dimensional model of the determinants
of school quality with RC VAM or other OLS estimates. Because systematic variation in
quality is presumed to flow through only a few school characteristics, this model is identified
even in the face of widespread under-subscription. The resulting parameter estimates can
then be used to predict value-added for individual schools. As in Angrist et al. (2017), these
predictions can be seen as optimally weighted combinations of OLS estimates and IV reduced
forms. We improve on earlier efforts in this spirit by combining RC VAM and IV estimates
in a computationally attractive linear framework.
    The foundations of this framework are first-stage and reduced form regressions of school
attendance and outcomes on risk-adjusted offers for admission to oversubscribed schools:

                                    L
                      Dij = j +           j (Zi - pi ) + uij , j  {1, ..., J },               (16)
                                    =1
                                              L
                                 Yi =  +           (Zi - pi ) + i .                           (17)
                                             =1


The reduced form is obtained by substituting the first stages (16) into the causal model, (2).
It's convenient to array the  j coefficients in equation (16) in the L × J matrix , and to
collect the  coefficients in equation (17) in the L × 1 vector . We then have  =  , where
    7
   The omnibus test and associated decomposition detailed here apply to OLS estimates other than RC
VAM, including conventional VAM estimates that control for Xi ignoring assignment risk.



                                                   11
 = (1 , ..., J ) . When L = J , school value-added is identified by solving for  = -1 .
When L < J , because some schools are under-subscribed, the first stage and reduced form
alone are insufficient to identify the causal effects of interest.
    This identification problem is tackled here by modeling the relationship between school
quality and a lower-dimensional set of mediating variables. Specifically, the school-level
forecast regression is extended to be:

                                         j = Mj  +  j ,                                    (18)

where Mj = (Mj 1 , ..., MjK ) is a K × 1 vector of school characteristics, normalized to have
mean zero across schools, with K typically much smaller than L. These characteristics may
include RC VAM or conventional OLS VAM parameters, as well as other school character-
istics like indicators for school sector. The forecast coefficient  (now a vector) captures the
relationship between these school covariates and causal value-added, j . The forecast resid-
ual, j , is defined to be mean zero and uncorrelated with Mj across schools. Substituting
(18) into (2) yields a generalization of equation (15):

                                 Yi = 0 + Mj (i)  + i + j (i) ,                            (19)

where Mj (i) = j Dij Mj is the vector of mediators associated with student i's enrolled school
and j (i) = j Dij j is the associated forecast residual.
    Our IV VAM procedure estimates  using risk-adjusted school offers as instruments for
Mj (i) in equation (19). This extends the testing procedure in Section 3 to allow for multiple
mediators in Mj (i) rather than RC VAM coefficients alone. Moreover, the forecast regression
is no longer assumed to fit causal value-added perfectly, that is, j = 0. This scenario,
which arises when Mj fails to explain all of the variation in school value-added, leads to a
violation of the relevant exclusion restrictions even when Assumption CRA holds. To see
this, substitute the first stage equation, (16), into the definition of j (i) in (19) to obtain:

                                                L
                          Yi = ~0 + M  +              (Zi - pi ) + ~i ,                    (20)
                                     j (i)
                                                =1


where  ~0 = 0 +
                    j  j j , ~i = i + j j uij , and  = j  j j . The  parameters in this
expression capture effects of the instruments operating through channels other than Mj (i) .
The resulting exclusion restriction violations emerge whenever offers shift students across
schools with different forecast residuals.
   We account for potential exclusion violations by adapting the Koles´
                                                                      ar et al. (2015) frame-


                                              12
work for models with many invalid instruments. This framework allows violations of the
exclusion restriction, but requires these violations to average out in an asymptotic sequence
that increases the number of instruments in proportion to the sample size. To see how this
strategy applies here, it's useful to write the first stages for the mediating variables as:

                                        L
                     Mj (i)k = 0k +           k (Zi - pi ) + ik , k  {1, ..., K },                  (21)
                                        =1


with 0k = j Mjk j , ik = j Mjk uij , and  k = j Mjk  j . The  k characterize school
offer effects on school characteristics, filtered through the effects of offers on enrollment as
parameterized by  j .
    With this notation in hand, the second key identifying assumption for IV VAM (after
Assumption CRA) can be stated as follows:

Assumption MIV. Exclusion violations are orthogonal to first stage fitted values:

                      L                       L
              E            (Zi - pi )               k (Zi - pi )   = 0, k  {1, ..., K }.
                     =1                       =1


This assumption requires the first stage predicted values for school characteristics generated
by (21) to be uncorrelated with the terms generating exclusion violations in (20).
    When the first stage and reduced form parameters are viewed as fixed, Assumption
MIV holds only in a scenario in which the  and  k coefficients are arranged so that
exclusion violations fortuitously average to zero in the data at hand.8 In a random coefficients
framework, however, school-specific features Mj , j and { j }L=1 are seen as draws from a
joint distribution of school characteristics, forecast residuals, and offer compliance behavior.
In this framework (similar to that used in Angrist et al. 2017), a sufficient condition for
Assumption MIV can be formalized as:

Lemma 3. Let  denote the J × 1-vector of forecast residuals, j ; let M denote the J × K
                                           ~ denote the N × L matrix of risk-adjusted offers,
matrix of school characteristics, Mj ; let Z
Zi - pi . Suppose that Mj , j , and { j }L=1 are drawn from a joint distribution of school
features, so that conditional expectations involving these variables are well-defined, and that
E [ | , M, Z ~ ] = 0. Then Assumption MIV holds.

    This result requires that the unexplained component of school value-added be unrelated
to offer compliance patterns across schools. When Mj includes characteristics strongly pre-
   8
     In this case, the only random variables relevant to Assumption MIV are the instruments. Suppose, for
example, there are two oversubscribed schools with V ar(Zi1 - pi1 ) = V ar(Zi2 - pi2 ) and the ( ,  ) are
fixed. Then Assumption MIV requires -(1 1 + 2 2 )/(1 2 + 2 1 ) = Corr(Zi1 - pi1 , Zi2 - pi2 ).


                                                      13
dictive of school quality, j can be thought of as capturing the bias in these predictions. MIV
is then satisfied when bias and offer compliance rates are uncorrelated, but fails when stu-
dents are more likely to accept offers at higher value-added schools (conditional on Mj and
Z~ ). It's also worth noting that when Mj includes the RC VAM coefficient j , Assumption
MIV is strictly weaker than Assumption CIA: the latter requires j = 0 for all schools, while
the former is compatible with non-zero j provided these idiosyncratic bias components are
conditionally mean-independent of .
     Increasing the number of instruments increases the plausibility of Assumption MIV,
though at the risk of increased bias in 2SLS estimates of . In view of possible bias in
heavily over-identified models, Koles´ar et al. (2015) propose a bias-corrected 2SLS estimator
(B2SLS) that is consistent in a many-instrument asymptotic sequence similar to that used in
Bekker (1994). Appendix A.5 adapts the assumptions of Koles´      ar et al. (2015) to our setting
and shows that the B2SLS estimator is consistent for  under Assumptions CRA and MIV
in a many-instrument asymptotic sequence (here, this means increasing L in proportion to
                                                                                                2
N ). The appendix also derives a consistent estimator of the forecast residual variance,          ,
under an additional homoskedasticity assumption. In practice, B2SLS and 2SLS estimates
of the parameters of interest here are virtually indistinguishable.

Empirical Bayes Posterior Predictions
                                                                                           2
In addition to characterizing the distribution of school quality, IV VAM estimates of  and 
can be used to produce value-added predictions for individual schools. In contrast with RC
VAM, however, which generates individual school VAM estimates directly, IV VAM requires
an extra step. This step, sketched here (with proofs in the appendix), computes empirical
                                                           2
Bayes posterior means from estimates of , , , and            .
    Consider the minimum mean squared error (MSE) predictor of  as a function of OLS
estimates of reduced form offer effects  ^ in equation (17), conditional on M , , and Z~:

                         = arg min E (b(^
                                        ) -  ) (b(^           ~ .
                                                  ) -  )|, M, Z                               (22)
                                  b(·)


As always, MSE is minimized by a conditional expectation function; in this case   = E [ |
        ~ ]. The following result, proved in Appendix A.6, characterizes this function when
^, , M, Z
reduced form estimates and forecast residuals are both Normally distributed:

Proposition 1. Suppose           ~ )  N (, ) and  |(, M, Z
                       ^|(, , M, Z                       ~ )  N (0, 2
                                                                      I ). Then:

                                      = ^
                                         + (I - )M ,                                          (23)



                                                14
               2 -1
where  =  ( + / ) .

    Equation (23) defines a set of hybrid value-added predictions determined by a linear
combination of reduced-form offer effects and value-added as predicted by the forecast re-
gression. Given the assumptions invoked in the proposition, the hybrid value-add vector  
can be interpreted as the posterior mean of  given a prior based on (M, , Z    ~ ), updated
                                                   2
with estimates of   ^. Plugging estimates of ,       , , , and M into equation (23) yields
an empirical Bayes posterior mean    ^ . These IV VAM predictions generalize the empirical
Bayes shrinkage estimators commonly used to reduce MSE in noisy OLS estimates of VAM
(as in, e.g., Kane et al. 2008 and Chetty et al. 2014a for teachers).9
    Proposition 1 generates empirical Bayes posterior VAM estimates for schools under
weaker assumptions than deployed for this purpose in Angrist et al. (2017), which requires
all school-specific parameters in the underlying random coefficients model to be Normally
distributed. The first assumption in Proposition 1, that the reduced form estimates are
conditionally normally distributed, can be justified by an asymptotic approximation to the
distribution of ^ or by Normality of the error term i in equation (17). Note also that   is
the best linear predictor of  even when the j are non-Normal:

Corollary 2. Suppose     ^|(, , M, Z~ )  N (, ), E [ | , M, Z  ~ ] = 0, and V ar( |, M, Z~) =
 2
   I . Then the   in equation (23) solves (22) in the class of linear predictors of the form
b0 + B1 ^, where b0 is a J × 1 vector of constants and B1 is a J × L coefficient matrix.

This follows from the fact that Normality of the reduced-form estimates and conditional
homoskedasticity of forecast residuals imply that   and the regression of  on          ^ coincide.
    The formula for  reveals that when M is a vector of unbiased OLS VAM coefficients
, such that  = 1 and         2
                                = 0, the posterior   puts no weight on the reduced-form
estimates:   = M  = . Appendix A.6 extends this formula to allow for sampling vari-
ance in the OLS estimates,   ^ j , a generalization is used in the empirical work. When       ^ j is
unbiased, the posterior again puts no weight on reduced-form estimates, simplifying to a
conventional empirical Bayes shrinkage estimator of the form       ^ = j     ^ j .10 The appendix
                                                                    j
also shows that when L = J , so that all schools are oversubscribed, the posterior            ^ is
a weighted average of IV estimates      ^ -1 ^ and the forecast regression fitted value M    ^. In
general, the hybrid posterior combines the quasi-experimental information generated by ran-
    9
       The logic here follows Morris (1983). Estimates of  and  can be obtained by OLS estimation of
equations (16) and (17).
    10
       This result requires homoskedasticity of the underlying error terms, which implies that OLS is the
efficient linear estimator of  when it is unbiased. The appendix provides more general formulas allowing
for heteroskedasticity, correlation in the sampling error of ^ j across schools, and estimation error in the first
stage matrix .



                                                       15
domized school assignment with a value-added forecast based on OLS estimates and other
school characteristics, weighted to account for estimation and forecast errors.


5    Quantifying the Quality of Public Schools
The utility of RC VAM and IV VAM is demonstrated using data from the Denver and NYC
public school districts. The Denver sample updates the extract analyzed by Abdulkadiro       glu
et al. (2017), adding five new applicant cohorts. This sample includes students applying for
sixth-grade seats at any Denver Public Schools (DPS) middle school between the 2012-2013
and 2018-2019 school years. Match data include applicant preferences, priorities, and the
assignments generated by the match. We also have data on school enrollment, student demo-
graphic characteristics, and scores on the Colorado Student Assessment Program (CSAP)
and Colorado Measures of Academic Success (CMAS) state achievement tests. The data
appendix for Abdulkadiro     glu et al. (2017) explains how these files are processed.
    The NYC sample covers sixth grade applicants to NYC middle schools, applying for the
2016-2017 through 2018-2019 school years, and ninth grade applicants to NYC high schools,
applying for 2012-2013 through 2014-2015. This sample is an update of the extract analyzed
by Abdulkadiro   glu et al. (2019), adding middle school applicants. As with Denver, the NYC
analysis sample includes preferences, priorities, assignments, demographic information, and
school enrollment. Middle school outcomes come from New York state achievement tests,
while the high school analysis focuses on SAT scores. The processing of NYC student records
is described in the Abdulkadiro   glu et al. (2019) data appendix. In both Denver and NYC, we
standardize all achievement tests and SAT scores to have mean zero and standard deviation
one separately by year.
    Students in Denver rank up to five schools participating in the DPS unified enrollment
match, which covers public schools of all types, including traditional district schools and
charter schools. Priorities are assigned based on criteria like sibling status and applicant
neighborhood. A DA algorithm implemented with a single lottery tie-breaking number
assigns students to schools. We calculate assignment risk for DPS applicants using the
propensity score formula derived by Abdulkadiro       glu et al. (2017). This formula is an ana-
lytical large-market approximation to the school assignment propensity score for DA with a
random tie-breaker.
    NYC applicants rank up to 12 academic programs in middle or high school. For the
purposes of our analysis, data on schools with multiple programs are aggregated to the school
level. The NYC match features a variety of tie-breakers, with "unscreened" schools using a
random lottery number and other "screened" schools using non-random tie-breakers such as


                                              16
past test scores. Propensity scores for NYC school assignment are computed as described
in Abdulkadiro   glu et al. (2019). These scores depend in part on a bandwidth for screened
school tie-breakers, similar to those used in standard regression discontinuity designs, which
we calculate using a procedure suggested by Calonico et al. (2019). As in Abdulkadiro         glu
et al. (2019), regression and 2SLS estimates that control for propensity scores also control
for local linear functions of the relevant screened-school tie-breakers for applicants inside the
bandwidth corresponding to each tie-breaking variable.
    Table 1 describes students and schools in the DPS and NYC samples. The first column
shows statistics for the full sample of DPS middle school students, while column 2 displays
statistics for DPS applicants with non-degenerate assignment risk (these students have pij 
(0, 1) for at least one j ). Columns 3-4 of the table report corresponding statistics for NYC
middle school students, and columns 5-6 describe NYC high school students. RC VAM and
other OLS VAM models are estimated using full samples, while bias tests and IV VAM
estimation use at-risk samples.
    As is typical of large urban districts, most DPS and NYC students are disadvantaged,
with over 70 percent eligible for a subsidized lunch. Roughly a quarter of the students in each
sample face some assignment risk, with such applicants appearing broadly representative of
the full student populations. Appendix Table A1 compares the characteristics of students
offered seats at higher- and lower-value-added schools (as measured by the conventional
VAM estimates discussed below) within the at-risk sample. We see large differences in
student characteristics between those offered high- and low-value-added seats. Controlling
for assignment risk, however, these differences largely disappear. The fact that risk control
makes centralized assignment offers independent of observed characteristics suggests this is
likely to be the case for unobserved characteristics as well.11
    The bottom rows of Table 1 show that most Denver and New York schools are oversub-
scribed. Specifically, at least one student has non-degenerate risk at 68 out of 83 Denver
middle schools, 448 out of 674 NYC middle schools, and 380 out of 537 NYC high schools.
This reflects the interdependence of school assignments in a centralized match: oversubscrip-
tion at in-demand schools generates assignment risk even for unpopular schools with fewer
  11
     Balance checks regress student characteristics on the conventional value-added of the school where ap-
plicants are offered a seat along with a dummy indicating whether the applicant was offered a seat anywhere.
The risk controls here consist of expected value-added and the probability of receiving any offer. The former
is computed as a score-weighted average of school value-added. Appendix Table A1 shows that control for
risk eliminates imbalances between applicants offered high and low-value-added seats and between those
who do and don't get offers. Differential attrition can create selection bias even with random assignment.
Appendix Table A2 shows that follow-up rates for key outcomes are unrelated to assigned school value-added
conditional on assignment risk. This makes it unlikely that selective attrition biases estimates of reduced
form school-offer effects.




                                                     17
applicants than seats. At the same time, some schools are undersubscribed, while others
have small at-risk samples or low offer take-up rates. RC VAM allows us to estimate causal
effects for such schools even so.


5.1       Evaluating RC VAM
The test characterized by equation (14) is used to compare the predictive validity of RC
VAM estimates with results from three other OLS VAM estimators relying on fewer controls.
The first of these is a benchmark, labelled uncontrolled, that includes only application year
dummies in Xi and omits the propensity score controls, pi . The second is a conventional
value-added model adding sex, race, subsidized lunch status, special education, and limited
English proficiency, along with cubic functions of baseline math and ELA (reading) scores, to
the control vector Xi . This parallels widely-used VAM specifications for the measurement of
teacher and school effectiveness (e.g., Chetty et al. 2014a). A third model, labelled risk only,
omits conventional VAM controls but includes assignment propensity scores, pi . RC VAM
estimates come from regressions that combine conventional VAM controls with controls for
school assignment risk.
    Uncontrolled VAM estimates are contaminated by selection bias. This can be seen in
Table 2, which reports the components of (14) for sixth grade math scores in each city.
For the purpose of VAM testing, schools are classified into 20 bins defined by ventiles of the
distribution of estimated conventional value-added. The testing equation, (11), is estimating
using bin-level (rather than single-school) offers and propensity scores. This aggregation may
increase test power relative to models using (many) school-specific offers as instruments for
j (i) in (15).12 Aggregation also facilitates a graphical depiction of VAM validity. As shown
in column 1 of Table 2, the uncontrolled VAM specification generates forecast coefficients of
0.43 in DPS (shown in Panel A) and 0.59 in NYC (shown in Panel B). These estimates are
statistically different from one, while the overidentification and omnibus tests clearly reject
the null hypothesis of zero bias in the uncontrolled model.13
    VAM research to date suggests that control for lagged test scores and student demo-
graphic characteristics eliminates much of the selection bias in naive comparisons of achieve-
ment across teachers and schools (Chetty et al., 2014a; Bacher-Hicks et al., 2014; Deming,
2014; Angrist et al., 2017). Consistent with this finding, the second column of Table 2 shows
that VAMs estimated with conventional controls boost the forecast coefficient markedly,
yielding estimates of 1.12 in DPS and 0.93 in NYC. The former estimate is statistically
indistinguishable from one, while the latter is marginally significantly different from one, re-
  12
       On this point, see, e.g., Roodman (2009) and Bontempi and Mammi (2015).
  13
       Appendix Table A3 reports results using alternative bin schemes.The choice of bin size matters little.


                                                      18
flecting the fact that NYC estimates are considerably more precise. Omnibus test results are
marginal for conventional VAM in both cites. The DPS overidentification test also results
in a marginal rejection of the null hypothesis.
    As can be seen in column 3 of Table 2, VAMs estimated with risk controls only also
improve greatly on the uncontrolled estimates. The risk-only model generates forecast coef-
ficients of 0.75 and 0.82 in DPS and NYC. In contrast with the test results for conventional
VAM, omnibus and overidentification test results clearly reject the null of unbiased risk-only
estimates. On the other hand, RC VAM estimates, evaluated in the fourth column of the
table, yield remarkably accurate and internally consistent predictions of school quality. For
both DPS and NYC schools, estimated RC VAM forecast coefficients are close to one, while
the associated omnibus tests offer little evidence against the claim that RC VAM estimates
can be interpreted as causal.
    Test results for NYC high schools, reported in Table 3, likewise show that RC VAM
estimates for SAT math are virtually unbiased. In contrast, the other VAM estimators
evaluated in the table are almost certainly biased. This is unsurprising for uncontrolled
estimates, which yield a forecast coefficient of only 0.34. Conventional and risk-only VAMs
do much better, with forecast coefficients of 0.75 and 0.63. Even so, test results for both
models suggest substantial remaining bias. In these cases, forecast bias rather than a failure
of overidentifying restrictions is the source of the omnibus test rejection. The fact that the
lagged score controls used to construct conventional VAM estimates come from assessments
other than the SAT seems likely to contribute to the relatively poor performance of con-
ventional VAM estimates for high schools (a point made in a different context by Chetty
et al. (2014b)). The good performance of RC VAM (and the improvement of RC VAM over
risk-only VAM) is therefore especially impressive.14
    The tests reported in Tables 2 and 3 can interpreted as asking whether VAM estimates
predict the causal effects of randomized school offers. Figure 1 presents a graphical summary
of these predictions. Specifically, the figure plots reduced form offer effects for each value-
added bin (the  coefficients in equation (17)) against first-stage effects of bin offers on
predicted value-added of an applicant's enrolled school (that is, OLS value-added at the
school attended,    ^ j (i) ). The corresponding 2SLS estimate of  is given by the slope of a
weighted least squares line of best fit through the origin, while the overidentification test
checks whether this line fits all points up to sampling error (Angrist, 1991). Consistent with
the estimates in Tables 2 and 3, each panel shows that adding either conventional controls
  14
     Lagged score controls used to compute the estimates in Table 2 come from 5th grade, taken the year
before the start of middle school; lagged score controls used to compute the estimates in Table 3 come from
8th grade, taken the year before the start of high school.




                                                    19
or risk controls pushes the forecast slopes towards unity and reduces dispersion around the
best-fitting lines. Including both sets of controls results in tightly-estimated relationships
that are indistinguishable from the 45-degree line. Appendix Figure A1 and Appendix Table
A4 show broadly similar results for reading.


5.2       IV VAM
Our IV VAM application focuses on the NYC middle school sample, which includes the
largest numbers of students and schools with assignment risk in the three samples we've
looked at. The vector of mediators used to predict causal value-added includes a screened
school indicator and the alternative OLS VAM estimates evaluated in Tables 2 and 3. Fore-
cast regression parameters and the forecast residual variance are estimated by instrumenting
Mj (i) with a full set of school offer dummies, controlling for school assignment propensity
scores and the baseline covariates used to compute the test statistics reported in Table 2.
We use individual school offers rather than binned offers for IV VAM because the extra
instruments make Assumption MIV more plausible. As detailed in Appendix A.5, IV VAM
is implemented using a bias-corrected 2SLS estimator suitable for an asymptotic sequence
in which the number of instruments grows in proportion to sample size.
    Using an uncontrolled VAM estimate to predict causal value-added yields an estimated
IV VAM forecast coefficient of only 0.25. This result, reported in the first column of Table
4, is qualitatively consistent with the test statistics reported in Table 2, which show strong
evidence of forecast bias and a failure of uncontrolled VAM to satisfy the corresponding
overidentification test.
    The IV VAM procedure also generates an estimated screened-school effect on causal value
added. This is negative and significantly different from zero in column 1. The bottom rows
of Table 4 report IV VAM estimates of the forecast residual standard deviation,  , along
with the overall standard deviation of causal value-added,  .15 These estimates are scaled
in standard deviation units of the student-level test score distribution. The estimates in
column 1 reveal substantial residual variation unexplained by uncontrolled VAM or screened
status ( = 0.13) and a total value-added standard deviation of  = 0.19. The latter
estimate highlights the substantial variation in quality across NYC middle schools.
    As shown in the second and third columns of Table 4, replacing uncontrolled VAM
estimates with conventional or risk-only value-added estimates increases the IV VAM forecast
coefficients, to around 0.9 and 0.6 respectively, while also decreasing the estimated residual
standard deviations. Screened school effects in these columns are smaller and not significantly
  15                                                                                  2               2
       The variance of causal value-added is obtained from the forecast regression as   = V ar(Mj ) +   .



                                                     20
different from zero, suggesting the larger negative estimate in the first column is driven by
the diminished predictive power of uncontrolled VAM. IV VAM models generate roughly
comparable estimates of  in columns 1, 2, and 4 (around 0.2), though the estimate in
column 3 is notably larger at around 0.28, perhaps reflecting failure of Assumption MIV in
this case. It's noteworthy that the forecast coefficient estimates for uncontrolled and risk-only
VAM in Tables 2 and 4 differ markedly, though not so for conventional VAM. This reflects
the near-unbiasedness of conventional VAM estimates. When the VAM estimates used as
mediator are biased, forecast coefficient estimates computed using binned instruments and
individual school offers should differ.
    The estimates in columns 4 and 5 of Table 4 align with those in Table 3 in highlighting
the essential unbiasedness of RC VAM. Including the RC VAM estimates as an IV VAM
mediator yields a precisely estimated forecast coefficient of 0.98, with an estimated residual
standard deviation that's virtually zero. At the same time, column 5 shows that models
including both conventional and RC VAM as mediators generate an insignificant negative
forecast coefficient for conventional VAM, while the RC VAM coefficient remains close to
one. This is impressive since conventional VAM is a pretty good predictor of causal VAM on
its own (including these two highly correlated mediators reduces the precision of estimated
forecast coefficients). The screened school coefficient estimates in these columns are likewise
precisely estimated zeros.
    On balance, there would seem to be little scope for IV VAM posterior predictions to
improve on RC VAM. Conventional VAMs also generate remarkably accurate predictions of
causal effects. It's important to note, however, that both of these models rely on controls for
lagged test scores measured one year prior to the outcome. In practice, these controls may
be unavailable. For example, the 2020 pandemic has disrupted standardized testing in many
districts, resulting in a year of missing test scores. Many districts also rely on "skip-year
growth" metrics that omit a year of test score data when transitioning to new assessment
systems. These scenarios necessitate VAM measurements that control for test scores lagged
by more than one year. To investigate the consequences of longer lags, column 6 of Table
4 reports IV VAM estimates from a procedure where the mediator is a set of conventional
VAM estimates computed using more distant lagged score controls. The estimates in this
case replace 5th grade scores with 3rd grade scores in a conventional VAM for sixth-grade
outcomes. Using earlier lagged score controls reduces the forecast coefficient to 0.80 with a
forecast residual standard deviation of  = 0.07. This seems a noteworthy deterioration in
predictive power relative to the estimates in column 2. It remains, however, to gauge the
extent to which IV VAM ameliorates this.




                                               21
5.3     The MSE of Estimated VAMs
MSE provides a natural standard of comparison for IV VAM and OLS VAM estimators
computed using alternative sets of controls. Although RC VAM and other OLS value-added
estimators generate estimates of value-added for each school with no further computation
required, an empirical Bayes estimator can reduce MSE in this context by shrinking the
OLS estimates toward zero. Importantly, the MSE here is with reference to OLS VAM
parameters, setting aside the question of whether these have a causal interpretation.
    Given a set of OLS VAM estimates,     ^ j , the MSE-minimizing predictions of the corre-
sponding OLS coefficients, j , are given by:

                                                                2
                                                               
                                         j = j ^ j , j =      2 + s2
                                                                     ,                                      (24)
                                                                   j

         2
where      is the variance of the OLS coefficients and s2
                                                        j is the sampling variance of    ^ j . The
shrinkage formula in (24) coincides with the conditional expectation E [j |   ^ j ] when (j ,   ^j )
are joint Normal and uncorrelated across schools, and gives a best linear approximation to
this conditional expectation outside of Normality. As in Morris (1983), an empirical Bayes
                                               2
estimator based on OLS plugs estimates of        and sj into equation (24).16
    We turn next to MSE calculations with reference to a causal VAM target. The MSE of
  
j   as an estimator of causal value-added, j , is given by

                            
                         E (j - j )2 = E 2  2   2
                                         j sj +  E ( - j )
                                                          2
                                                            + 2
                                                                .                                           (25)

The first term in this formula reflects sampling variance in the OLS estimates, while the last
two terms are attributable to bias. A similar though somewhat more involved calculation
in Appendix A.7 derives the MSE of IV VAM posterior predictions, with a parallel decom-
                                                        
position into bias and sampling variance. As with j      , the MSE of IV VAM is computed
by plugging estimates of forecast coefficients, residual variances, and sampling variances of
VAM parameters into the relevant formula.
   Figure 2 compares the root mean squared error (RMSE) of OLS VAM and IV VAM
posterior predictions of causal value added, computed by applying (25) and the formulas in
Appendix A.7 to the parameter estimates summarized in Table 4.17 RMSE is minimized
by the RC VAM posterior, at around 0.06 standard deviations in the distribution of middle
   16                                                     2
      sj is taken to be the standard error of ^ j , while   is estimated by the variance of estimated ^ j 's minus
the average squared standard error.
   17
      The estimates in Table 4 imply different total variances of value-added. We therefore divide RMSE for
each model by the ratio of the estimate of  for that model to the corresponding estimate for the RC VAM
model. This puts RMSE on a common scale across models.



                                                       22
school math scores. Because RC VAM is essentially unbiased, the IV VAM posterior for this
model coincides with that for OLS. Not surprisingly, sampling variance contributes far more
to the MSE of RC VAM than bias. What bias there is arises from shrinkage (i.e., j = 1).
    OLS VAM estimates generate posterior predictions with higher RMSE than RC VAM,
but this gap is reduced by IV VAM. The gains are most impressive for risk-only VAM, the
IV version of which cuts RMSE almost in half. This result can be read as saying that IV
VAM is a good substitute for lagged score controls, an point with high empirical relevance.
By contrast, IV VAM improves much less on conventional estimates, a result consistent with
Table 2. Interestingly, the RMSE of the conventional model exceeds the RMSE of RC VAM
despite the relative imprecision of the latter. The precision penalty with RC VAM reflects
the fact that risk controls absorb a substantial portion of the variation in school enrollment.
    The last two columns in Figure 2 compare RMSE for OLS and IV VAM versions of
conventional VAM estimated with older lagged score controls. Consistent with the estimates
in the last column of Table 4, use of 3rd instead of 5th grade score controls increases RMSE
substantially. IV VAM reduces the resulting bias markedly, cutting RMSE by about 20%
relative to the OLS analog predictions and closing roughly half the gap with RC VAM. This
highlights the value of IV VAM estimation in applications with missing or degraded lagged
achievement controls.


6    Summary and Conclusions
VAM estimates may help families choose schools wisely, perhaps with life-changing conse-
quences. Policy-makers and educators likewise base high-stakes decisions related to school
access, expansion, and closure on VAM; the federal government and many states require
this. Given these stakes, how should the consequences of attendance at individual schools be
estimated? Many school accountability frameworks report rankings which amount to unad-
justed mean outcomes for each school. Such poorly controlled VAM estimates confuse school
quality with the socioeconomic status and racial make-up of student bodies. In large urban
districts like those examined here, schools sporting the highest test scores and graduation
rates tend to have an outsize share of non-minority students. These schools are also found
in wealthier neighborhoods.
    The primary econometric challenge in this context is how to eliminate or at least moderate
this sort of selection bias. We show here that centralized assignment provides an invaluable
and easily exploited tool in service of this goal. By matching students to schools as a
function of observed characteristics and partially or fully randomized tie-breaking variables,
centralized assignment takes much of the mystery out of who goes where. This by-product of


                                              23
centralized matching can be key to VAM estimation strategies with minimal selection bias.
    Our RC VAM estimator exploits centralized assignment by fully controlling for the many
student preference and priority variables that govern match outcomes. The problem of high
dimensional controls is solved by conditioning on the relatively coarse school assignment
propensity score induced by DA matching algorithms. Importantly, the RC VAM procedure
generates school-specific VAM estimates for all schools in a match, regardless of under-
subscription. Moreover, the assumptions justifying RC VAM are easily validated by testing
whether RC VAM residuals are orthogonal to offers of seats at over-subscribed schools.
Application of this test to schools in Denver and NYC suggest that RC VAM estimates
provide a remarkably accurate account of school quality. RC VAM estimates exhibit little
bias and outperform conventional VAM strategies on mean squared error grounds.
    We've also introduced an IV VAM estimator that exploits reduced forms for causal VAM
estimation in districts with fewer randomized offers than schools. The IV VAM procedure
outlined here, which builds on and simplifies earlier efforts in this direction, amounts to 2SLS
estimation of mediating-variable effects followed by a simple weighted-average calculation of
empirical Bayes posterior means. IV VAM posterior predictions have an attractive best linear
predictor property and require weaker distributional assumptions than the fully parametric
hybrid IV-and-OLS VAM estimator developed in Angrist et al. (2017). The results reported
here show that IV VAM can improve on poorly-controlled estimates of school quality and
on estimates that rely on older and perhaps less relevant controls.
    Farther afield, we expect the estimation strategies developed here to find application in
other markets with elements of systematic and chance assignment. Possible applications
include job assignment systems, such as those used by Teach for America to place interns in
school, the measurement of physician and hospital quality, and the consequences of receiving
rationed medical resources like new drugs and mechanical ventilation during the recent pan-
demic. In these contexts, RC VAM and IV VAM can be deployed to answer causal questions
about the consequences of receiving a particular assignment or scarce resource. Finally,
on the theoretical side, there's work to be done on integrating the large market asymp-
totic sequence used to derive school assignment propensity scores with the many-instrument
asymptotic sequences used to study the behavior of econometric estimators like 2SLS. We
plan to explore these applications and questions in future work.




                                              24
References
Abaluck, J., M. M. C. Bravo, P. Hull, and A. Starc (2020): "Mortality Effects
 and Choice Across Private Health Insurance Plans," NBER Working Paper 27578.
Abdulkadirog  lu, A., J. D. Angrist, Y. Narita, and P. A. Pathak (2017): "Re-
 search Design Meets Market Design: Using Centralized Assignment for Impact Evalua-
 tion," Econometrica, 85, 1373­1432.
------ (2019): "Breaking Ties: Regression Discontinuity Design Meets Market Design,"
  MIT SEII Working Paper.
Abdulkadirog   lu, A., P. A. Pathak, J. Schellenberg, and C. R. Walters (2020):
  "Do Parents Value School Effectiveness?" American Economic Review, 110, 1502­39.
Angrist, J. D. (1991): "Grouped-Data Estimation and Testing in Simple Labor-Supply
 Models," Journal of Econometrics, 47, 243­266.
Angrist, J. D., P. D. Hull, P. A. Pathak, and C. R. Walters (2016): "Interpreting
 Tests of School VAM Validity," American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 106,
 388­392.
------ (2017): "Leveraging Lotteries for School Value-Added: Testing and Estimation,"
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132, 871­919.
Bacher-Hicks, A., T. J. Kane, and D. O. Staiger (2014): "Validating Teacher Effect
 Estimates Using Changes in Teacher Assignments in Los Angeles," NBER Working Paper
 20657.
Bekker, P. (1994): "Alternative Approximations to the Distributions of Instrumental
 Variable Estimators," Econometrica, 62, 657­681.
Bontempi, M. E. and I. Mammi (2015): "Implementing a Strategy to Reduce the Instru-
 ment Count in Panel GMM," Stata Journal, 15, 1075­1097.
Borusyak, K. and P. Hull (2020): "Non-Random Exposure to Exogenous Shocks: The-
 ory and Applications," NBER Working Paper 27845.
Calonico, S., M. D. Cattaneo, M. H. Farrell, and R. Titiunik (2019): "Regression
 Discontinuity Designs Using Covariates," Review of Economics and Statistics, 101, 442­
 451.
Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, and J. E. Rockoff (2014a): "Measuring the Impact
 of Teachers I: Evaluating Bias in Teacher Value-Added Estimates," American Economic
 Review, 104, 2593­2563.
------ (2014b): "Measuring the Impact of Teachers II: Teacher Value-Added and Student
  Outcomes in Adulthood," American Economic Review, 104, 2633­2679.
Chetty, R. and N. Hendren (2018): "The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergen-
 erational Mobility II: County-Level Estimates," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133,
 1163­1228.
Dale, S. B. and A. B. Krueger (2002): "Estimating the Payoff to Attending a More Se-
 lective College: An Application of Selection on Observables and Unobservables," Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 117, 1491­1527.


                                           25
------ (2014): "Estimating the Effects of College Characteristics over the Career Using
  Administrative Earnings Data," Journal of Human Resources, 49, 323­358.
Deming, D. (2014): "Using School Choice Lotteries to Test Measures of School Effective-
 ness," American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 104, 406­411.
Donald, S. G. and W. K. Newey (2001): "Choosing the Number of Instruments,"
 Econometrica, 69, 1161­1191.
Hausman, J. A. (1978): "Specification Tests in Econometrics," Econometrica, 46, 1251­
 1271.
------ (1983): "Specification and Estimation of Simultaneous Equation Models," in Hand-
  book of Econometrics, ed. by Z. Griliches and M. D. Intriligator, North-Holland, vol. 1,
  391­448.
Hull, P. D. (2018): "Estimating Hospital Quality with Quasi-Experimental Data," Avail-
 able at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3118358.
Kane, T. J., J. E. Rockoff, and D. O. Staiger (2008): "What Does Certification Tell
 Us About Teacher Effectiveness? Evidence from New York City," Economics of Education
 Review, 27, 615­631.
Kane, T. J. and D. O. Staiger (2008): "Estimating Teacher Impacts on Student
 Achievement: an Experimental Evaluation," NBER Working Paper 14607.
     ´ r, M., R. Chetty, J. Friedman, E. Glaeser, and G. W. Imbens (2015):
Kolesa
 "Identification and Inference With Many Invalid Instruments," Journal of Business and
 Economic Statistics, 33, 474­484.
Morris, C. N. (1983): "Parametric Empirical Bayes Inference: Theory and Applications,"
 Journal of the American Statistical Association, 78, 47­55.
Mountjoy, J. and B. Hickman (2020): "The Returns to College(s): Estimating Value-
 Added and Match Effects in Higher Education," Becker Friedman Institute Working Paper.
Nagar, A. L. (1959): "The Bias and Moment Matrix of the General k-Class Estimators of
 the Parameters in Simultaneous Equations," Econometrica, 27, 575­595.
Robinson, P. M. (1988): "Root-N-Consistent Semiparametric Regression," Econometrica,
 56, 931­954.
Roodman, D. (2009): "A Note on the Theme of Too Many Instruments," Oxford Bulletin
 of Economics and Statistics, 71, 135­158.
Rosenbaum, P. R. and D. B. Rubin (1983): "The Central Role of the Propensity Score
 in Observational Studies for Causal Effects," Biometrika, 70, 41­55.
Sargan, J. (1958): "The Estimation of Economic Relationships Using Instrumental Vari-
  ables," Econometrica, 26, 393­415.




                                           26
                                                                                               Figure 1. Visual Instrumental Variables Tests for Bias (Math)

                                                                                                                                                                                                       A. Denver middle schools

                                                                                   Uncontrolled                                                                                                        Conventional                                                                                                  Risk only                                                                                                  RC VAM
                                                      .4




                                                                                                                                                                                .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .4
  Reduced form effect on test scores




                                                                                                                            Reduced form effect on test scores




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Reduced form effect on test scores




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Reduced form effect on test scores
                                                      .2




                                                                                                                                                                                .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .2
                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                      -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.2
                                                                                                Forecast coef.: 0.427                                                                                           Forecast coef.: 1.12                                                                                         Forecast coef.: 0.748                                                                                     Forecast coef.: 1.11
                                                                                                Omnibus p-val.: 0.000                                                                                           Omnibus p-val.: 0.071                                                                                        Omnibus p-val.: 0.000                                                                                     Omnibus p-val.: 0.298
                                                      -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.4
                                                               -.4           -.2           0                .2         .4                                                             -.4        -.2        0           .2        .4                                                              -.4        -.2         0           .2        .4                                                              -.4        -.2      0           .2        .4
                                                                     First stage effect on OLS VAM                                                                                          First stage effect on OLS VAM                                                                               First stage effect on OLS VAM                                                                                First stage effect on OLS VAM




                                                                                                                                                                                                        B. NYC middle schools

                                                                                   Uncontrolled                                                                                                        Conventional                                                                                                  Risk only                                                                                                  RC VAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Forecast coef. line                                                                                      45 degree line
                                                      .6




                                                                                                                                                                                .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .4
  Reduced form effect on test scores




                                                                                                                            Reduced form effect on test scores




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Reduced form effect on test scores




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Reduced form effect on test scores
                                                      .4




                                                                                                                                                                                .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .2
                                                      .2




                                                                                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.2
                                                      -.2




                                                                                                Forecast coef.: 0.594                                                                                           Forecast coef.: 0.927                                                                                        Forecast coef.: 0.822                                                                                     Forecast coef.: 0.983
                                                                                                Omnibus p-val.: 0.000                                                                                           Omnibus p-val.: 0.087                                                                                        Omnibus p-val.: 0.000                                                                                     Omnibus p-val.: 0.115
                                                      -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.4
                                                               -.4      -.2            0          .2             .4    .6                                                             -.4        -.2        0           .2        .4                                                              -.4        -.2         0           .2        .4                                                              -.4        -.2      0           .2        .4
                                                                     First stage effect on OLS VAM                                                                                          First stage effect on OLS VAM                                                                               First stage effect on OLS VAM                                                                                First stage effect on OLS VAM



                                                                                   Uncontrolled                                                                                                        Conventional                                                                                                  Risk only                                                                                                  RC VAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                          C. NYC high schools
                                                      .6




                                                                                                                                                                                .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .4
                              effect on test scores




                                                                                                                                                        effect on test scores




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    effect on test scores




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 effect on test scores
                                                      .4




                                                                                                                                                                                .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .2

                                                                                   Uncontrolled                                                                                                        Conventional                                                                                                  Risk only                                                                                                  RC VAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Forecast coef. line                                                                                      45 degree line
                                                      .8




                                                                                                                                                                                .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .4
                                                      .2
                         test scores




                                                                                                                                                   test scores




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               test scores




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            test scores
                                                                                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                      0 .6
              effect on form




                                                                                                                                        effect on form




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    effect on form




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 effect on form
                                                                                                                                                                                .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .2
                                                      -.2 .4




                                                                                                                                                                                -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.2
  Reduced formReduced




                                                                                                                            Reduced formReduced




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Reduced formReduced




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Reduced formReduced
                                                      .2




                                                                                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                Forecast coef.: 0.594                                                                                           Forecast coef.: 0.927                                                                                        Forecast coef.: 0.822                                                                                     Forecast coef.: 0.983
                                                                                                Omnibus p-val.: 0.000                                                                                           Omnibus p-val.: 0.087                                                                                        Omnibus p-val.: 0.000                                                                                     Omnibus p-val.: 0.115
                                                      0 -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.4




                                                               -.4      -.2            0          .2             .4    .6                                                             -.4        -.2        0           .2        .4                                                              -.4        -.2         0           .2        .4                                                              -.4        -.2      0           .2        .4
                                                                     First stage effect on OLS VAM                                                                                          First stage effect on OLS VAM                                                                               First stage effect on OLS VAM                                                                                First stage effect on OLS VAM
                                                                                                                                                                                -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.2
                                                      -.2




                                                                                                Forecast coef.: 0.339                                                                                           Forecast coef.: 0.750                                                                                        Forecast coef.: 0.633                                                                                     Forecast coef.: 0.941
                                                                                                Omnibus p-val.: 0.000                                                                                           Omnibus p-val.: 0.031                                                                                        Omnibus p-val.: 0.000                                                                                     Omnibus p-val.: 0.768
                                                      -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.4




                                                               -.4     -.2         0       .2          .4         .6   .8                                                             -.4        -.2        0           .2        .4                                                              -.4        -.2         0           .2        .4                                                              -.4        -.2      0           .2        .4
                                                                     First stage effect on OLS VAM                                                                                          First stage effect on OLS VAM                                                                               First stage effect on OLS VAM                                                                                First stage effect on OLS VAM




                                                                                                                                                                                                          Forecast coef. line                                                                                      45 degree line


Notes: This figure plots reduced-form estimates against value-added first stages from each of 20 school
assignment bins. Outcomes are 6th gradeForecast
                                              mathcoef.
                                                   CSAP line       45 degree line
                                                             and CMAS  scores for Denver, 6th grade math New
York State Assessment scores for NYC middle schools, and SAT math scores for NYC high schools. Scores
are standardized to be mean zero and standard deviation one in the student-level test score distribution,
separately by year. Assignments are binned by ventile of the estimated conventional VAM. See notes to
Table 2 for a description of the value-added models and test procedure. Filled markers indicate reduced
form and first stage estimates that are significantly different from each other at the 10% level. The solid
lines have slopes equal to the forecast coefficients in Table 2, while dashed lines indicate the 45-degree line.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   27
                                   Figure 2. RMSE of Value-Added Estimates for NYC Middle Schools


                             .15
   Root mean squared error




                              .1




                             .05




                              0
                                       OLS       IV       OLS       IV      OLS = IV     OLS        IV
                                                VAM                VAM                             VAM
                                        Conventional        Risk only       RC VAM        Conventional
                                                                                       older lagged scores

                                                                Bias     Variance


Notes: This figure plots root mean squared error (RMSE) for posterior predictions of value-added generated
by the models and outcomes used for Table 4. OLS VAM predictions are posterior means constructed from
OLS value-added estimates. IV VAM predictions are posterior means constructed from OLS and reduced
form estimates. Bars indicates RMSE. Blue and red shading mark the shares of MSE due to bias and
variance, respectively. Conventional and RC VAM posterior predictions are from models using 5th grade
tests as lagged score controls, as in Table 2. The conventional VAM posterior with older lagged scores relies
on 3rd grade tests for lagged score controls, as in column 6 of Table 4. Section 5 details the calculations
used to produce this figure.




                                                                 28
                                    Table 1. Descriptive Statistics
                                              1 year lagged scores
                                Denver middle schools        NYC middle schools      NYC high schools
                                  All       With risk          All     With risk     All       With risk
                                  (1)         (2)              (3)       (4)         (5)         (6)
Demographics
   Hispanic                      0.592        0.580           0.413      0.445      0.382        0.431
   Black                         0.126        0.140           0.232      0.254      0.283        0.279
   White                         0.210        0.202           0.153      0.110      0.136        0.106
   Female                        0.493        0.494           0.492      0.483      0.525        0.522
   Free/reduced price lunch      0.723        0.703           0.753      0.787      0.775        0.793
   Special education             0.102        0.087           0.208      0.217      0.127        0.067
   English language learner      0.393        0.415           0.098      0.099      0.093        0.087

Baseline scores
   Math (standardized)           0.000        0.079           0.000      -0.052     0.000       -0.038
   ELA (standardized)            0.000        0.071           0.000      -0.044     0.000       -0.035

Enrollment
   Screened                      0.000        0.000           0.055      0.039      0.110        0.065
   Lottery                       1.000        1.000           0.945      0.961      0.890        0.935
Students                        37,101        8,116          185,988     46,410    121,583      32,432
Schools                           83            76             674        623        537         516
Lotteries (schools with risk)                   68                        448                    380

Notes: This table describes the study samples in Denver and NYC. Column 1 reports descriptive statistics
for Denver students enrolled in 6th grade in the 2012-13 through 2018-19 school years. Column 3 reports
statistics for NYC middle school students enrolled in 6th grade in the 2016-17 through 2018-19 school
years. Column 5 reports statistics for NYC high school students enrolled in 9th grade in the 2012-13
through 2014-15 school years. Columns 2, 4, and 6 report on the corresponding samples of applicants
with assignment risk at at least one school. Baseline characteristics and lagged scores are from 5th grade
for middle school samples and 8th grade for high school samples. Baseline scores are standardized to be
mean zero and standard deviation one in the student-level test score distribution, separately by year.




                                                        29
              Table 2. VAM Bias Tests for Middle School Math Scores
                                          Homoskedastic

                                   Uncontrolled    Conventional           Risk only   RC VAM
                                        (1)             (2)                  (3)        (4)
                                  Panel A. Denver middle schools
Forecast coefficient                   0.427             1.12               0.748      1.11
                                      (0.059)          (0.106)             (0.085)    (0.102)
First stage F statistic                48.5             104                 41.7        97.1
Bias tests:
   Forecast bias                        95.3             1.21                8.72       1.21
                                      [0.000]          [0.272]             [0.003]     [0.271]
   Overidentification (19 d.f.)         79.0             28.7                53.6       21.6
                                      [0.000]          [0.070]             [0.000]     [0.305]
   Omnibus (20 d.f.)                    174              29.9                62.3       22.8
                                      [0.000]          [0.071]             [0.000]     [0.298]
N (testing)                                                       7,661
N (VAM estimation)                                         37,101
                                  Panel B. NYC middle schools
Forecast coefficient                   0.594            0.927               0.822      0.983
                                      (0.030)          (0.041)             (0.039)    (0.044)
First stage F statistic                153              648                 171         530
Bias tests:
   Forecast bias                        188              3.13                20.8       0.152
                                      [0.000]          [0.077]             [0.000]     [0.697]
   Overidentification (19 d.f.)         84.5             25.9                52.9       27.6
                                      [0.000]          [0.134]             [0.000]     [0.091]
   Omnibus (20 d.f.)                    273              29.0                73.7       27.8
                                      [0.000]          [0.087]             [0.000]     [0.115]
N (testing)                                                      44,758
N (VAM estimation)                                               185,988

Notes: This table reports tests for bias in OLS value-added models (VAMs). The uncon-
trolled VAM includes indicators for application year. The conventional VAM adds cubic
functions of baseline math and ELA scores and indicators for sex, race, subsidized lunch,
special education, limited English proficiency, each interacted with application year. Risk-
only VAM adds propensity score and running variable controls to the uncontrolled specifi-
cation. RC VAM combines the controls in the conventional and risk-only VAMs. Forecast
coefficients are from instrumental variables regressions of test scores on VAM fitted values,
instrumenting fitted values with binned assignment indicators. Assignments are binned by
ventile of the estimated conventional VAM. IV models control for propensity scores, running
variable controls, and baseline demographics and achievement. Test scores for outcomes and
VAMs are standardized to be mean zero and standard deviation one in the student-level test
score distribution, separately by year. The forecast bias test checks whether the forecast
coefficient equals 1; the overidentification test checks overidentifying restrictions implicit in
the procedure used to estimate the forecast coefficient. The omnibus test combines tests
for forecast bias and overidentification. Standard errors are reported in parentheses; test
p-values are reported in brackets.



                                                  30
         Table 3. VAM Bias Tests for SAT Math Scores, NYC High Schools
                                         Homoskedastic

                                  Uncontrolled    Conventional        Risk only     RC VAM
                                      (1)              (2)                 (3)        (4)

Forecast coefficient                 0.339             0.750               0.633     0.941
                                    (0.030)           (0.064)             (0.055)   (0.080)
First stage F statistic               148              206                 80.9       148
Bias tests:
   Forecast bias                       476              15.1                44.3      0.538
                                     [0.000]          [0.000]             [0.000]    [0.463]
   Overidentification (19 d.f.)        26.8             18.2                19.0       14.6
                                     [0.110]          [0.511]             [0.456]    [0.748]
   Omnibus (20 d.f.)                   503              33.3                63.3       15.1
                                     [0.000]          [0.031]             [0.000]    [0.768]
N (testing)                                                      30,158
N (VAM estimation)                                              121,583

Notes: This table reports tests for bias in OLS value-added models (VAMs). See the notes to Table
2 for a description of models and test procedures. Standard errors are reported in parentheses;
test p-values are reported in brackets.




                                                 31
                Table 4. IV VAM NYC
                                Estimates for NYC Middle School Math Scores
                                     MS (5th grade lagged scores)

                                                (1)            (2)       (3)             (4)      (5)       (6)
Mediators
  No controls VAM                              0.253
                                              (0.029)
    Conventional VAM                                          0.914                              -0.134
                                                             (0.043)                            (0.131)
    Risk only VAM                                                       0.596
                                                                       (0.040)
    RC VAM                                                                           0.982        1.14
                                                                                    (0.040)     (0.071)
    Conventional VAM (older lagged scores)                                                                 0.801
                                                                                                          (0.043)
    Screened sector dummy                      -0.132         -0.025    -0.065       0.007       0.020     -0.057
                                              (0.050)        (0.037)   (0.043)      (0.035)     (0.034)   (0.040)
Standard deviations
   Value-added                                 0.188         0.204     0.277            0.213   0.214     0.207
    Forecast residual                          0.128         0.052     0.094            0.013   0.012     0.073

First stage F statistic                        28.2           39.6      26.4            38.4     39.3      32.4

N                                                                              46,410

Notes: This table reports IV VAM parameter estimates for math scores. The rows listing mediators report
forecast coefficients and sector effects from instrumental variable regressions of test scores on the OLS VAM
estimates listed as mediator, along with an indicator for screened school attendance. Mediators are instrumented
with individual school assignment offer dummies. Conventional and RC VAM mediators for the estimates
reported in columns 1-5 use 5th grade tests as lagged score controls, as in Table 2. The conventional VAM
mediator used to compute the estimates in column 6 relies on 3rd grade tests for lagged score controls. Test
scores are standardized to be mean zero and standard deviation one in the student-level test score distribution,
separately by year. Standard errors are reported in parentheses.




                                                        32
A      Appendix
A.1     Proof of Lemmas 1 and 2
As in Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983), we establish Lemma 1 by showing Pr(Zij = 1 | i , pi ) =
Pr(Zij = 1 | pi ) = pij . By the law of iterated expectations,

                        Pr(Zij = 1 | i , pi ) = E [E [Zij | i , i , pi ] | i , pi ]
                                                = E [E [Zij | i , pi ] | i , pi ]
                                                = pij .

The second line uses Assumption CRA; the last line uses the fact that E [Zij | i , pi ] = E [Zij |
i ] = pij . We establish equation (4) by repeating the same argument, starting with the fact
that (i , Xi )  Zi | i and adding Xi to the conditioning set in the first line above.
    To establish Lemma 2, start with i      Zi | (pi , Xi ), and assume i   Di | (pi , Xi , Zi ).
Then by the law of iterated expectations,

                 Pr(Dij = 1 | i , pi , Xi ) = E [E [Dij | i , pi , Xi , Zi ] | i , pi , Xi ]
                                              = E [E [Dij | pi , Xi , Zi ] | i , pi , Xi ]
                                              = E [E [Dij | pi , Xi , Zi ] | pi , Xi ]
                                              = Pr(Dij = 1 | pi , Xi ).

The second line follows from independence of i and Di conditional on (pi , Xi , Zi ), the third
follows from independence of Zi and i conditional on (pi , Xi ), and the fourth follows from
another application of the law of iterated expectations.


A.2     Proof of Corollary 1
The corollary is a consequence of the law of iterated expectations:

                          E [i (Zij - pij )] = E [i (E [Zij | i , pij ] - pij )]
                                              = E [i (E [Zij | pij ] - pij )]
                                              = E [i (pij - pij )]
                                              = 0.

The second equality uses Lemma 1, while the third equality uses the definition of pij .



                                                     33
    Risk adjustment is equivalent to control for the propensity score. To see this, note that

                                         E [Zij | pi1 , . . . , piJ ] = pij ,

so the population regression of Zij on pi1 , . . . , piJ is pij . The auxiliary regression that partials
out propensity scores therefore has residual Zij - pij . Equivalence then follows by standard
multivariate regression algebra.


A.3        Derivation of Equation (14)
Note that Y - D^ = Y - D^^ + D^ (^ - 1) and that

                                       (Y - D^   ~Z D
                                              ^) P   ^ (^ - 1) = 0,

                              ~Z D
since the 2SLS fitted values, P                         ~Z (Y - D
                                  ^ , are orthogonal to P        ^^). Therefore,

 (Y - D   ~Z (Y - D
       ^) P        ^)   (Y - D  ^ ^ + D   ^ (^ - 1)) P~Z (Y - D  ^^ + D ^ (^ - 1))
           2
                      =                                2
          ^                                          ^
                        (D ^ (^ - 1)) P~Z (D  ^ (^ - 1)) (Y - D     ^   ~Z (Y - D
                                                                     ^) P          ^^)
                      =                 2
                                                          +              2
                                                                                       +0
                                      ^                                 ^
                             (^ - 1)2           (Y - D   ^   ~Z (Y - D
                                                          ^) P         ^ ^)
                      = 2                    +                              .
                           DP
                        ^ (^     ~Z D ^) - 1                 ^
                                                              2
                                    


A.4        Proof of Lemma 3
Using the law of iterated expectations:

       L                       L
E            (Zi - pi )              k (Zi - pi )
       =1                      =1
               L                         L
=E E                 (Zi - pi )                k (Zi - pi )              ~
                                                                  | , M, Z
               =1                        =1
               L      J                                                     L     J
=E E                                      ~
                             j E j | , M, Z           (Zi - pi )                        Mjk  j   (Zi - pi )          ~
                                                                                                              | , M, Z
               =1    j =1                                                   =1   j =1

= 0,

                 ~ = 0.
since E j | , M, Z




                                                         34
A.5      IV VAM Consistency
The IV VAM estimation framework draws on Koles´           ar et al. (2015). Equations (20) and
(21) generalize equation (3.1) in Koles´   ar et al. (2015) to incorporate multiple endogenous
variables Mj (i)k . The Koles´
                             ar et al. (2015) consistency assumptions (1, 2(i), 3, 4, and 5) have
parallels here as follows:

Assumption IVR. The instruments and residuals Z             ~i  RLN ,   ~i  R,      ~i  RK , for i =
                                                                            ~i , 
1, . . . , N , N = 1, . . . are triangular arrays of random variables with (Z    ~i , ~i ), i = 1, . . . , N
exchangeable. (Z,   ~ 1) is full column rank with probability one.

Assumption REG. (~      i ,        ~ are iid with zero mean, a positive definite covariance ma-
                            ~i ) | Z
trix, and finite fourth moments.

Assumption NIV. The number of instruments satisfies L/N =  + o(N -1/2 ) for   [0, 1).

Assumption CPM. The (1 + K ) × (1 + K ) matrix N /N = (  ) Z       ~ Z~
                                                                      (  )/N converges
in probability to a positive semidefinite concentration parameter matrix , with 2...K,2...K
positive definite. Furthermore, E [N /N ]  .

Assumption ZC. 1k = 0 for k = 2, . . . , 1 + K .

    Here Z ~i denotes the ith observation on the centered offer matrix Z   ~,  ~ = (~
                                                                                    i1 , . . . , ~iK )
                                        ~                      ~
collects the first stage residuals, and Z collects demeaned Zi . The setup for the instruments
and residuals (Assumption IVR), regularity conditions (Assumption REG), assumption on
the number of instruments (Assumption NIV), and first assumption on the concentration
parameter matrix (Assumption CPM) are standard in Bekker many-instrument asymptotics.
As in Koles´  ar et al. (2015) we strengthen the last condition slightly and adopt their novel
zero correlation condition (Assumption ZC) which implies the large-sample orthogonality of
exclusion restriction violations and first stage effects. We again extend this condition to allow
for multiple endogenous variables, and note that it is satisfied under the mean-independence
of  we use in Lemma 3. Formally, for each k , we have:

                         E [N,1k /N ] = E [ Z~ Z
                                               ~
                                                k /N ]
                                                      ~ ] Z
                                      = E [E [ | , M, Z   ~ Z
                                                            ~
                                                              Mk /N ]

                                       =0

                ~ ] = 0. It follows that 1k = 0 for each k under the convergence condition
when E [ | , M, Z
in Assumption CPM.



                                                    35
   Under these five assumptions, Koles´
                                      ar et al. (2015) show the consistency of a bias-
corrected 2SLS estimator of the form
                                                 -1
                                      ~
                         ~ (I - kR ~ )M
                      ^= M                            ~ (I - kR ~ )Y ,
                                                      M
                                  Z                            Z


where M ~ is an N ×K matrix collecting observations of demeaned endogenous variables Mj (i)k ,
Y is an N × 1 vector collecting observations of the outcome Yi , k is a scalar, and RZ   ~ is the

residual-maker matrix of Z  ~ ; i.e. = I - P ~ for the projection matrix P ~ = Z ~ (Z~ Z~ -1 ~
                                             Z                            Z             ) Z .
                                     p
Koles´ar et al. (2015) establish  ^ -  for k = 1/(1+ ). This aligns    ^ with the estimator that
Donald and Newey (2001) propose for many-instrument settings, building on Nagar (1959).
Koles´ar et al. (2015) also consider a modified version of this estimator which accounts for
many control variables which we use in the empirical applications. In practice we find both
bias-corrected estimators to yield very similar results to conventional 2SLS, which sets k = 1.
    To estimate  , we modify an estimator for 11 which Koles´        ar et al. (2015) show to be
consistent under additional assumptions and which they propose (and we use) for estimating
the asymptotic variance of      ^. The modification follows from the fact that when E [ |
       ~
, W, Z ] = 0 and V ar( | , M, Z      ~ ) = 2
                                             I as in Corollary 2,

                                               ~ Z
                            E [N,11 /N ] = E [ Z ~
                                                  /N ]

                                         = E [  Z~ Z
                                                   ~ /N ]
                                                      
                                                   ~ Z
                                          = tr(E [ Z ~  2
                                                      ]) /N.

                                                             p
Thus, if ^ 11 is a consistent estimator of 11 (implying ^ 11 - E [N,11 /N ] under Assumption
                                                                                     p
             ^ is consistent for tr(E [ Z~ Z
                                           ~               ^         ~ ~
CPM) and t                                   ])/N (i.e. t - tr (E [ Z Z ]/N )       - 0) then
                                                                                          p
by the continuous mapping theorem we have the consistent estimator       ^ =      ^ 11 /t
                                                                                        ^ -  .
Following Koles´
               ar et al. (2015), we use

             ^ 11 = max{(Y - M
                             ~      ~ /(N - L) - RZ
                                                  ~ (L/N ))(Y - M 
                               ^) (PZ                   2       ~ ^), 0}

and further use

                     ^ = tr(
                     t       ~ (PZ - Z
                            ^Z       ~ ^(^Z ~ ^ -1 ^ ~ ~ ^
                                          ~ Z
                                               )  Z )Z )/N.


These formulas are derived from Lemmas 1 and 2 in Bekker (1994), as detailed in Appendix
A of Koles´ar et al. (2015).
    Finally, it's worth noting that the propensity score formulas derived in Abdulkadiro  glu
et al. (2017) and Abdulkadiro   glu et al. (2019) use a large-market approximation that fixes


                                               36
the number of schools while increasing the number of students participating in the match.
This large-market sequence scales applicants and school capacities in proportion, thereby
generating admissions cutoffs that are fixed across matches. The Bekker sequence, by con-
trast, increases the number of instruments and therefore (implicitly) the number of schools.
It remains to derive propensity scores for matching markets under this sequence. Impor-
tantly, however, the number of students per school in the matching markets studied here
appears to be large enough for a large-market sequence to yield estimated propensity scores
that balance student characteristics conditional on school offers.


A.6     Empirical Bayes Formulas
Proposition 1 follows from the observation that under the assumptions  ^ and  are joint-
                                           ~ ). Specifically, since  =  and  = M  +  ,
normally distributed, conditional on (M, , Z

                                                    2       2
                    ^         ~)  N           M       +  
                      | (M, , Z                  ,    2  2
                                                                           .
                                              M            I

Thus, E [ |         ~ ] is given by:
            ^, M, , Z

                     ~ ] + Cov (, 
        = E [ | M, , Z                     ~ )V ar(^
                                  ^ | M, , Z               ~ )-1 (^
                                                    | M, , Z       - E [^       ~ ])
                                                                         | M, , Z
                2  2                   -1
        = M  +       +                        - M )
                                            (^
           + (I - )M ,
        = ^

                            2-1
where  =  ( + /               ) .
   Corollary 2 follows from the observation that if E [ | M, , Z        ~ ] = 0 and V ar( |
M, , Z ~ ) =  2
                I then the   in equation (23) is the fitted value from a regression of  on   ^,
                         ~
conditional on (M, , Z ). Standard arguments show that this regression gives a minimum-
MSE linear approximation to the conditional expectation E [ |                ~ ], and so solves
                                                                     ^, M, , Z
(22) in the class of linear predictors. Specifically,   solves:

                    min E ((b0 + B1 ^) -  ) ((b0 + B1              ~ ,
                                                      ^) -  )|M, , Z
                    b0 ,B1


where b0 and B1 are a constant vector and coefficient matrix, respectively. As noted in the
text, empirical Bayes value-added posteriors are obtained by plugging estimates of , , ,
and   2
        into the equation for   .




                                                37
Accounting for First-Stage Estimation Error

We also derive a posterior mean accounting for estimation error in the first stage matrix, ,
assuming joint-Normal reduced form and first-stage estimation errors:

                         ^                                        
                                         ~ )  N
                                 | (M, , Z,                    ,           ,
                      V ec ^                           V ec ()    

as would be obtained in a conventional asymptotic approximation. Consider the MSE min-
imization problem

        min E     b0 + B1 ^ + B2 V ec ^ -          b0 + B1 ^ + B2 V ec            ~ .
                                                                       ^ -  |M, , Z
    b0 ,B1 ,B2


This problem is solved by the conditional regression of  on            ^ given M and :
                                                            ^ and V ec()

                           ~]
               =E [ | M, , Z
                                                                                -1
                             ^                 ~                ^          ~
                  + Cov ,               | M, , Z     V ar           | M, , Z
                               ^
                          V ec()                                  ^
                                                             V ec()
                            ^ - E [^
                                           ~]
                                    | M, , Z
                  ×
                           ^ - E [V ec(
                      V ec()           ^ | M, , Z
                                                ~ ]]
                                                     -1
                                     2
                        2
                                       +                       ^ - M 
                 =M  +    0                                                 .
                                                          V ec()^ - V ec()]

                                        2
Plugging the estimates of , , , , , and   in to this formula yields

                                    ^ = ^
                                        ^  + (I - ^ )
                                                    ^ M ,
                                                        ^

where
                                                                -1
                               ^ =^ ^^ + (^ -^^ -1 ^ )/^2
                                                                     .

The difference between this weighting matrix and the weighting matrix in Proposition 1
comes from the  ^ ^ ^ term, which adjusts the reduced form sampling variance matrix  ^
when estimates of ^ and ^ are correlated.




                                              38
Posterior Means Without Under-subscription

When L = J , the feasible version of equation (23) can be written:

                                    ^
                                  = W ^ + (I - W
                                               ^ )M ,
                                                    ^

where W ^ =   ^^ is a positive definite matrix and  ^ =  ^ -1 ^ is a two-stage least squares
estimate of  using risk-adjusted offers as instruments for school enrollment. When M
is a vector of OLS coefficients, ^ is therefore a matrix-weighted average of OLS and IV
estimates of  , with the former scaled by the estimated forecast coefficient ^. The weights
                                            ^
depend on the estimated first-stage matrix , the estimated forecast residual variance    ^2
                                                                                            ,
and estimation error .

Posterior Means that Account for OLS Sampling Variance

Let M =   ^ =  + e be a vector of noisy OLS value-added estimates. We assume the vector
of estimation error, e , is mean-zero and uncorrelated with  and  conditional on  and Z  ~.
We also assume E [ | , Z      ~ ] =  2                        ~ ] = V . Then, with  =  + 
                                       I and write E [e e | , Z
and E [ | , Z ~ ] = [ | , Z ~ ] = 0, the posterior mean of  given the reduced-form and OLS
estimates becomes:
                                                                 -1
                 ^
                                   ~                ^
                                                             ~         ^
          =Cov ,            | M, , Z    V ar          | M, , Z
                 ^                                  ^                  ^
                                                                              -1
                                         (2 2
                                              + 2
                                                  ) +    2
                                                           + V                     ^
             =  (2 2
                     + 2
                         ) 2
                             I              2          2
                                                                                     ,
                                           + V          I + V                      ^

where V denotes the covariance of reduced-form and OLS estimation error. This can be
written

                                         = ^^ + ^^,

where

              2 2 2    2 2                     -1     2
        ^ =  (  +  ) -   I + V
                                                        + V
                                                                      -1                 -1
             ×  (2 2
                     + 2
                         ) +  - 2
                                  + V                    2
                                                           I + V            2
                                                                              + V




                                               39
and

                               2 2          2
                   ^ = (I - 
                            ^)   I + V - ^V  I + V .


This formula is the same as equation (17) in Angrist et al. (2017) when the mediating vector
M includes OLS VAM and the VAM parameters are normalized so that E [j ] = E [j ] = 0.
                                                  2
    With unbiased OLS VAM, so that  = 1 and         = 0, and with homoskedastic estimation
error, V = V by the usual Gauss-Markov logic. Then,

                                -1                                          -1
 (2 2
      + 2
          ) - 2 2
                  I + V               2
                                        + V =  2
                                                 - 2 2
                                                       I + V                          2
                                                                                        + V 

                                                  =0

such that ^ = 0 and no weight is put on the reduced-form vector. Furthermore,


                                          2 2
                                     ^ =    I + V  .


In this case   = ^^ can be seen to be the conventional OLS-VAM posteriors. For example,
                                                                 
when V is diagonal,  ^ = diag (1 , . . . , J ) and we obtain the j = j ^ j in equation (24).


A.7     Mean Squared Error Calculations
By the law of iterated expectations, the mean squared error of the conventional shrinkage
estimator in equation (25) is given by:

                                                                                 2
          E (j - j )2 = E V ar(j |j , j , j ) + E        E [j |j , j , j ] - j       .

The first term is the expected sampling variance of the value-added estimator, while the sec-
ond equals expected squared bias conditional on the underlying VAM parameters. Suppose
the sampling error sj (and therefore j ) is independent of j and j across schools. The
variance term is given by

                      
               E V ar(j |j , j , j ) = E 2       j |j , j , j ) = E 2
                                         j V ar (^
                                                                       2
                                                                    j sj ,




                                             40
and the bias component is given by

                                     2
         E      
             E [j |j , j , j ] - j       = E (j j - j - j )2

                                         = E [(j - )2 j
                                                      2                          2
                                                        ] - 2E [(j - )j j ] + E [j ]
                                         = E [( - j )2 ]2
                                                          + 2
                                                              ,

where the third line uses independence of (j , j ) from j along with E [j j ] = 0. Adding
these two components yields equation (25).
   We calculate the mean squared error of the IV VAM posterior predictions in Appendix
A.6, accounting for estimation error in both the reduced form  ^ and OLS-VAM mediators
M =   ^ . Write the reduced form as

                              ^ =  + e =  +  + e ,

where e is again mean-zero given , with E [e e | ] = V and E [e e | ] = V . The
difference between the IV VAM posterior and causal value-added is then

                 -  =^( +  + e ) + ^ ( + e ) -  - 

                        = ((^ - I )  + ^ )  + (^ - I )  + ^e + ^ e .


Average mean squared error across the J schools can then be written

       J -1 E [(  -  ) (  -  )] =J -1 tr(((^ - I )  + ^ ) ((^ - I )  + ^ ) 
                                                                           2

                                                         2
                                     + (^ - I ) (^ - I ) 

                                     + ^^ + ^ V ^ + ^V ^ + ^ V ^)


                                                                 2  2
We calculate RMSE by plugging estimates of     ^,   ^ , , , ,  ,  , V , and V into this
                                                                                       
expression and taking its squared root. As with j  , the average mean squared error of j is
the sum a bias term

      J -1 tr ((^ - I )  + ^ ) ((^ - I )  + 
                                                2
                                            ^ )  + (^ - I ) (^ - I ) 
                                                                     2



and a variance term,

                       J -1 tr ^^ + ^ V  ^ + ^V ^ + ^ V ^ .




                                                41
                                                                                       Figure A1. Visual Instrumental Variables Tests for Bias (Reading)
                                                                                                                                                                                                       A. Denver middle schools

                                                                                   Uncontrolled                                                                                                        Conventional                                                                                                  Risk only                                                                                                  RC VAM
                                                      .4




                                                                                                                                                                                .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .4
  Reduced form effect on test scores




                                                                                                                            Reduced form effect on test scores




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Reduced form effect on test scores




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Reduced form effect on test scores
                                                      .2




                                                                                                                                                                                .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .2
                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                      -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.2
                                                                                                Forecast coef.: 0.453                                                                                           Forecast coef.: 1.13                                                                                         Forecast coef.: 0.683                                                                                     Forecast coef.: 1.06
                                                                                                Omnibus p-val.: 0.000                                                                                           Omnibus p-val.: 0.472                                                                                        Omnibus p-val.: 0.000                                                                                     Omnibus p-val.: 0.692
                                                      -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.4
                                                               -.4           -.2           0                .2         .4                                                             -.4        -.2        0           .2        .4                                                              -.4        -.2         0           .2        .4                                                              -.4        -.2      0           .2        .4
                                                                     First stage effect on OLS VAM                                                                                          First stage effect on OLS VAM                                                                               First stage effect on OLS VAM                                                                                First stage effect on OLS VAM




                                                                                                                                                                                                        B. NYC middle schools

                                                                                   Uncontrolled                                                                                                        Conventional                                                                                                  Risk only                                                                                                  RC VAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Forecast coef. line                                                                                      45 degree line
                                                      .6




                                                                                                                                                                                .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .4
  Reduced form effect on test scores




                                                                                                                            Reduced form effect on test scores




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Reduced form effect on test scores




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Reduced form effect on test scores
                                                      .4




                                                                                                                                                                                .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .2
                                                      .2




                                                                                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.2
                                                      -.2




                                                                                                Forecast coef.: 0.372                                                                                           Forecast coef.: 0.799                                                                                        Forecast coef.: 0.637                                                                                     Forecast coef.: 0.910
                                                                                                Omnibus p-val.: 0.000                                                                                           Omnibus p-val.: 0.050                                                                                        Omnibus p-val.: 0.000                                                                                     Omnibus p-val.: 0.426
                                                      -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.4
                                                               -.4      -.2            0          .2             .4    .6                                                             -.4        -.2        0           .2        .4                                                              -.4        -.2         0           .2        .4                                                              -.4        -.2      0           .2        .4
                                                                     First stage effect on OLS VAM                                                                                          First stage effect on OLS VAM                                                                               First stage effect on OLS VAM                                                                                First stage effect on OLS VAM



                                                                                   Uncontrolled                                                                                                        Conventional                                                                                                  Risk only                                                                                                  RC VAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                          C. NYC high schools
                                                      .6




                                                                                                                                                                                .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .4
                              effect on test scores




                                                                                                                                                        effect on test scores




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    effect on test scores




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 effect on test scores
                                                      .4




                                                                                                                                                                                .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .2
                                                                                   Uncontrolled                                                                                                        Conventional                                                                                                  Risk only                                                                                                  RC VAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Forecast coef. line                                                                                      45 degree line
                                                      .8




                                                                                                                                                                                .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .4
                                                      .2
                         test scores




                                                                                                                                                   test scores




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               test scores




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            test scores
                                                                                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                      0 .6
              effect on form




                                                                                                                                        effect on form




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    effect on form




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 effect on form
                                                                                                                                                                                .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .2
                                                      -.2 .4




                                                                                                                                                                                -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.2
  Reduced formReduced




                                                                                                                            Reduced formReduced




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Reduced formReduced




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Reduced formReduced
                                                      .2




                                                                                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                Forecast coef.: 0.372                                                                                           Forecast coef.: 0.799                                                                                        Forecast coef.: 0.637                                                                                     Forecast coef.: 0.910
                                                                                                Omnibus p-val.: 0.000                                                                                           Omnibus p-val.: 0.050                                                                                        Omnibus p-val.: 0.000                                                                                     Omnibus p-val.: 0.426
                                                      0 -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.4




                                                               -.4      -.2            0          .2             .4    .6                                                             -.4        -.2        0           .2        .4                                                              -.4        -.2         0           .2        .4                                                              -.4        -.2      0           .2        .4
                                                                     First stage effect on OLS VAM                                                                                          First stage effect on OLS VAM                                                                               First stage effect on OLS VAM                                                                                First stage effect on OLS VAM
                                                                                                                                                                                -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.2
                                                      -.2




                                                                                                Forecast coef.: 0.322                                                                                           Forecast coef.: 0.795                                                                                        Forecast coef.: 0.653                                                                                     Forecast coef.: 0.975
                                                                                                Omnibus p-val.: 0.000                                                                                           Omnibus p-val.: 0.210                                                                                        Omnibus p-val.: 0.000                                                                                     Omnibus p-val.: 0.669
                                                      -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.4




                                                               -.4     -.2         0       .2          .4         .6   .8                                                             -.4        -.2        0           .2        .4                                                              -.4        -.2         0           .2        .4                                                              -.4        -.2      0           .2        .4
                                                                     First stage effect on OLS VAM                                                                                          First stage effect on OLS VAM                                                                               First stage effect on OLS VAM                                                                                First stage effect on OLS VAM




                                                                                                                                                                                                          Forecast coef. line                                                                                      45 degree line


Notes: This figure plots risk-adjusted offer reduced-form estimates against value-added first stages from each
                                           Forecast coef. line      45 degree line
of 20 school assignment offer bins. Outcomes       are 6th grade reading   CSAP and CMAS scores for Denver,
6th grade ELA New York State Assessment scores for NYC middle schools, and SAT reading/writing scores
for NYC high schools. Assignments are binned by ventile of the estimated conventional VAM. See notes
to Table 2 for a description of the value-added models and test procedure. Filled markers indicate reduced
form and first stage estimates that are significantly different from each other at the 10% level. The solid
lines have slopes equal to the forecast coefficients in Table 2, while dashed lines indicate the 45-degree line.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   42
                               Table A1. Statistical Tests for Balance
                                              Offered conventioanl VAM

                                 Denver middle schools            NYC middle schools           NYC high schools

                               Uncontrolled    Controlled      Uncontrolled   Controlled   Uncontrolled   Controlled
                                   (1)            (2)              (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
Demographics
    Hispanic
     Offered VAM                  -0.509         -0.042           -0.173        0.030         -1.47         0.002
                                 (0.020)        (0.065)          (0.008)       (0.025)       (0.024)       (0.013)

     Any offer                    -0.029         0.012           -0.016        -0.013         -0.02         -0.131
                                 (0.007)        (0.029)          (0.003)       (0.009)       (0.004)       (0.104)
    Black
     Offered VAM                  0.083          0.055            -0.42         -0.003        -1.79         -0.006
                                 (0.013)        (0.044)          (0.007)       (0.023)       (0.021)       (0.011)

     Any offer                    -0.043         -0.039          -0.136         0.011         -0.014        0.056
                                 (0.005)        (0.022)          (0.003)       (0.008)       (0.003)       (0.097)
    White
     Offered VAM                  0.411          -0.056           0.339         0.004         1.19          0.003
                                 (0.018)        (0.055)          (0.006)       (0.013)       (0.019)       (0.009)

     Any offer                    0.085          0.065            0.072         0.004         0.011         -0.002
                                 (0.005)        (0.019)          (0.002)       (0.005)       (0.002)       (0.055)
    Female
     Offered VAM                  -0.068         0.080            0.008         0.005         0.027         0.145
                                 (0.020)        (0.065)          (0.008)       (0.026)       (0.027)       (0.106)
     Any offer                    0.011          -0.046           0.032         -0.02         0.083         0.012
                                 (0.007)        (0.032)          (0.003)       (0.009)       (0.004)       (0.013)
    Free/reduced price lunch
     Offered VAM                  -0.529         0.052            -0.33         0.034         -1.31         -0.003
                                 (0.020)        (0.061)          (0.007)       (0.020)       (0.023)       (0.011)

     Any offer                    -0.074         -0.031          -0.091         0.000         -0.017        -0.161
                                 (0.006)        (0.025)          (0.003)       (0.007)       (0.003)       (0.088)
    Special education
     Offered VAM                  -0.050         -0.016           -0.096        -0.014        -0.258        0.004
                                 (0.011)        (0.036)          (0.006)       (0.022)       (0.011)       (0.007)

     Any offer                    -0.001         0.033           -0.072         0.006         -0.346        -0.043
                                 (0.004)        (0.019)          (0.003)       (0.008)       (0.003)       (0.056)
    English language learner
     Offered VAM                  -0.246         -0.020           -0.019        0.034         -0.412        -0.006
                                 (0.019)        (0.063)          (0.004)       (0.017)       (0.014)       (0.008)

     Any offer                    -0.072         -0.069          -0.016         0.002         -0.028        -0.016
                                 (0.007)        (0.031)          (0.002)       (0.006)       (0.002)       (0.067)
Baseline scores
  Math (standardized)
    Offered VAM                   0.892          0.187             1.15         0.002         6.95          0.054
                                 (0.040)        (0.130)          (0.015)       (0.046)       (0.041)       (0.158)

     Any offer                    0.221          -0.057           0.341         -0.032        0.339         0.012
                                 (0.012)        (0.057)          (0.006)       (0.017)       (0.007)       (0.018)
    ELA (standardized)
     Offered VAM                  0.753          0.109            0.935         -0.015         6.01         0.330
                                 (0.040)        (0.126)          (0.016)       (0.049)       (0.043)       (0.159)

     Any offer                    0.192          -0.065           0.320         -0.012        0.359         -0.010
                                 (0.013)        (0.056)          (0.006)       (0.017)       (0.006)       (0.018)

N                                37,101          8,116           185,988        46,410       121,583        32,432

Notes: This table reports balance statistics, estimated by regressing baseline covariates on the estimated
conventional OLS VAM of the offered school and an indicator for any offer. Columns 2, 4, and 6 control for
expected OLS VAM, any offer risk, and running variable controls in NYC samples. Robust standard errors
are reported in parentheses.
                                                          43
                    Table A2. Differential Attrition
                                 1 year lags

                                                 Expected VAM, any offer
Controls:                 Expected VAM                     risk
                                (1)                          (2)
                       Panel A. Denver middle schools
Offered VAM                    0.028                        0.017
                              (0.039)                      (0.039)
Any offer                                                   0.025
                                                           (0.020)
N                              9,250                        9,250
                        Panel B. NYC middle schools
Offered VAM                    0.037                        0.044
                              (0.017)                      (0.017)
Any offer                                                   0.038
                                                           (0.006)
N                              53,313                      53,313
                         Panel C. NYC high schools
Offered VAM                    -0.031                       -0.055
                              (0.082)                      (0.085)
Any offer                                                   0.018
                                                           (0.010)
N                              53,068                      53,068

Notes: This table reports differential attrition estimates. The regression re-
ported in column 1 regresses an indicator for follow-up in the sample on the
estimated conventional OLS VAM of the offered school, controlling for expected
OLS VAM and running variable controls in NYC samples. The regression in
column 2 additionally regresses follow-up on an indicator for any offer and an
any offer risk control. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.




                                       44
                                                    Table A3. Sensitivity of Tests for Bias to Instrument Binning
                                                                                       2SLS (homoskedastic & summed omnibus & full sample risk VAMs)

                                                         Denver middle schools                                                      NYC middle schools                                             NYC high schools
                                       Uncontrolled   Conventional          Risk only         RC VAM         Uncontrolled       Conventional           Risk only   RC VAM     Uncontrolled   Conventional           Risk only   RC VAM
                                           (1)            (2)                  (3)              (4)              (5)                (6)                   (7)        (8)          (9)           (10)                  (11)        (12)
                                                                                                              A. 4 Offer Bins
     Forecast coefficient                 0.668          1.15                 0.936             1.15             0.611             0.936                 0.851      1.000        0.359          0.790                 0.679      0.967
                                         (0.071)        (0.111)              (0.096)           (0.111)          (0.034)           (0.047)               (0.046)    (0.051)      (0.035)        (0.074)               (0.065)    (0.091)
     First stage F statistic               122            364                 135                340             547                2042                 560         1643         550            771                  318         592
     Bias tests:
        Forecast bias                      22.2           1.71                0.440             1.80              130               1.83                 10.6        0.000         331            8.07                 24.7       0.130
                                          [0.000]        [0.191]             [0.507]           [0.180]          [0.000]            [0.176]              [0.001]     [0.998]      [0.000]        [0.004]              [0.000]     [0.719]
        Overidentification (3 d.f.)        3.86            4.33                2.29              2.88            41.1                6.17                22.7       11.2          10.2           1.72                 2.81        1.14
                                          [0.277]        [0.228]             [0.514]           [0.411]          [0.000]            [0.103]              [0.000]    [0.010]       [0.017]        [0.633]              [0.422]     [0.767]
        Omnibus (4 d.f.)                   26.1           6.04                2.73               4.68             171               8.00                 33.3       11.2           341            9.8                 27.5        1.27
                                          [0.000]        [0.196]             [0.604]           [0.322]          [0.000]            [0.092]              [0.000]    [0.024]       [0.000]        [0.044]              [0.000]     [0.866]
     N (testing)                                                    6,437                                                                     37,008                                                       23,216
     N (VAM estimation)                                            37,101                                                                    185,988                                                      121,583
                                                                                                              B. 10 Offer Bins
     Forecast coefficient                 0.492          1.07                 0.745             1.09             0.621             0.918                 0.838      0.976        0.358          0.779                 0.677      0.981
                                         (0.058)        (0.105)              (0.084)           (0.105)          (0.032)           (0.043)               (0.042)    (0.046)      (0.031)        (0.066)               (0.058)    (0.083)
     First stage F statistic               85.8           196                 80.6               171             251                1114                 287         911          279            392                  148         278
     Bias tests:
45




        Forecast bias                       75.4          0.424               9.20              0.705             138               3.63                 15.2       0.267          420           11.2                 30.7        0.054
                                          [0.000]        [0.515]             [0.002]           [0.401]          [0.000]            [0.057]              [0.000]    [0.605]       [0.000]        [0.001]              [0.000]     [0.817]
        Overidentification (9 d.f.)         37.6           14.5                30.8              11.4             52.0              16.1                  29.7       19.3          11.9          5.11                  5.79       2.42
                                          [0.000]        [0.107]             [0.000]           [0.250]          [0.000]            [0.064]              [0.001]    [0.023]       [0.218]        [0.824]              [0.760]     [0.983]
        Omnibus (10 d.f.)                   113            14.9                40.0             12.11             190                19.7                 44.9       19.6          432            16.3                 36.5        2.47
                                          [0.000]        [0.135]             [0.000]           [0.278]          [0.000]            [0.032]              [0.000]    [0.034]       [0.000]        [0.091]              [0.000]     [0.991]

     N (testing)                                                   7,505                                                                      42,866                                                       27,629
     N (VAM estimation)                                            37,101                                                                    185,988                                                      121,583
                                                                                                              C. 20 Offer Bins
     Forecast coefficient                 0.427          1.12                 0.748             1.11             0.594             0.927                 0.822      0.983        0.339          0.750                 0.633      0.941
                                         (0.059)        (0.106)              (0.085)           (0.102)          (0.030)           (0.041)               (0.039)    (0.044)      (0.030)        (0.064)               (0.055)    (0.080)
     First stage F statistic               48.5           104                 41.7              97.1             153                648                  171         530          148            206                  80.9        148
     Bias tests:
        Forecast bias                      95.3           1.21                 8.72             1.21              188               3.13                 20.8        0.152         476           15.1                  44.3       0.538
                                          [0.000]        [0.272]             [0.003]           [0.271]          [0.000]            [0.077]              [0.000]     [0.697]      [0.000]        [0.000]              [0.000]     [0.463]
        Overidentification (19 d.f.)        79.0           28.7                53.6              21.6             84.5               25.9                 52.9       27.6          26.8           18.2                19.0         14.6
                                          [0.000]        [0.070]             [0.000]           [0.305]          [0.000]            [0.134]              [0.000]    [0.091]       [0.110]        [0.511]              [0.456]     [0.748]
        Omnibus (20 d.f.)                   174            29.9               62.3              22.8              273               29.0                  73.7       27.8          503           33.3                 63.3        15.1
                                          [0.000]        [0.071]             [0.000]           [0.298]          [0.000]            [0.087]              [0.000]    [0.115]       [0.000]        [0.031]              [0.000]     [0.768]

     N (testing)                                                    7,661                                                                     44,758                                                       30,158
     N (VAM estimation)                                            37,101                                                                    185,988                                                      121,583

     Notes: This table reports tests for bias in OLS value-added models (VAMs). See notes to Table 2 for a description of models and test procedures. Panel A reports
     estimates that use school assignment instruments binned by quartile of estimated conventional VAM; Panel B reports estimates that use instruments binned by
     decile; and Panel C reports estimates that use instruments binned by ventile (same as in Tables 2 and 3). Standard errors are reported in parentheses; test p-values
     are reported in brackets.
        Table A4. Tests for Bias in OLS Value-Added Models (Reading)
                homoskedastic & summed omnibus & full sample risk VAMs

                                  Uncontrolled    Conventional            Risk only   RC VAM
                                      (1)             (2)                    (3)        (4)
                                  Panel A. Denver middle schools
Forecast coefficient                  0.453           1.13                  0.683      1.06
                                     (0.056)         (0.108)               (0.074)    (0.101)
First stage F statistic               49.6             94.1                 51.3       100.0
Bias tests:
   Forecast bias                      94.3              1.48                18.5        0.388
                                     [0.000]          [0.225]              [0.000]     [0.533]
   Overidentification (19 d.f.)       55.3              18.3                35.3         16.0
                                     [0.000]          [0.503]              [0.013]     [0.655]
   Omnibus (20 d.f.)                   150              19.8                53.8         16.4
                                     [0.000]          [0.472]              [0.000]     [0.692]
N (testing)                                                     7,932
N (VAM estimation)                                              37,101
                                   Panel B. NYC middle schools
Forecast coefficient                  0.372          0.799                  0.637      0.910
                                     (0.033)        (0.062)                (0.054)    (0.071)
First stage F statistic                155             567                  113         408
Bias tests:
   Forecast bias                       363             10.4                 44.9         1.61
                                     [0.000]          [0.001]              [0.000]     [0.205]
   Overidentification (19 d.f.)       50.9             21.0                 38.0         18.9
                                     [0.000]          [0.338]              [0.006]     [0.466]
   Omnibus (20 d.f.)                   414              31.4                82.9        20.5
                                     [0.000]          [0.050]              [0.000]     [0.426]
N (testing)                                                     45,110
N (VAM estimation)                                              185,988
                                    Panel C. NYC high schools
Forecast coefficient                  0.322          0.795                  0.653      0.975
                                     (0.037)        (0.083)                (0.071)    (0.101)
First stage F statistic                126             179                  62.5        131
Bias tests:
   Forecast bias                       343              6.09                23.6        0.059
                                     [0.000]          [0.014]              [0.000]     [0.807]
   Overidentification (19 d.f.)       31.8              18.7                24.6        16.7
                                     [0.033]          [0.473]              [0.173]     [0.607]
   Omnibus (20 d.f.)                   375             24.8                 48.2        16.8
                                     [0.000]          [0.210]              [0.000]     [0.669]
N (testing)                                                      30,754
N (VAM estimation)                                              121,583

Notes: This table reports tests for bias in OLS value-added models (VAMs). See notes to
Table 2 for a description of models and test procedures. Standard errors are reported in
parentheses; test p-values are reported in brackets.



                                                 46
