                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             WHEN WORKERS TRAVEL:
                      NURSING SUPPLY DURING COVID-19 SURGES

                                       Joshua D. Gottlieb
                                         Avi Zenilman

                                      Working Paper 28240
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28240


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020




We are grateful to Health Carousel for providing data, to Daniel Sonnenstuhl, Scott Loring, and
Wanran Zhao for excellent research assistance, and to the Becker-Friedman Institute for support.
We thank Bill DeVille, Amie Ewald, Debbie Freund, Stephen Gottlieb, Wes Hamilton, Jeff
Hicks, Dmitri Koustas, Brian LeCount, Neale Mahoney, Hugh Shiplett, and Janine Sulavik for
helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Joshua D. Gottlieb and Avi Zenilman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
When Workers Travel: Nursing Supply During COVID-19 Surges
Joshua D. Gottlieb and Avi Zenilman
NBER Working Paper No. 28240
December 2020
JEL No. I11,J22,J30,J41,J61,R20

                                         ABSTRACT

We study how short-term labor markets responded to an extraordinary demand shock during the
COVID-19 pandemic. We use traveling nurse jobs - a market hospitals use to fill temporary
staffing needs - to examine workers' willingness to move to places with larger demand shocks.
We find a dramatic increase in market size during the pandemic, especially for those specialties
central to COVID-19 care. The number of jobs increased far more than compensation, suggesting
that labor supply to this fringe of the nursing market is quite elastic. To examine workers'
willingness to move across different locations, we examine jobs in different locations on the same
day, and find an even more elastic supply response. We show that part of this supply
responsiveness comes from workers' willingness to travel longer distances for jobs when payment
increases, suggesting that an integrated national market facilitates reallocating workers when
demand surges. This implies that a simultaneous national demand spike might be harder for the
market to accommodate rapidly.


Joshua D. Gottlieb
University of Chicago
Harris School of Public Policy
1307 E. 60th St.
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jgottlieb@uchicago.edu

Avi Zenilman
Yale University
400 West Campus Drive
Orange, CT 06477
avi.zenilman@yale.edu
    The flexibility to adjust staffing based on short-term shocks is an oft-cited reason for

firms’ use of outsourcing and temporary workers (Abraham and Taylor, 1996; Autor, 2003;

Katz and Krueger, 2017). Alternatively, some analysts argue that the benefits of this

short-term flexibility are overstated, and markets for short-term labor are popular because

they enable employers to lower costs and avoid offering job security (Dube and Kaplan,

2010). Whether spot labor markets can really help accommodate transitory demand shocks

depends on whether supply is also flexible—or can at least be reallocated to parts of the

market where demand increases. We take advantage of the COVID-19 pandemic to study

the flexible short-term labor market for nurses—a context where obtaining adequate staffing

can have life-or-death consequences.1

    The market for temporary nurses enables hospitals and other facilities to fill short-term

nursing needs. In this market, hospitals post temporary job offers in a particular hospital

unit, at a posted wage, and with specified work conditions. This market is worth $10

billion in the United States (Landuis and Starkey, 2020), or approximately 7 percent of the

overall labor market for nurses (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2020). Travel nursing—where

nurses are hired for multi-week stints (usually 13 weeks), sometimes traveling across state

lines or across the country—makes up the bulk of this market.

    Travel nurses have the flexibility to accept or decline particular openings, so hospitals

have to offer terms that can attract the staff they need. Nurses accept short-term postings

at fluctuating prices and conditions they find acceptable. In this specific way, the markets

for travel nurses, Uber drivers, and other contingent workers are similar. Unlike the ride-

sharing market, the market for travel nurses is fragmented and intermediated by many

different staffing firms, each finding nurses through its own network of recruiters. The
   1
     The literature on nurse staffing and quality finds mixed impacts on health outcomes (Aiken et al., 2002;
Needleman et al., 2002, 2011; Cook et al., 2012; Spetz et al., 2013; Mark et al., 2013; Sloane et al., 2018),
but the evidence from natural experiments comes from legal staffing ratio mandates at normal times, and
the situation may be very different during a pandemic or other public health emergencies.



                                                     2
hiring process also requires intermediaries to evaluate the quality of the match, check

nurses’ skills, and manage regulatory hurdles such as state board licensing.

       As COVID-19 surged in different parts of the country throughout the spring and sum-

mer of 2020, hospitals in affected regions needed additional nurses to manage the corre-

sponding demand spike. We take advantage of these shocks to study the flexibility of this

spot labor market. We look at different nursing specialties, some of which were central

to coronavirus care, and others which were not. We find little-to-no increase in wages for

nurses working in labor and delivery (L&D) units, which is unsurprising because the num-

ber of near-term pregnant women could not, and did not, exponentially increase between

March and May 2020.

       The patterns are different for intensive care unit (ICU) and emergency room (ER)

jobs, which are central to COVID-19 care. The number of job openings and compensa-

tion level for both specialties is positively associated with increased state-level COVID-19

case counts. Based only on the time series, one would estimate a labor supply elasticity

to local wages of around 3; ICU jobs increased by 339 percent during the first wave of

the pandemic, while compensation increased 50 percent. ER jobs increased by 89 percent

while compensation increased by 27 percent, for an elasticity of 2.6.2 These elasticities

specifically describe travel nursing—the fringe of the nursing market that exists to resolve

short-term imbalances. So they cannot be directly applied to the nursing market over-

all, or an individual hospital’s permanent nursing workforce, where supply could behave

differently (Staiger et al., 2010; Matsudaira, 2014).

       We then move to panel estimates, which highlight nurses’ ability to move across the

country. When we condition on state and calendar day fixed effects, we find an even larger

supply elasticity of approximately 5 for ICU nurses. The difference with the time-series
   2                                                                                          ln(339)−ln(100)
       Using the numbers for ICU jobs from Table 1b, the implied labor supply elasticity is   ln(157)−ln(105)
                                                                                                                = 3,
                        ln(189)−ln(100)
and for ER jobs it is   ln(131)−ln(103)
                                          = 2.6.


                                                       3
estimates is unsurprising; it suggests that nurses are quite elastic to compensation once

they have the decided to enter the market at a certain point in time.

   But even this estimate would understate the local supply elasticity if part of the wage

increase is compensation for increased risk of COVID-19 exposure. We design a simple

empirical framework to adjust for this risk, by comparing high-demand specialties (such

as ICU and ER) with labor and delivery, whose demand does not increase in COVID-

19 hotspots. We interpret compensation changes for L&D nurses as an estimate of the

COVID-19 compensating differential. We can thus estimate supply based on the difference

between compensation for COVID-19 specialties and L&D nursing.

   This simple framework suggests an even higher elasticity to local wages of at least 8

for ICU, and 6 for ER, and 7 for general hospital floor nurses. This highly elastic supply

suggests that price signals are an effective way of moving nurses to the parts of the country

with increased staffing needs. To test this interpretation, we study a subset of jobs for

which we observe the nurse accepting the offer. For these jobs, we measure the distance

between the nurses’ home and job locations. We find that they accept postings farther from

home when pay is higher. The United States’ large size, and nurses’ ability to switch the

locations where they work in response to market signals, appear to be important aspects

of how this market adapted to the first waves of demand for COVID-19 nursing.

   This raises serious questions about what happens in short-term staffing markets if there

are simultaneous demand shocks in many different markets—such as when the pandemic

surges simultaneously across the country. In this situation, reallocating workers to the

highest-need places may be insufficient, and the market would need an increase in the total

number of workers. This margin might be less responsive than the cross-region supply

elasticity, but it still appears quite high.

   This setting offers a unique opportunity to study the supply and mobility of temporary



                                               4
workers. To study short-term workers’ behavior, the literature has turned to extremely

short-term markets such as Uber drivers or online tasks (Hall et al., 2015; Angrist et al.,

2017; Mas and Pallais, 2017; Chen and Sheldon, 2015; Chen et al., 2020; Farrell et al., 2018;

Caldwell and Oehlsen, 2018; Koustas, 2019).3 But contingent work is often for time spans

longer than an Uber ride and may have deeper consequences for social welfare. Our sample

includes a market experiencing historic demand shocks (Hawryluk and Bichell, 2020), and

with significant implications for social welfare—and even human survival. Our findings of

elastic worker supply, and the contribution of worker mobility, help understand how the

market accommodates surges in healthcare demand due to COVID-19.

       Section 1 discusses the institutional context of travel nursing and introduces our data.

Along with its advantages, the setting has some important limitations. Like most studies

of contingent labor or short-term jobs, we don’t observe permanent workers alongside the

traveling nurses, so we can’t capture other margins of adjustment hospitals may use—

such as increasing hours, retraining staff, or permanent hires. Like other studies using job

postings data, we don’t have information on whether all of the postings were filled, or the

nurses who filled them. But we do have these data for a subsample, and these data confirm

the broader trends in the postings data.

       The COVID-19 pandemic and recession has many simultaneous shocks, some of which

could threaten supply estimation. Section 2 introduces the conceptual and empirical frame-

work we use to analyze the data and control for these threats. Section 3 presents descriptive

facts and basic time series patterns in our data, and uses them to compute an initial tenta-

tive supply elasticity. Section 4 presents our core empirical results. In section 6 we discuss
   3
    Autor (2003); Collins et al. (2019); Katz and Krueger (2019a,b) discuss the size and trajectory of
the contingency labor workforce. This market is difficult to study as temporary workers and independent
contractors are a blind spot in many labor market datasets (Abraham et al., 2017), and may work simul-
taneously on multiple platforms (Koustas, 2019). Most of the evidence on the staffing industry comes from
employers’ perspective (Abraham, 1988; Abraham and Taylor, 1996; Houseman, 2001; Dey et al., 2012).




                                                   5
the interpretation of these results and conclude.



1     Setting and Data

Registered nurses are by far the largest source of hospital labor–in 2019, American hos-

pitals employed over 1.8 million registered nurses, compared to 120,000 physicians–and

there has long been concern about a mismatch between the nursing workforce needed and

the available labor supply (Buerhaus et al., 2000, 2009). When a hospitals or individual

hospital units faces an acute and temporary nursing staff shortage, they frequently access

contingent labor through the $10 billion market for temporary nurses. There are multiple

ways to access this market, but the essential structure is similar: the hospital sets a price

(a “bill rate” in industry terminology) and working conditions. An intermediary, such as

a supplemental staffing agency, then tries to match the position with a registered nurse

who can fill the temporary gap. The nurses are generally considered employees of the in-

termediary, and this staffing firm provides benefits, liability insurance, and quality check.

Hospitals thus outsource recruiting, licensing, and other HR tasks. Nurses that accept

contracts for multiple weeks are generally called “travel nurses,” even though many come

from the hospital’s local area. (In some cases, the hospitals hire them full-time after they

finish their contract.)4

    The price the hospital offers for travel nurse labor (the “bill rate”) has to cover the

nurse’s wages and the intermediary’s fee, which includes benefits, housing stipends, trans-

portation, and administrative costs.5 If the intermediary hires a secondary recruiter, it will
   4
     Travel nurses are more likely to have a bachelor’s degree, and observational studies have found that,
after adjusting for hospital quality, there are no deleterious outcomes associated with their use (Xue et al.,
2012a,b).
   5
     Some hospitals have exclusive relationships with certain staffing agencies that essentially operate their
own self-contained marketplace, while others may post to independent vendor management systems for an
auction.




                                                      6
have to split its share of the bill rate. There is usually some room for nurses to negotiate,

and hospitals may offer other benefits such as a bonus or a housing allowance. Compen-

sation and location are very salient in the recruiting process; they are posted prominently,

along with the specialty and start date, in online job listings. Recruiters regularly solicit

potential nurse recruits by sending them text messages describing potential jobs, often

including the compensation in the initial solicitation.

       Health Carousel, one of the ten largest healthcare staffing firms in the United States,

provided data on job postings made available to its recruiters, and jobs it filled. We use

two years of data, from September 1, 2018 through August 31, 2020, though many of our

analyses focus on the COVID-19 pandemic, beginning February 1, 2020.

       The postings are for registered nurses only, not other occupations such as licensed

practical nurses or nurse practitioners. The information includes including postings from

all fifty states and Washington, D.C. For each posting, the data report the specialty of

nurse requested, number of nurses requested, job location and the compensation per nurse

(“bill rate”), which we scale as an index relative to the nationwide average in early 2020.6

For ease of comparison, we also convert total counts of both job openings and jobs filled

by Health Carousel’s recruiters (“completed jobs”) into indices relative to their early-2020

averages.

       We measure compensation, job openings, and completed jobs were nationally and within

subsamples by specialty and state. We define six categories of nursing specialties: Emer-

gency Room (ER), Adult Intensive Care (ICU), standard hospital floors (Medical/Surgical

or Telemetry), Labor and Delivery (L&D), Operating Room (OR), and Other.7 Within

each subsample, we rescaled the job openings index to the subsample’s February 1 through
   6
    The index is normalized such that the mean from February 1 through March 14 is 100.
   7
    The “other” category includes a broad range of specialties, including psychiatry, cardiac catheterization,
pediatrics, administration, dialysis, skilled nursing facility, urgent care, and pediatric ICUs. Some of these
may be relevant to COVID-19 care, while others are less so.



                                                      7
March 14 mean.

      For completed jobs, the data reported the residential zip code of the nurse who filled the

opening. We used this to compute the geodesic (straight-line) travel distance between the

nurse’s residence and job location. We measured state and national COVID-19 incidence

as the number of new cases reported daily (or, for some analyses, weekly) by the Johns

Hopkins Coronavirus Resource Center.



2      Framework

Consider the market for nurses of specialty i in location j. At time t, the natural log of

COVID-19 cases in location j is denoted by cjt . We describe the natural log of nurse supply

as:


                            si (wjt
                                 i
                                    , cjt ) = αt0 + α̃j + αwjt
                                                            i
                                                               + βcjt + eijt                (1)


       i is the natural log of the compensation and ei is an orthogonal supply shock.
where wjt                                            jt

Supply presumably responds positively to wages, and negatively to COVID-19 risk, so

α > 0 and β < 0. Supply may have baseline differences across locations due to the cost,

convenience, or amenities nurses face when traveling to state j. We capture these with α̃j .

Since nurses can choose which market to enter, we allow for time-varying national supply

shocks αt0 .

      We model the natural log of nurse demand as:


                            di (wjt
                                 i
                                    , cjt ) = γt0 + γ̃j + γwjt
                                                            i
                                                               + δ i cjt + uijt             (2)


where i indexes specialties and uijt is an orthogonal demand shock. Demand presumably

slopes down in the cost, so γ < 0. For some specialties, such as emergency medicine and

                                                    8
critical care, δ i > 0. For other specialties, such as labor and delivery, it seems plausible

that δ i = 0; the number of births, and hence demand for labor and delivery nurses, is

determined far in advance of realized COVID-19 cases. Just like supply, there may be

common national demand shocks γt0 and baseline differences in demand across regions, γ̃j .

    Supply equals demand in equilibrium, which yields:


                     i     −β + δ i              uijt − eijt
                    wjt =           cjt + ψjt +                                                   (3)
                            α−γ                    α−γ
                             i
                           αδ − βγ                           α        γ
                      i
                     qjt =           cjt + γ̄jt + γψjt +        ui −     ei                       (4)
                            α−γ                            α − γ jt α − γ jt

       i = si (w i , c ) = di (w i , c ) is the equilibrium number of jobs and ᾱ = α0 + α̃ ,
where qjt       jt jt           jt jt                                            jt  t     j
                               γ̄jt −ᾱjt
γ̄jt = γt0 + γ̃j , and ψjt =      α−γ       collect parameters. Note that ψjt is additively separable

in components that depend on t and those that depend on j, so it can be represented

empirically through location and time fixed effects.

    The two relationships between and wages and quantities, respectively, and the number

of cases, are governed by four parameters—the supply and demand elasticities with respect

to wages (α and γ), and with respect to COVID-19 conditions (β and δ i )—and we only

have two equations. To understand the behavior of nursing supply thus requires additional

data and additional assumptions.

    We use both. First, consider a specialty such as L&D where demand is plausibly

independent of COVID cases, i.e. δ 0 = 0. This reduces the number of relevant parameters

to 3. If we then add a second specialty, such as intensive care, where δ 1 6= 0, we have another

set of two equations but only one additional parameter (δ 1 ). This gives us 4 equations—

each of (3) and (4) for two specialties—to solve for four parameters (α, β, γ, δ 1 ).




                                                       9
       Equations (3) and (4) then suggest the following estimating equations:


                          wijt = τ0 + τ1 cijt + πi 1i cijt + θj 1j + φt 1t + εijt                (5)

                           qijt = κ0 + κ1 cijt + µi 1i cijt + ρj 1j + σt 1t + νijt               (6)


where θj and ρj are state fixed effects, and φt and σt are time fixed effects. The τ1 and

κ1 coefficients on cijt represent the estimates of (3) and (4) for the specialty unaffected

by COVID-19. The πi and µi coefficients for each other specialty represent the differences

in the wage and quantity coefficients between the specialty in question and the unaffected

specialty. For each specialty i, we can express the four parameters of interest (α, β, γ, δ i )

in terms of the four relevant coefficients (τ1 , πi , κ1 , µi ) on cijt .8

       The fixed effects in regressions (5) and (6) absorb some of the variation in uijt and eijt

from the equilibrium equations, increasing the plausibility of the identifying assumption

that εijt , νijt ⊥ cjt . We also consider specifications with different granularity of fixed effects,

and others that estimate separate time and/or state fixed effects for each specialty.

       Conceptually, these fixed effects ensure that we are identifying the model within state

and time. Given our motivation—understanding short-term reallocation and flexibility in

this market—we want precisely this sort of variation. We do not need to understand why

baseline compensation is higher in New York than in Arizona (unions? living costs? regu-

lations?) in order to understand the within-state variation over time. Similarly, we do not

need to know extensive margin elasticities over time (due to nurse training in the long run,

or short-run entry into travel nursing) in order to understand allocation across space at a

given point in time.

       Our interpretation rests on a few assumptions. First, we need the parameters aside

from δ i to be constant across specialties. While this assumption is strong, its failure would
   8
       Appendix A shows the expressions.


                                                    10
cause errors in a predictable direction. To see this, imagine that we incorrectly imposed

β = 0—i.e. we assumed that nurses do not require compensation for the risk of treating

COVID-19 patients. We could then compute the supply elasticity by taking the ratio of

the coefficients on cjt in equation (4) and in equation (3), which is:

                                        δ i α − γβ
                                                   < α.                                     (7)
                                          δi − β

If we were to assume β = 0, we will incorrectly conclude that this coefficient is equal to

α. It would appear that this ratio directly reveals the supply elasticity, when in fact it

yields something less than the supply elasticity; in other words, supply is more elastic than

it immediately appears to be. When we assume that the non-δ i parameters are constant

across specialties, this is effectively the error we are likely to make. That is, we assume

ICU and ER nurses require the same compensation for risk as L&D nurses, even though

ICU and ER nurses are likely to deal with sicker, COVID-positive patients. If they demand

extra compensation for that risk, their β would be more negative than we assume when we

hold β constant across specialties. Our framework thus runs the risk of underestimating

the compensating differential COVID-19 specialties require, and hence underestimating the

supply elasticity. But it is unlikely to overestimate the supply elasticity.

   At the same time, our second assumption is that the market is segmented between

specialties. While this may not be perfectly true, the fact that compensation does diverge

between specialties implies at least some segmentation—as we would expect based on the

genuine skill differences the different specialties require. To the extent nurses can substitute

between specialties, this may help to explain the high supply elasticities we find. Over a

longer time horizon, nurses could train for a new specialty, but our estimates are all short-

run responses.

   Third, we assume demand for L&D postings is invariant to COVID-19 conditions. The


                                              11
lag inherent in pregnancy provides most of the justification for this assumption—our time

period ends less than nine months after COVID-19 arrived in the United States, so the

pandemic is unlikely to have affected fertility during this time period. L&D unit demand

for travel nurses could still change if home births increased, or if hospitals reduced staffing

levels due to budgetary shortfalls (Khullar et al., 2020). Despite these theoretical concerns,

we find below that L&D job postings do not vary substantially with respect to COVID-19

cases, conditional on our fixed effects.

   Fourth, nursing supply shocks could covary with demand shocks. For instance, suppose

areas with more COVID-19 cases have larger recessions, leading full-time nurses to lose

their jobs and enter the travel nursing workforce. This would increase supply of workers in

the same places that have a positive demand shock. Since the workers we consider travel

nationally, the time fixed effects should control for these supply shocks. To the extent

nurses prefer shorter travels, this force should bias against the relationship we find later

between travel distance and pandemic severity

   Finally, empirically we interpret the listed compensation from job postings as an equi-

librium outcome. Even though posting a job does not guarantee that the position will be

filled, the use of job postings has a strong tradition in labor economics (Davis et al., 2013;

Kuhn and Shen, 2013; Rothwell, 2014; Hershbein and Kahn, 2018; Deming and Kahn, 2018;

Forsythe et al., 2020), and we are able to demonstrate its appropriateness in our data. For

the subset of data when we see the positions filled, the patterns look very similar to our

broader results. We cannot replicate our most granular analyses exclusively with filled

positions, but we are able to confirm the key result with slightly coarser definitions.




                                              12
3        Time Series Patterns

Before delving into the regressions, we introduce descriptive patterns and present the basic

time series relationships apparent in the data. Table 1 displays the descriptive patterns,

nationally and in key subsamples.9 The baseline national indices for both job openings

and compensation are normalized to 100. Focusing on the first row in Panel B, we see

that the national job openings index increased to 165 in spring, fell to 47 in early summer,

and increased again to 167 in late summer. The national compensation index was 133 in

spring, 103 in early summer, and 114 in late summer.

        The next three rows show results for three selected states: New York, Massachusetts,

and Arizona. We choose these states because of their different experiences during the first

7 months of the pandemic: Massachusetts had an early spike; Arizona had a spike in late

summer, and New York had a uniquely extreme spike in the spring. The baseline job

openings index is normalized to 100 at baseline for each subsample, and the first column

shows each state’s share of the full sample. In New York, job openings increased to 863 in

spring, fell to 49 in early summer, and recovered to 101 in late summer. In Massachusetts,

job openings increased to 174 in spring, returned to 94 in early summer, and fell to 70 in

late summer. In Arizona, the job openings index was stable until late summer, when it

increased to 273. Appendix Table B.2 shows the patterns for all states.

        Panel A of Figure 1 shows a smoothed time series of the national job openings index,

overlaid with the time series of new COVID-19 cases. COVID-19 cases began increasing

sharply after March 15, 2020, exceeding 30,000 daily by April 2. They gradually declined

to 20,000 in early June, before increasing again to 67,000 by July 15. The national job

openings index increased gradually during the pre-COVID part of our sample. It began

at around around 70 early in our sample (late 2018), and was fluctuating between 80 and
    9
        Appendix Table B.1 shows a corresponding table for the February-August 2020 subperiod.



                                                     13
130 from February 1 through March 15, 2020. Prior to COVID-19, there are notable

seasonal patterns in December and January, but otherwise the secular increase dominates

the pattern. This changed rapidly after the pandemic arrived. By April 6, the job openings

index reached 300. It then declined rapidly, falling to 35 in late May, and stayed low until

July, when outbreaks in the southern and southwestern United States peaked. The job

openings index reached 170 by July 27, and rose to 185 by the end of August. It is clear

that the openings closely track spikes in COVID-19 cases.

   The graph shows a corresponding trend for New York, which experienced the largest,

and most rapid, increase in COVID-19 care needs. The COVID-19 daily incidence in New

York (not shown) grew from 300 cases on March 15 to 10,000 by April 3. The job openings

index, stable near its baseline value of 100 until early March, 2020, increased to over 2,500

during the first week of April. (Note that the graph shows the New York index divided

by 10.) By April 15, it was 1,100, and ultimately returned to baseline on May 7. The job

openings index remained low until the end of August, when it rose to 130.

   Panel B shows the compensation index. The national compensation average was quite

stable until early March, 2020. It then increased significantly, hitting 110 by March 26 and

rising to a peak of 125 by April 10. It began to decline in May, and returned to baseline

in June. It increased again in the second half of July and reached 115 by early August.

New York’s compensation index, which was 105 in February, started to trend upwards in

March, was 140 by March 24, and then reached 165 within a week. It remained at around

160 through May, and then gradually declined to 100 by the end of July.

   These time series patterns already provide preliminary indications of the supply elas-

ticity. If the supply curve were constant (i.e. COVID-19 only affected labor demand), and

the rate at which posted jobs are filled were constant, we could directly measure the supply
              ∆ ln(job openings index)
elasticity as                            relative to the baseline. Using the national changes
              ∆ ln(compensation index)


                                             14
                                                          ln(165) − ln(100)
from baseline to spring, we estimate a supply elasticity of                 = 1.8.10 Using
                                                          ln(133) − ln(100)
                                                                       ln(863) − ln(100)
the estimates from New York in spring, the supply elasticity would be                    =
                                                                       ln(185) − ln(106)
3.9. Even with the size of New York’s demand shock, we naturally find a higher local than

national elasticity.

       This interpretation is subject to two important caveats. First, posted jobs are not

filled jobs. We will study job completions below to ensure that these estimates are not

misleading for completed jobs.

       Second, the supply curve may respond to COVID-19 cases. More cases increase nurses’

exposure risk and likely make the work environment more difficult and less pleasant. Both

of these forces would tend to depress supply precisely when demand is higher. On the other

hand, if some nurses volunteer to work in COVID-19 hotspots due to altruism or a sense

of professional obligation, that would increase supply. But this force seems unlikely to

overwhelm the need for a compensating differential due to the risk and working conditions,

an assumption that our subsequent results will support. As a result, this time series

calculation is likely to underestimate the supply elasticity with respect to wages.

       In order to address this, we delve into differences across nursing specialties. Figure

1 Panel D decomposes the job postings by specialty. We see the pandemic associated

with dramatic increases in postings for jobs that deal with COVID-19 patients: intensive

care (ICU), emergency room, and standard hospital floors (Medical/Surgical). In contrast,

operating room and L&D postings decline during the initial pandemic wave.

       Returning to Table 1, the final six rows summarize the descriptive patterns by nursing

specialty. The first column shows the specialty’s share of all job postings. The baseline

openings index for each specialty was scaled to 100, while the baseline compensation index
  10
    We divide the indices by 100 for this calculation, so subtracting the baseline value amounts to sub-
tracting ln(1) = 0.




                                                  15
was scaled relative to the national mean. ICU, ED, L&D, and OR nurse postings had

compensation indices above 100 in February. Med/Surg had a mean of 95. In spring, the

ICU job openings index more-than-tripled to 339, while the compensation index rose to

157. The ER job openings index increased to 189 and the compensation index rose to 131.

The OR job openings index fell to 56 as many elective surgeries were canceled across the

country.

    Most helpful for our purposes is labor and delivery (L&D). Demand for L&D nurses

depends on the number of births taking place, which—for our entire sample period—would

have been determined before COVID-19 arrived in the United States. We see a 22% decline

in L&D job openings to 78 and a slight increase in compensation from 110 at baseline to

115 in spring. These changes are inconsistent with a demand increase, as quantities decline

while wages increase. These estimates require a negative supply shock, which we interpret

as nurses demanding risk compensation.



4    Results

Table 2 shows the results of our explicit supply estimation. Columns 1 and 2 regress log job

postings, and log compensation, respectively, against log cases at the state-by-day level.

These columns do not distinguish among specialties; this would be the right approach if

markets for different specialties are fully integrated. We estimate an elasticity of 0.17 of

job postings with respect to COVID-19 cases, and a compensation elasticity of 0.03. These

regressions would make sense if COVID-19 is purely a demand shock for nursing, and supply

is fixed. In the language of our framework, these regressions assume β = 0—nurses do not

require any compensation for the risk of working in a COVID-19 hotspot. Under these

assumptions, the supply elasticity is simply the ratio of the quantity and compensation

coefficients, which is 5.6.


                                            16
   Since nurses might plausibly require a compensating differential for the risk of work-

ing in a COVID-19 hotspot, the remaining columns implement specifications (5) and (6)

suggested by the model. Columns (2) through (10) estimate different versions of these

specifications. For each type, we present both a wage and a quantity specification. Each

specification shows the relationship between the dependent variable and the log number of

new cases, along with interactions for different nursing specialties. The omitted interaction

is labor and delivery, so the coefficient on log cases alone can be interpreted as the rela-

tionship between the L&D market outcomes and COVID-19 cases. We cluster standard

errors by state. Across the specifications, we see insignificant positive estimates between

COVID-19 cases and L&D job postings or wages.

   The subsequent rows show the incremental relationships for other specialties. Looking

at column (3), we see significant positive interactions for the quantity of job postings in

ICU, emergency room, and medical/surgical jobs. If we add the ICU coefficient of 0.17 to

the baseline coefficient of 0.03, the total elasticity for ICU jobs is 0.2. This means that a

doubling of COVID-19 cases in a state is associated with a 14 percent increase in ICU job

postings (ln(2) × 0.2 = 0.14). The magnitudes of these relationships are somewhat smaller

for emergency and medical/surgical jobs, consistent with COVID-19’s particular increase

in critical care needs.

   Figure 2 visually plots the relationships between labor market outcomes and COVID-

19 cases. Each panel shows a binned scatterplot for each specialty, after conditioning

on day and state fixed effects. Panel A shows the relationship for the quantity of job

postings, and the differences across specialties are visually apparent. L&D and operating

room job postings are nearly flat with respect to local COVID-19 conditions. The slopes for

emergency room and miscellaneous other jobs is clearly positive, and the slopes for ICU and

medical/surgical jobs are even steeper, as Table 2 column (3) shows quantitatively. This



                                             17
is consistent with our interpretation that demand for some specialties does not respond to

local COVID-19 cases, while that for others does.

   Panel B shows a corresponding graph for compensation. Here we see that all of the spe-

cialties’ compensation offers slope upwards with respect to COVID-19 cases. But the slope

of the relationship differs across specialties: ICU, emergency room, and medical/surgical

jobs have the steepest relationships, while L&D and operating room are the flattest. These

differences, combined with the quantity slope differences from Panel A, will allow us to

solve for the supply and demand parameters below.

   The remaining columns in Table 2 show the robustness of our estimates to different sets

of controls. Columns (5)–(6) add state-by-specialty fixed effects. Columns (7)–(8) further

add day-by-specialty fixed effects; these columns are fully interacted, in the sense that all

independent variables are interacted with specialty. These are thus equivalent to completely

separate regressions by specialty, so offer the data maximum flexibility. The results are

remarkably stable under these different sets of controls. In all cases, the case-quantity

and case-compensation relationships are significantly steeper for ICU and medical/surgical

postings than for the omitted category, labor and delivery. The magnitudes for emergency

room postings are slightly lower, and sometimes indistinguishable from those for L&D.

   Below the estimates, we show the supply parameters that our regressions imply. These

calculations use our framework from section 2 to solve for the key parameters in equa-

tions (2) and (1). We interpret our regressions as empirical implementations of equations

(3) and (4), for pairs of specialties at a time. We treat labor and delivery as the non-

COVID specialty (i.e., δ L&D = 0) and sequentially compare it with ICU, emergency, and

medical/surgical markets.

   Combining the estimates from columns (3) and (4) for ICU nurses implies a supply elas-

ticity of 6.7 with respect to wages. The corresponding elasticities are 3.9 for ER jobs, and



                                             18
6.1 for medical/surgical. The supply elasticities are slightly lower in columns (5) and (6),

and increase again in columns (7) and (8). These are our most flexible specifications, with

state-by-specialty and date-by-specialty fixed effects, and the estimated supply elasticities

return to 6.2, 4.2, and 5.1 for ICU, ER, and medical/surgical respectively.

      To ease interpretation, consider a worker looking for a short term job at a given point

in time, and facing two comparable job offers, but with one paying twice as much as the

other. A supply elasticity of 6.2 implies that 4.3 times as many workers choose the higher-

paid job.11 Put another way, in a pool of such choices, 81 percent of workers would choose

the job paying double, while 19 percent would choose the job paying half.12

      The higher elasticities here compared with the time series results make perfect sense:

We are zooming in to capture supply elasticities across regions at a given point in time.

These regressions effectively consider a market with a fixed national supply of workers and

labor demand—even within a given specialty. Thus the only choice for a worker is which

state to choose. In this context, a large positive supply elasticity is not surprising. In fact,

an infinite supply elasticity may be just as natural a benchmark for this margin of response

as any other. From workers’ perspective, temporary job markets are supposed to maximize

short-term earnings, so it should not be any surprise that they overwhelmingly choose the

better-paid opening. This market is designed to encourage this behavior; compensation is

very salient in the recruiting process.

      These elasticities are higher than those estimated in many other settings, but the re-

sponse margins available in those other settings are more limited. Much of the work on

Uber/Lyft drivers and other gig economy workers estimates a Frisch labor supply elasticity

centered around 0.5 (Chen and Sheldon, 2015; Chen et al., 2020), or an intertemporal labor

supply elasticity of 1.2 (Angrist et al., 2017). But these responses require drives to change
 11
      ln(2) × 6.2 = 4.3.
 12     4.3
      1+4.3
            = 0.81.



                                              19
total hours or when they work. Moving beyond Uber drivers, Mas and Pallais (2017) find

similar estimates for temporary remote work, and show that workers have a meaningful,

decreasing valuation of non-work time. These elasticities do not measure decisions about

which work to accept, conditional on taking a job—for instance, in which part of a city an

Uber driver chooses to look for rides. But in our context, that simple location choice takes

on first-order importance.

    In contrast with this literature, our estimates do not require workers to substitute

between working at different times, or away from home production. This choice may

be more comparable to drivers’ decisions of whether to offer rides on Uber or Lyft, where

Caldwell and Oehlsen (2018) estimate elasticities ranging from 2 to 6. In our specifications,

workers’ outside option is taking a similar job, for the same temporary time period, but in

a different state. Given the similarity of the choices—at least once we have adjusted for

the compensation required to offset the different COVID-19 risk—it makes sense that the

different choices are close substitutes.

    To test this interpretation, we now turn to the subset of data for which we observe the

worker who fills the job.



5    Evidence from Job Completion

We use data on completed jobs for two purposes. First, we show that the key patterns

from job postings data hold up for completed jobs. Second, we test our interpretation of

the results so far as reflecting workers’ mobility across different states.

    The first piece of evidence that completed jobs follow the same patterns as job postings

comes from Table 2 columns (9) and (10). These columns report regressions analogous

to those in columns (3) through (8), but with more aggregated data to account for the

reduced sample. These regressions aggregate to the weekly instead of daily level, and


                                              20
combine specialties to further increase precision. Since demand for operating room jobs

follows similar pattern to that for labor and delivery, we combine those two specialties.

Since medical/surgical, ER, and ICU jobs all play key roles in COVID-19 care, we also

combine them.

    The results from this analysis are similar to those for job postings. For the non-COVID

specialties, quantities are flat with respect to COVID-19 cases. For the COVID-related

specialties, the elasticity of jobs with respect to COVID-19 cases is 0.13. The compensation

elasticity for non-COVID specialties is 0.04, while that for COVID-related specialties is

around 0.08. When we solve for the supply and demand parameters, we find a supply

elasticity of 3.9.

    Figure 3 Panel A shows the time series patterns for filled jobs. Using smoothed weekly

data, the figure shows completed jobs more than doubling from early 2020 to the peak in

April. Job completions fall during the early summer, reaching below the baseline value

of 100 in June, before climbing again in late summer. Compensation followed a similar

pattern, increasing during the pandemic’s initial phase, falling during the summer, and

beginning to increase again in August.

    For completed jobs, we see an additional characteristic that can help us understand

the market outcomes: the worker’s home location and the location of the job that worker

accepted. We compute the distance between these two points, and plot the average as

another time series in Panel A. We see the average distance increasing from 500 to 700

miles at the beginning of the pandemic, before falling back to 600 throughout the summer.

This provides initial evidence that the market accommodated the surge in demand through

workers’ willingness to travel across states and change their work locations.

    The remaining panels dig into this phenomenon further. Panel B shows the time-series

relationship of distance traveled with respect to the bill rate. Since this relationship does



                                             21
not rely on COVID-19 cases, here we use an expanded sample beginning in July 2018. The

y-axis shows the average log distance traveled to a job posting, and the x-axis shows the

average log bill rate for these jobs. We see a sharp positive relationship, with an elasticity

of distance with respect to compensation of around 1.3. The months when bill rates are

higher, nurses travel farther.

    Panels C and D show these relationships using panel variation. Panel C shows a binned

scatterplot of log distance travel against the log compensation, after partialing out week

and state fixed effects. Panel D changes the distance measure to an indicator for workers

traveling from outside of their home state. We see large positive relationships in both

panels. The elasticity of distance with respect to compensation is approximately 1.2, very

similar to the time series value of 1.3. The semi-elasticity of out-of-state travel with respect

to compensation is 0.4, so each 10 percent increase in compensation is associated with a 4

percentage point increase in the share of workers accepting a job from out-of-state. Since

60 percent of workers come from out-of-state on average, the elasticity of cross-state travel

with respect to compensation is two-thirds (0.4/0.6).

    To tie this back to demand for COVID-19 care, Panels E and F change the x-axis to

log COVID-19 cases. Panel E shows an elasticity of 0.12 between distance traveled to

completed jobs and COVID-19 cases in a state. Panel F shows a semi-elasticity of 0.03

between traveling across states and COVID-19 cases, which corresponds to an elasticity of

0.05.



6       Discussion

Putting these results together, the national labor market for short-term nurse staffing

appears to have very elastic supply. In response to price signals, workers choose jobs in

different parts of the country—but not with perfect flexibility. Given the nature of this


                                              22
choice, why is supply not perfectly elastic with respect to wages?

       Even for short-term traveling work, workers appear to value proximity to home. The

elasticities of distance traveled, and of leaving one’s home state, with respect to com-

pensation are quite positive—but far from infinite. There may also be match-specific

reasons that labor supply is not infinitely responsive to price signals. Even within the

specialty categories we study, nurses can subspecialize in types of healthcare care that are

not perfect substitutes. When staffing companies consider nurse placements in a particular

position, they evaluate other aspects of the nurse’s skills, and whether they are a good

fit—even something as banal as experience with the hospital’s brand of electronic health

record. The labor supply elasticity may also be depressed by regulatory hurdles, such as

state-specific licensure requirements, which can delay nurses’ mobility.13 New York, Cal-

ifornia, and other states temporarily liberalized their licensure during the acute phase of

the COVID-19 pandemic, perhaps contributing to the large supply elasticity we find.

       Workers’ ability to travel does make labor supply quite elastic in this context, even if

not infinitely so. While our more compelling identification comes from the panel context,

and looking across specialties, the time series patterns remain important: compensation

only increased by 25 percent in the early phase of the pandemic, when job openings tripled.

       The cross-state variation showed even more flexibility, suggesting that a national staffing

market does offer a great deal of flexibility to accommodate demand shocks. When de-

mand increases in specific geographic areas, nurses’ ability to travel can help mitigate a

local shortage. Their willingness to do so is quite striking in light of the secular decline

in geographic mobility across the United States (Molloy et al., 2014; Bartik, 2018; Yagan,

2019). In contrast, nurses’ temporary mobility appears quite elastic to higher compensa-

tion, suggesting that this expansion can be valuable in increasing the labor supply available
  13
    The Nurse Licensure Compact eliminates these requirements among most states, though DePasquale
and Stange (2016) find no effect on labor supply.



                                                 23
in a particular market.

   But if numerous different regions experience simultaneous COVID-19 surges, the spike

in staffing needs would not be confined to one area. Nurses’ ability to relocate cannot

increase the total number of workers, so may be less powerful for addressing a simultaneous

national shortage. In this case, aggregate national supply would have to expand through

longer work hours, hiring nurses who normally work in less acute settings, or increased

labor force participation.




                                            24
References
Abraham, Katharine G, “Flexible Staffing Arrangements and Employers’ Short-Term
 Adjustment Strategies,” Working Paper 2617, National Bureau of Economic Research
 June 1988.

   and Susan K Taylor, “Firms’ use of outside contractors: Theory and evidence,”
  Journal of labor economics, 1996, 14 (3), 394–424.

Abraham, Katharine, John Haltiwanger, Kristin Sandusky, and James Splet-
 zer, “Measuring the gig economy: Current knowledge and open issues,” Measuring and
 Accounting for Innovation in the 21st Century, 2017.

Aiken, Linda H, Sean P Clarke, Douglas M Sloane, Julie Sochalski, and Jef-
 frey H Silber, “Hospital nurse staffing and patient mortality, nurse burnout, and job
 dissatisfaction,” Jama, 2002, 288 (16), 1987–1993.

Angrist, Joshua D, Sydnee Caldwell, and Jonathan V Hall, “Uber vs. Taxi:
 A Driver’s Eye View,” Working Paper 23891, National Bureau of Economic Research
 September 2017.

Autor, David H, “Outsourcing at will: The contribution of unjust dismissal doctrine to
 the growth of employment outsourcing,” Journal of labor economics, 2003, 21 (1), 1–42.

Bartik, Alexander W, “Moving costs and worker adjustment to changes in labor de-
 mand: Evidence from longitudinal census data,” Manuscript, University of Illinois at
 Urbana-Champaign, 2018.

Buerhaus, Peter I, David I Auerbach, and Douglas O Staiger, “The Recent Surge
 In Nurse Employment: Causes And Implications: Recession effects that have eased the
 shortage of hospital nurses must be viewed as temporary, lest they distract policymakers
 from continuing to address longer-term indicators.,” Health Affairs, 2009, 28 (Suppl3),
 w657–w668.

  , Douglas O Staiger, and David I Auerbach, “Implications of an aging registered
  nurse workforce,” Jama, 2000, 283 (22), 2948–2954.

Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Registered nurses made up 30 percent of hospital employ-
 ment in May 2019,” 2020. Available online at https://www.bls.gov/opub/ted/2020/
 registered-nurses-made-up-30-percent-of-hospital-employment-in-may-2019.
 htm (accessed November 17, 2020).

Caldwell, Sydnee and Emily Oehlsen, “Monopsony and the gender wage gap: Exper-
 imental evidence from the gig economy,” Massachusetts Institute of Technology Working
 Paper, 2018.

                                           25
Chen, Kuan-Ming, Claire Ding, John A List, and Magne Mogstad, “Reserva-
 tion Wages and Workers’ Valuation of Job Flexibility: Evidence from a Natural Field
 Experiment,” Working Paper 27807, National Bureau of Economic Research September
 2020.

Chen, M Keith and Michael Sheldon, “Dynamic pricing in a labor market: Surge
 pricing and flexible work on the Uber platform,” 2015. Mimeo, UCLA Anderson.
 Available online at https://www.anderson.ucla.edu/faculty_pages/keith.chen/
 papers/SurgeAndFlexibleWork_WorkingPaper.pdf.

Collins, Brett, Andrew Garin, Emilie Jackson, Dmitri Koustas, and Mark
 Payne, “Is gig work replacing traditional employment? Evidence from two decades
 of tax returns,” Unpublished paper, IRS SOI Joint Statistical Research Program, 2019.

Cook, Andrew, Martin Gaynor, Melvin Stephens Jr, and Lowell Taylor, “The
 effect of a hospital nurse staffing mandate on patient health outcomes: Evidence from
 California’s minimum staffing regulation,” Journal of Health Economics, 2012, 31 (2),
 340–348.

Davis, Steven J, R Jason Faberman, and John C Haltiwanger, “The establishment-
 level behavior of vacancies and hiring,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013, 128
 (2), 581–622.

Deming, David and Lisa B Kahn, “Skill requirements across firms and labor markets:
 Evidence from job postings for professionals,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2018, 36
 (S1), S337–S369.

DePasquale, Christina and Kevin Stange, “Labor Supply Effects of Occupational
 Regulation: Evidence from the Nurse Licensure Compact,” Working Paper 22344, Na-
 tional Bureau of Economic Research June 2016.

Dey, Matthew, Susan N Houseman, and Anne E Polivka, “Manufacturers’ out-
 sourcing to staffing services,” ILR Review, 2012, 65 (3), 533–559.

Dube, Arindrajit and Ethan Kaplan, “Does outsourcing reduce wages in the low-
 wage service occupations? Evidence from janitors and guards,” ILR Review, 2010, 63
 (2), 287–306.

Farrell, Diana, Fiona Greig, and Amar Hamoudi, “The online platform economy in
  2018: Drivers, workers, sellers, and lessors,” JPMorgan Chase Institute, 2018.

Forsythe, Eliza, Lisa B Kahn, Fabian Lange, and David Wiczer, “Labor demand
  in the time of COVID-19: Evidence from vacancy postings and UI claims,” Journal of
  public economics, 2020, 189, 104238.


                                          26
Hall, Jonathan, Cory Kendrick, and Chris Nosko, “The effects of Uber’s surge
 pricing: A case study,” The University of Chicago Booth School of Business, 2015.

Hawryluk,    Markian    and   Rae      Ellen     Bichell,    “Need a COVID-
 19 Nurse?        That’ll Be $8,000 a Week,”              Kaiser Health News,
 November   24   2020.       Available    online    at    https://khn.org/news/
 highly-paid-traveling-nurses-fill-staffing-shortages-during-covid-pandemic/.

Hershbein, Brad and Lisa B Kahn, “Do recessions accelerate routine-biased techno-
 logical change? Evidence from vacancy postings,” American Economic Review, 2018,
 108 (7), 1737–72.

Houseman, Susan N, “Why employers use flexible staffing arrangements: Evidence from
 an establishment survey,” Ilr Review, 2001, 55 (1), 149–170.

Katz, Lawrence F and Alan B Krueger, “The role of unemployment in the rise in
 alternative work arrangements,” American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (5), 388–92.

   and , “The rise and nature of alternative work arrangements in the United States,
  1995–2015,” ILR Review, 2019, 72 (2), 382–416.

  and , “Understanding trends in alternative work arrangements in the United States,”
  RSF: The Russell Sage Foundation Journal of the Social Sciences, 2019, 5 (5), 132–146.

Khullar, Dhruv, Amelia M Bond, and William L Schpero, “COVID-19 and the
 Financial Health of US Hospitals,” Jama, 2020, 323 (21), 2127–2128.

Koustas, Dmitri K, “What Do Big Data Tell Us about Why People Take Gig Economy
 Jobs?,” in “AEA Papers and Proceedings,” Vol. 109 2019, pp. 367–71.

Kuhn, Peter and Kailing Shen, “Gender discrimination in job ads: Evidence from
 china,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013, 128 (1), 287–336.

Landuis, Timothy and Curtis Starkey, “Largest Healthcare Staffing Firms in the
  United States: 2020 Update,” 2020. Staffing Industry Analysts.

Mark, Barbara A, David W Harless, Joanne Spetz, Kristin L Reiter, and
 George H Pink, “California’s minimum nurse staffing legislation: results from a natural
 experiment,” Health services research, 2013, 48 (2pt1), 435–454.

Mas, Alexandre and Amanda Pallais, “Valuing alternative work arrangements,”
 American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (12), 3722–59.

Matsudaira, Jordan D, “Monopsony in the low-wage labor market? Evidence from
 minimum nurse staffing regulations,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2014, 96 (1),
 92–102.

                                          27
Molloy, Raven, Christopher L Smith, and Abigail K Wozniak, “Declining Migra-
 tion within the U.S.: The Role of the Labor Market,” Working Paper 20065, National
 Bureau of Economic Research April 2014.

Needleman, Jack, Peter Buerhaus, Soeren Mattke, Maureen Stewart, and
 Katya Zelevinsky, “Nurse-staffing levels and the quality of care in hospitals,” New
 England Journal of Medicine, 2002, 346 (22), 1715–1722.

  , , V Shane Pankratz, Cynthia L Leibson, Susanna R Stevens, and Mar-
  celline Harris, “Nurse staffing and inpatient hospital mortality,” New England Journal
  of Medicine, 2011, 364 (11), 1037–1045.

Rothwell, Jonathan, “Still searching: Job vacancies and STEM skills,” Metropolitan
 Policy Program at Brookings Institution, 2014.

Sloane, Douglas M, Herbert L Smith, Matthew D McHugh, and Linda H Aiken,
  “Effect of changes in hospital nursing resources on improvements in patient safety and
  quality of care: a panel study,” Medical care, 2018, 56 (12), 1001.

Spetz, Joanne, David W Harless, Carolina-Nicole Herrera, and Barbara A
  Mark, “Using minimum nurse staffing regulations to measure the relationship between
  nursing and hospital quality of care,” Medical Care Research and Review, 2013, 70 (4),
  380–399.

Staiger, Douglas O, Joanne Spetz, and Ciaran S Phibbs, “Is there monopsony in
  the labor market? Evidence from a natural experiment,” Journal of Labor Economics,
  2010, 28 (2), 211–236.

Xue, Ying, Joyce Smith, Deborah A Freund, and Linda H Aiken, “Supplemental
 nurses are just as educated, slightly less experienced, and more diverse compared to
 permanent nurses,” Health Affairs, 2012, 31 (11), 2510–2517.

  , Linda H Aiken, Deborah A Freund, and Katia Noyes, “Quality outcomes of
  hospital supplemental nurse staffing,” The Journal of nursing administration, 2012, 42
  (12), 580.

Yagan, Danny, “Employment hysteresis from the great recession,” Journal of Political
 Economy, 2019, 127 (5), 2505–2558.




                                          28
                                                      Table 1: Data Descriptives

                                 (a) Full Sample Basic Summary Statistics

      Measure                                         N          Mean               SD            P10        Median             P90
      Job posting index                            19439            94.5           260.1           7.8            31.2       218.2
      Comp. index (posted jobs)                    19439           105.8            23.8          87.8            99.6        129
      Filled jobs index                             2550           139.2           281.5          41.1            82.1       246.4
      Comp. index (filled jobs)                     2550           117.3            34.3          85.9           103.3       178.5
      COVID-19 cases (thousands)                   10694            .83             3.78            0             .14         1.3
      Travel distance (miles)                       2550           548.3           625.5          59.2           290.8      1469.9
                                   (b) Summary Values During COVID-19

                                          February 1 - March 14            March 15 - May 16              May 17 - July 18            July 19 - August 31
                                             Job           Comp              Job           Comp            Job           Comp           Job       Comp
      Observation level
29




                                           postings        index           postings        index         postings        index        postings    index
      National                  100          100             100             165            133             47            103           167        114
      ICU                       29           100             105             339            157            104            110           331        127
      ER                         10          100             103             189            131             22            102           121        110
      LD                         3           100             110              78            115             27            107            72        111
      Med/Surg                   39          100              95             130            119             39             97           168        111
      OR                         5           100             108              56            108             49            104           101        106
      Other                     15           100             100             162            125            37             99            105        100
      NY                        10           100             106             863            185             49            125           77         107
      MA                          3          100             106             174            131             94            106            70        103
      AZ                         2           100              93             145            113             75            104           273        127
      Completed                  4           100             104             324            162             94            120           266        126
     Data are from Health Carousel and are described in detail in the text. The unit of observation in Panel A is the state-by-day. The
     compensation index is normalized to national daily average from February 1–March 14, 2020 for all subsets, weighted by number of job
     postings. The job posting index is normalized average daily postings for February 1–March 14, 2020 for each subsample.
                                                                                                                                                                                       Figure 1: Time Series Patterns

                                                        (A) Job Openings and COVID-19 Cases                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (B) Compensation and COVID-19 Cases

                             300                                                                                                                                                                                                  80                                                                                              200                                                                                                                                    80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              New Covid Cases (thousands)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       New COVID-19 Cases




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Compensation Index
       Job Openings Index




                             200                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  150


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  40                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     40


                             100                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20




                                  0                                                                                                                                                                                               0                                                                                                50                                                                                                                                    0
                                      Sep 1, 18            Dec 1, 18                Mar 2, 19            Jun 2, 19             Sep 1, 19          Dec 1, 19                Mar 1, 20            May 31, 20           Aug 30, 20                                                                                                         Sep 1, 18        Dec 1, 18         Mar 2, 19   Jun 2, 19   Sep 1, 19   Dec 1, 19        Mar 1, 20   May 31, 20      Aug 30, 20

                                                                                                                               Day                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Day

                                                                US Job Openings Index                                                      US COVID-19 Cases (thousands)                                                                                                                                                                                                Compensation Index US                  Compensation Index NY
                                                                NY Job Openings Index / 10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              COVID-19 Cases
30




                                                                          (C) Job Openings by Specialty                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (D) Compensation Growth by State
                            800                                                                                                                                                                                                80000                                                                                               .6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Compensation growth, Apr '19 - Apr '20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           NJ




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       New COVID-19 Cases in Thousands
                            600                                                                                                                                                                                                60000                                                                                               .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MI       IL                               MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    WI                                 CT
       Job Openings Index




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              HI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OR WA              LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FL RI
                            400                                                                                                                                                                                                40000                                                                                               .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ARDE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 AZ CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        IN    MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MNKYNVOH GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ND VT IA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ME         VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               WVMO    CO  PA    DC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TXSC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MTNM  NE
                            200                                                                                                                                                                                                20000                                                                                               0           OK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              KSALNC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              WYSD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              UT TN


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -.2
                             0                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                  Feb 1, 20   Feb 16, 20   Mar 2, 20   Mar 17, 20     Apr 1, 20   Apr 16, 20   May 1, 20   May 16, 20 May 31, 20 Jun 15, 20   Jun 30, 20     Jul 15, 20   Jul 30, 20   Aug 14, 20 Aug 29, 20                                                                                                              0                                            5000                                 10000                                             15000
                                                                                                                            Day                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      COVID-19 cases per million population through April 2020

                                                  ICU                  ER                  L&D                   Med/Surg                     OR                 Other                      COVID-19 Cases                                                                                                                                                            Change in log compensation April 2019 - April 2020                       Linear fit



     Panel A shows job postings in the United States and in New York state from September 1, 2018 through August 31, 2020. Data are
     smoothed using an Epanechnikov kernel. The panel also shows (smoothed) national new COVID-19 cases. Panel B shows compensation
     trends, also nationally and for New York state, along with national COVID-19 cases. Panel C considers six specialty categories: intensive
     care (ICU), emergency room (ER), labor and delivery (L&D), standard hospital floors (Med/Surg), operating room (OR), and other. The
     panel shows smoothed time series of job postings by category from February 1 through August 31, 2020. The indices in Panels A, B, and
     C are normalized to a mean of 100 in Feburary 2020. Panel D shows the change in log compensation from April 2019 to April 2020 by
     state, plotted against cumulative COVID-19 cases per million population by April 30, 2020.
                                                      Table 2: Regression Estimates

                                    (1)         (2)        (3)          (4)       (5)         (6)         (7)        (8)        (9)      (10)
                                   Jobs       Comp.       Jobs       Comp.       Jobs       Comp.        Jobs     Comp.        Jobs     Comp.
      ln(cases)                   0.17∗∗∗    0.030∗∗∗     0.036       0.011      0.059      0.0094       0.019    0.0055       0.015    0.039∗
                                  (0.021)    (0.0037)    (0.036)    (0.0079)    (0.033)    (0.0075)    (0.033)   (0.0077)     (0.035)   (0.018)
      ICU × ln(cases)                                    0.17∗∗∗     0.026∗∗    0.14∗∗∗    0.028∗∗∗     0.16∗∗     0.026∗
                                                         (0.028)    (0.0087)    (0.028)    (0.0068)    (0.057)    (0.012)
      ER × ln(cases)                                     0.059∗       0.015      0.035      0.016∗       0.11∗     0.025
                                                         (0.024)    (0.0094)    (0.027)    (0.0077)    (0.052)    (0.015)
      Med/Surg × ln(cases)                               0.11∗∗∗      0.018∗    0.074∗      0.020∗∗     0.14∗∗     0.027∗
                                                         (0.031)    (0.0073)    (0.029)    (0.0058)    (0.049)    (0.011)
      OR × ln(cases)                                     0.0019      -0.0040     0.011     0.00015      -0.029    -0.0025
                                                         (0.031)    (0.0047)    (0.036)    (0.0057)    (0.044)    (0.011)
      Other × ln(cases)                                   0.056      0.0096      0.033      0.0085      0.11∗∗     0.012
                                                         (0.029)    (0.0087)    (0.029)    (0.0077)    (0.038)   (0.0092)
      COVID-19 × ln(cases)                                                                                                     0.11∗    0.037∗∗
                                                                                                                              (0.044)   (0.012)
31




      N                             3860       3860       9413        9413       9413        9413       9413       9413         419       968
      R2                            0.48       0.27       0.34        0.28       0.37        0.32       0.43       0.39         0.38      0.65
      α (overall or ICU)                        5.6                    6.7                    5.1                   6.2                    3.1
      α (ER)                                                           3.9                    2.2                   4.2
      α (Med/Surg)                                                     6.1                    3.8                   5.1
      Date Fixed Effects             1           1          1           1          1           1          1          1
      Week Fixed Effects                                                                                                         1          1
      State-Specialty FE                                                           1           1          1          1
      Date-Specialty FE                                                                                   1          1
     This table reports estimates of equations (6) and (5) on Health Carousel data on travel nursing job postings from February–August 2020.
     The dependent variable in odd-numbered columns is the log number of nursing jobs (nationally by day in col. 1; by specialty in cols. 3,
     5, and 7; and filled by day in col. 9). The dependent variable in the even-numbered columns is the average log compensation for the jobs
     included in the prior column. Cols. (1)–(2) don’t distinguish among specialties, and the supply calculations assume that local supply is
     unaffected by local COVID-19 conditions (β = 0). In cols. (3)–(8), the omitted nursing specialty is labor and delivery. Cols. (9)–(10)
     combine ICU, ER, and Med/Surg together into ”COVID-19 specialties”, and combine OR with L&D into the omitted category. Regressions
     are estimated at the state-week level in cols. (9)–(10). All specifications include state fixed effects. Standard errors, in parenthesis, are
     clustered by state. ∗ p < 0.05,∗∗ p < 0.01,∗∗∗ p < 0.001.
                                           Figure 2: Graphical Supply Estimates by Specialty
                                               (A) Job Postings vs. COVID-19 Cases | Fixed Effects
                                     150

                                     125


                                     100
     Job Quantity Index (log scale




                                      75




                                      50

                                                                                                          ICU
                                                                                                          ER
                                                                                                          L&D
                                                                                                          Med/Surg
                                                                                                          OR
                                                                                                          Other
                                      25
                                           50        100        200            500      1,000     2,000
                                                                Cases (log scale)

                                                (B) Compensation vs. COVID-19 Cases | Fixed Effects
                                     120
     Compensation Index (log scale




                                     110




                                     100
                                                                                                          ICU
                                                                                                          ER
                                                                                                          L&D
                                                                                                          Med/Surg
                                                                                                          OR
                                                                                                          Other
                                      90
                                           50        100        200            500      1,000     2,000
                                                                Cases (log scale)
                                                                         32
Panel A shows six binned scatterplots of job postings against COVID-19 cases by state/day, after condi-
tioning on state and day fixed effects. We show separate scatterplots and corresponding log-linear fits for
six specialty categories: intensive care (ICU), emergency room (ER), labor and delivery (L&D), standard
hospital floors (Med/Surg), operating room (OR), and other. Panel B is analogous, but shows the mean
compensation for the corresponding jobs rather than the quantity.
                                                                             Figure 3: Workers’ Travel Flexibility and Compensation

                                                                (A) Completed Jobs Over Time                                                                                                                                                                         (B) Distance & Pay Over Time
                                              250                                                                                                                      800                                                                           450
  Completed Jobs Index / Compensation Index




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     400                                                                                                                Apr 20




                                                                                                                                                                                                             Distance in miles (log scale)
                                                                                                                                                                             Distance / Weekly Covid Cases
                                              200                                                                                                                      600                                                                           350
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               May 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     300
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jun 20
                                              150                                                                                                                      400                                                                                               Jun 19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     250                            Jul 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jan 19 Jan 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Aug 18     Feb 19                        Aug 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Sep 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           May 19
                                              100                                                                                                                      200                                                                                                Aug Nov
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                19 19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     200               MarApr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Sep      19 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           19 Feb
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      OctOct
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         18 19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Dec 19             Mar 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jul 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Nov Jul
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             18 19
                                               50                                                                                                                      0                                                                                        Dec 18           Sep 19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     150
                                                    Feb 1, 20    Mar 1, 20         Apr 1, 20       May 1, 20      Jun 1, 20     Jul 1, 20    Aug 1, 20     Sep 1, 20


                                                                                                           Week                                                                                                                                                 90              100             110              120              130            140          150         160
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Compensation Index (log scale)
                                                                    Completed Jobs Index                       Compensation Index
                                                                    Distance (in miles)                        Weekly COVID-19 Cases (thousands)                                                                                                                                                      Distance             Linear fit




                                                                (C) Distance vs. Compensation                                                                                                                                                                   (D) Cross-State vs. Compensation
                                              450                                                                                                                                                                                                    .9

                                              400                                                                                                                                                            Share of workers from different state
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .8
                                              350
 Distance in miles (log scale)




                                              300
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .7


                                              250

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .6


                                              200

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .5



                                              150
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .4
                                                       70                     85                     100                  115         130          145          160                175                                                                     70                   85                100                115                130          145          160     175
                                                                                               Compensation Index (log scale)                                                                                                                                                                Compensation Index (log scale)


                                                                 (E) Distance vs. COVID-19                                                                                                                                                                           (F) Cross-State vs. COVID-19
                                              450                                                                                                                                                                                                    .9

                                              400
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Share of workers from different state




                                              350
 Distance in miles (log scale)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .8


                                              300


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .7
                                              250




                                              200                                                                                                                                                                                                    .6




                                              150                                                                                                                                                                                                    .5
                                                          10         20                50           100           200           500         1000         2000                5000                                                                           10           20             50       100         200                500           1000         2000          5000
                                                                                          Weekly COVID-19 cases (log scale)                                                                                                                                                               Weekly COVID-19 cases (log scale)




This figure uses data on jobs filled by Health Carousel. Panel A shows time series of completed jobs
and compensation (both normalized to 100 in Feburary 2020), average distance traveled from a nurse’s
home to the job location, and COVID-19 cases. Panel B shows the relationship between average distance
traveled and the contemporaneous mean compensation index by month. Panels C, D, E, and F show binned
scatterplots of the relationship between travel distance (Panels C and E) or share of jobs filled by out-of-
                                                     33
state workers (Panels D and F) against the job’s own compensation (Panels C and D) or the job location’s
weekly COVID-19 new case count (Panels E and F). The binned scatterplots are all conditional on state
and specialty fixed effects.
A     Model Solution
To back out the model’s parameters from our estimates, we sequentially use the coefficients
πi and µi for each COVID-19-related specialty i ∈ {ICU, ER, Med/Surg}, along with the
τ1 and κ1 coefficients for L&D. (That is, τ1 and κ1 remain the same as we move across
specialties i.) Setting the empirical coefficients in (5) and (6) equal to the appropriate
model-implied coefficients from (3) and (4), and then solving for the latter, yields:
                                           µi
                                     α=                                                 (8)
                                           πi
                                                 µi τ1
                                      β = κ1 −                                          (9)
                                                  πi
                                           κ1
                                      γ=                                              (10)
                                           τ1
                                                 κ1 πi
                                      δ = µi −         .                              (11)
                                                  τ1
Table 2 reports the estimates for the key supply parameter α̂ at the bottom of each pair
of regressions.




                                            34
     B     Additional Results

                               Table B.1: Summary Statistics During COVID-19 Pandemic

      Measure                                         N          Mean           SD           P10        Median         P90
      Job posting index                              4977         126.7         391           7.8          39          288.3
      Comp. index (posted jobs)                      4977         118.8         32.2         91.9        109.3         160.7
      Filled jobs index                              669          219.9        481.6         41.1        82.1          492.8
      Comp. index (filled jobs)                      669          138.9         38.3         92.6        134.9         187.9
      COVID-19 cases (thousands)                    10694          .83          3.78           0          .14           1.3
      Travel distance (miles)                        669          588.5        604.8         68.1        344.3        1395.3
     Data are from Health Carousel and are described in detail in the text. The unit of observation is the state-by-day. The compensation
     index is normalized relative to the national daily average from February 1–March 14, 2020, weighted by number of job postings. The job
     posting index is normalized average daily postings, relative to each subsample’s average from February 1–March 14, 2020.
35
                                          Table B.2: State Summary

                          February 1 - March 14   March 15 - May 16    May 17 - July 18   July 19 - August 31
                            Job         Comp        Job      Comp       Job      Comp       Job       Comp
     Observation
                          postings      index     postings   index    postings   index    postings    index
     level
     AL            1.26     100           88         62        90       66         84       189        108
     AK              .5     100          104         88        95        49       106        76        101
     AZ            2.47     100           93        145       113       75        104       273        127
     AR            1.33     100          100         86       101       40         96       341        111
     CA            13.4     100          116        131       137       32        118      165         132
     CO             .61     100           97         96       100       38         89        77         90
     CT            .69      100          115        173       133       57        123       60         116
     DE            .22      100          100        341       126       33        123       110        104
     FL             5.7     100           91        140       117        17        90       382        115
36




     GA            2.67     100           95        116       109        40        93       211        129
     HI             .25     100          105        165       126       17        101       169        147
     ID             .19     100          102         37        88       17         84       146        102
     IL            2.82     100           93        203       117       65         96        83        100
     IN            1.67     100           94         74        99       41         98        55        100
     IA            1.06     100          102        104       101       66         99       112        114
     KS            .33      100          100         52        95       19        87       103         104
     KY            1.65     100           96        128       105        37        96       168        110
     LA             .83     100           92        220       104       47         92       297        106
     ME             .52     100           93        137        97       69         92       98          93
     MD            3.65     100           93        208       105       118       107       155        111
     MA            2.89     100          106        174       131        94       106        70        103
     MI            1.62     100          110        243       137        32        90        55         89
     MN             .41     100          96         106        95        48       124        78        101
     MS             .31     100           65        242       100       77         83      1141        105
     MO            2.84     100           98        112       105       30         94       199        105
                                                     State Summary (Continued)

                                February 1 - March 14         March 15 - May 16           May 17 - July 18         July 19 - August 31
                                   Job            Comp          Job         Comp          Job          Comp          Job         Comp
      Observation
                                 postings         index       postings      index       postings       index       postings      index
      level
      MT               .73          100            103            78          101           65           96           114           97
      NE              .52           100            100            72          102           38           85            97          102
      NV              1.75          100            100           168          114          14            96           311          130
      NH              .62           100            100           108          104          55            99           124          102
      NJ               2.4          100            120           513          182           34          117            37          115
      NM             1.42           100            90            107           96           44          103            59          112
      NY             10.25          100            106           863          185          49           125            77          107
      NC              3.13          100             92           119           94           36           90           187          104
      ND              .34           100            105            73          106           20          108            46          106
37




      OH             1.96           100             92           135          112           62           98           187          101
      OK             1.05           100             97            54           95           14           93           128          120
      OR             1.46           100            106           150          111           37          100           117          106
      PA             2.62           100             97           145          109           75           96           160          103
      RI               .39          100            110           679          115          242          114           195          114
      SC             2.34           100            92            106           93           31           93           353          116
      SD               .48          100             98           121          100          103           97           125           98
      TN              1.99          100             77           111           96           48           98           208          100
      TX              4.74          100             96            53           97           63          101           573          116
      UT               .11          100            101           247           89          250          172           285           81
      VT               .86          100             99            98          101           31           97           143          107
      VA              3.98          100             95           113           97          56            97           122          104
      WA             3.25           100            105           152          128           23          106            74          110
      WV             1.08           100             88            90           88           74           91           146           94
      WI             1.56           100             92           178          120           22           99            61          100
      WY              .21           100            88             64           88           48           83            71           98
     Data are from Health Carousel and are described in detail in the text. The unit of observation is the state-by-day. The compensation
     index is normalized relative to the national daily average from February 1–March 14, 2020, weighted by number of job postings. The job
     posting index is average daily postings, normalized relative to each state’s average for February 1–March 14, 2020.
