                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      IN THE RED: OVERDRAFTS, PAYDAY LENDING AND THE UNDERBANKED

                                       Marco Di Maggio
                                        Angela T. Ma
                                       Emily Williams

                                      Working Paper 28242
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28242


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020




We thank John Campbell, Mihir Desai, Luis Viceira, Adi Sunderam, Jialan Wang, Giorgia
Piacentino, Adair Morse, and Emily Gallagher for helpful comments. We also thank numerous
conference and seminar participants for helpful comments. Ma gratefully acknowledges support
from the Paul & Daisy Soros Fellowship and the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Marco Di Maggio, Angela T. Ma, and Emily Williams. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
In the Red: Overdrafts, Payday Lending and the Underbanked
Marco Di Maggio, Angela T. Ma, and Emily Williams
NBER Working Paper No. 28242
December 2020
JEL No. G21,G38,G51

                                          ABSTRACT

The reordering of transactions from "high-to-low" is a controversial bank practice thought to
maximize fees paid by low-income customers on overdrawn accounts. We exploit multiple class-
action lawsuits resulting in mandatory changes to this practice, coupled with payday lending data,
to show that after banks cease high-to-low reordering, low-income individuals reduce borrowing
from alternative lenders. These consumers increase consumption, experience long-term
improvements in overall financial health, and gain access to lower-cost loans in the traditional
system. These findings highlight that aggressive bank practices create a demand for alternative
financial services, highlighting an important link between the traditional and alternative financial
systems.

Marco Di Maggio                                  Emily Williams
Harvard Business School                          Harvard Business School
Baker Library 265                                Baker Library 273
Soldiers Field                                   Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163                                 Boston, MA 02163
and NBER                                         ewilliams@hbs.edu
mdimaggio@hbs.edu

Angela T. Ma
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
angelama@g.harvard.edu
1         Introduction
According to the FDIC, at least twenty-five percent of U.S. households are unbanked or
underbanked (FDIC, 2017). Individuals in these households do not have a bank account,
or have a bank account but also routinely use financial services outside of the traditional
banking system, such as payday loans. One of the top reasons that underbanked households
cite for not having or exclusively using a bank account, is that bank account fees are too
high. Indeed, low-income individuals are estimated to pay at least three times as much as
the rest of the population in order to maintain their checking accounts.1
        The issue of financial inclusion has caught the attention of policymakers, with the Federal
Reserve Board Chairman Powell stating in 2019: "Access to safe and affordable financial
services is vital, especially among families with limited wealth -- whether they are looking to
invest in education, start a business, or simply manage the ups and downs of life." However,
while low income consumers use both traditional and alternative financial systems to obtain
financial services, the bulk of research and regulation on financial inclusion in the United
States has focused on the high costs associated with, and predatory nature of, alternative
service providers such as payday lenders.2 As a result, both state and federal regulators
have expanded their supervision of the payday lending industry specifically, and as of 2019,
nineteen states and the District of Columbia prohibit payday lending or have set interest
rate caps and other limits that may force payday lenders out of business.
        The commonly proposed solution to the high costs associated with these alternative fi-
nancial services, is to bank the underbanked, i.e. to integrate underbanked households into
the traditional financial system more. On its economic inclusion website, the FDIC states,
"Ownership of an account at a federally insured depository institution provides households
with a safe place to keep deposits and to save for emergency and long-term needs, and it facil-
itates households' financial transactions ... However, despite these benefits, millions of U.S.
households continue to use services from high cost alternative financial services providers."3
        A better understanding of the factors that influence demand for alternative financial
services ­ and in particular any factors driven by traditional financial institutions ­ can help
    1
     According to a 2017 report by Bankrate available at https://www.bankrate.com/pdfs/pr/20171023-Best-
Banks.pdf. Low-income is defined as below $30,000 per year.
   2
     See Bertrand and Morse (2011) for evidence on the costs associated with using alternative financial
services.
   3
     See https://economicinclusion.gov/whatis/.


                                                   1
inform future policy interventions. In particular, very little is known about the interaction
between the traditional and alternative financial institutions that both provide services to
the underbanked segment of the population.
       In this paper we investigate whether practices implemented by traditional financial insti-
tutions can cause customers to migrate towards alternative financial services providers, such
as payday lenders. Specifically, we study one highly controversial practice of banks ­the
high-to-low reordering of deposit account transactions ­that is thought to maximize fees
paid by consumers on their overdrawn bank accounts. We document the impact that this
practice has on consumer demand for alternative financial services and subsequent consumer
financial health.
       Banks are legally allowed to choose the order in which they process a customer's account
transactions. For instance, as illustrated in Figure 1, given an initial $400 checking account
balance, the bank can process a $500 rent debit before two smaller transactions of $50 each,
even if the rent debit was posted latest in time. In this example, the reordering causes
the customer to incur three overdraft fees, rather than just one, as would be the case if
transactions were processed in chronological order.4
       A 2016 report by the Pew Charitable Trusts scrutinized the practices of 50 of the largest
banks by deposits.5 The study found that high-to-low transaction reordering is widespread.
Roughly half of the analyzed banks reserve the right to reorder instead of processing trans-
actions in chronological order. Banks have argued that high-to-low reordering benefits cus-
tomers because it ensures that big, important payments ­ like rent, mortgages, and student
loans ­ are made first. Nonetheless, these procedures can be considered problematic, espe-
cially for younger and lower-income customers who may not have the resources to keep a
safe cash cushion in their bank accounts.
       The net effect of high-to-low ordering on consumer welfare is, in theory, ambiguous. On
one hand, if these overdraft policies are fairly priced, these procedures allow banks to offer
hand-to-mouth households a way to access cash instantaneously via overdraft credit when
in distress6 . On the other hand, if these procedures result in excessive fees, these households
   4
     In this example, for an overdraft fee of $35, the high-to-low reordering increases the fee burden from
17.5% of the overdrawn balance to 53% ­ a dramatic increase in the cost of overdraft far above the advertised
$35 sticker price.
   5
     See Pew Charitable Trusts (2016).
   6
     See Morse (2006) or Morse (2011) for a discussion on access to other forms of short-term distress credit
such as payday loans.


                                                     2
are more likely to become unexpectedly overextended and find it difficult to find funds to
both bring account balances above zero and pay the cascade of overdraft fees.
       It is worth noting that failure to pay overdraft fees and quickly bring account balances
above zero leads to severe consequences. This is due to the fact that the banking system
is centralized in its record-keeping on consumers. ChexSystems ­ the primary consumer
reporting agency used by banks ­ records involuntary bank account closures that result from
unpaid overdrafts and related fees. Involuntary account closure can then prevent a consumer
from opening an account at any other bank for up to 5 years.7 Once a consumer is unable
to obtain a checking account, it becomes very difficult to obtain credit or access financial
services like checks, debit cards, direct deposit, digital transfer, and bill payment. Given
the severe consequences of defaulting in the traditional banking system, households saddled
with overdraft fees may find it optimal to borrow elsewhere to make good on their fees, or
they may leave the traditional system altogether. The correct regulatory response to these
overdraft procedures crucially depends on which effect dominates in practice.8
       A key challenge in analyzing these bank practices and their impact on demand for alter-
native financial services is the availability of data: underbanked households are unlikely to
be fully represented in credit bureau data that is routinely employed for household finance
studies. An additional challenge is that bank policies and behaviors are endogenous ­ likely
driven by the type of depositors the bank tends to attract and therefore correlated with
a vast array of local economic variables. Furthermore, bank practices such as high-to-low
reordering are typically very difficult to observe.
       We address each of these challenges. First, we obtain alternative credit bureau data
from Clarity, which covers millions of individuals with non-traditional credit histories (e.g.
consumers with relationships with payday lenders and title lenders). Clarity data includes
a similar set of variables as those given by traditional bureaus, e.g. loan performance and
account information.9 We complement this data with traditional credit bureau data from
Equifax, one of the major consumer credit bureaus. With Equifax data, we focus on in-
stallment loans made to borrowers in the lowest quintile of the income distribution of the
dataset, in order to capture similarly constrained borrowers as those observed in Clarity.10
   7
    Failure to pay overdraft fees and balances within 2 months results in involuntary account closure ­ see
Campbell et al. (2012).
  8
    There are currently no regulations prohibiting high-to-low reordering.
  9
    See Nu~nez et al. (2016) for an exploration of Clarity subprime lending data.
 10
    Installment loans are an alternative to payday loans for individuals with poor credit. For anecdo-


                                                    3
   Second, by focusing on the practice of high-to-low transaction reordering, we can exploit
a series of lawsuits that challenged this practice at banks throughout the United States.
We hand-collect a unique dataset on these lawsuits, documenting the banks sued, lawsuit
outcomes (including whether any change to high-to-low reordering was mandated), and ge-
ographic areas affected. The lawsuits provide a key source of variation of high-to-low re-
ordering behavior over time, within zip-codes, across zip-codes, and across banks. In our
empirical strategy, we match each zip-code with its neighboring zip-codes, defined as those
located within a certain distance. We compare outcomes for zip-codes that lie within the
same neighborhood but that differ in the presence of banks sued over their overdraft prac-
tices. Specifically we compare zip-codes that contain branches of banks required to cease
high-to-low reordering with zip-codes within 7 miles that contain branches of sued banks
with no mandatory behavior changes. We choose a radius of 7 mile radius to ensure that
we are comparing areas with similar economic conditions including consumer demand dy-
namics.11 Furthermore, we control for neighborhood by quarter fixed effects in our preferred
specifications. In addition, we test for the absence of pre-trends and find no differences
before the lawsuits behavior change date.
   Our analysis proceeds in four steps. We start by showing that, within the same zip-code,
branches belonging to banks with high-to-low reordering policies are more likely to be located
in close proximity to payday lenders and check cashers, relative to branches belonging to
banks with no high-to-low reordering policies. This is consistent with the idea that banks,
specifically banks with aggressive overdraft policies, and alternative finance providers serve
similar customers. While this finding indicates a strong correlation between the bank practice
of high-to-low reordering and the existence of payday lenders and check cashers, it does not
provide a causal link between bank practices and demand for alternative financial services.
Instead, variation in high-to-low reordering induced by lawsuit outcomes provides a suitable
setting in which to tease out this interaction and causal effect.
   In the next step of our analysis, we confirm that our lawsuit instrument is relevant
and resulted in meaningful changes at affected banks. We document a strongly significant,
negative, first-stage relationship between the lawsuit behavior change mandate and overdraft
tal evidence, see for example https://www.nerdwallet.com/best/loans/personal-loans/installment-loans-bad-
credit.
  11
     Our results are not dependent on the exact radius chosen and hold true for radii ranging from 5 to 10
miles.



                                                    4
activity (whether measured as revenues or balances) at banks. In other words, we show that
both overdraft revenues and balances declined significantly for banks required to cease the
practice of high-to-low reordering. We argue therefore that the lawsuit rulings therefore
were likely binding and indeed caused banks to change behavior. We show that no other
source of bank revenue is affected by the lawsuit mandate, which reassures us that we are
not capturing some other overall shock to these banks.
       Next, we make use of the variation in high-to-low reordering practices induced by the
lawsuit outcomes and analyze household behavior. Our results, perhaps surprisingly, indicate
that borrowing from alternative lenders significantly declines after banks no longer reorder
transactions from high to low. We find that, after high-to-low reordering bans, the total
amount of payday loans disbursed declines by roughly $84 per borrower/quarter, which is
an economically significant decline of 16 percent relative to its mean. We further show that
installment loan borrowing similarly declines by $284 per borrower/quarter, which is a 6
percent decline relative to its mean. The effects are persistent for several quarters after
the change in bank overdraft policies, indicating a permanent decline in borrowing from
alternative lenders after high-to-low reordering bans.
       An important next step is investigating whether prohibiting aggressive overdraft fee poli-
cies actually results in better outcomes for affected consumers. If consumers who use over-
drafts have low cash-at-hand and face liquidity constraints, a reduction in debt servicing
costs can increase these consumers' ability to smooth consumption, service existing debt,
and ultimately access credit later on.12 We address this question by first investigating sev-
eral measures of financial health -- such as the total amount of loans in good standing,
credit card balance and limits, and overall reliance on installment loans13 . Consistently
across these measures, we find that households experience an improvement in these credit
health outcomes following high-to-low reordering bans.
       We find that credit card limits increase, which suggests that traditional lenders expand
access to credit for these households who experience improved financial conditions. Further-
more, we document long term changes in consumer borrowing behavior after high-to-low
reordering bans. Specifically, while borrowing from alternative lenders permanently declines
  12
     See for example Bacchetta and Gerlach (1997) who show that, for liquidity-constrained consumers,
reductions in debt servicing costs (due to monetary policy changes) lead to changes in consumption behavior.
We apply this logic to our setting, where the cost of overdraft has been reduced.
  13
     to test for a differential impact on the borrowers' reliance on more traditional forms of credit



                                                     5
following high-to-low reordering bans, total credit balances increase. This finding indicates
an improved access to more mainstream and likely cheaper credit.
       Finally, to further corroborate the interpretation that borrowers benefit from less aggres-
sive overdraft fees, we investigate whether borrowers' consumption is impacted by changes in
bank practices. We distinguish between durable expenditures related to home and auto (e.g.
roof and car repair), non-durable but still essential expenditures (e.g. food and clothing),
and other non-durable expenditures. We find that affected households significantly increase
their consumption of durable goods related to home and auto and their consumption of
essential, non-durable goods.
       These results collectively suggest that overdrafts offered by high-to-low reordering banks
and payday loans offered by payday lenders are not simply substitutes.14 Rather, over-
drafts can induce cash-strapped, low-income households to seek loans from alternative fi-
nance providers in order to bring their balances above zero again. In other words, the nature
of overdrafts in that they are appealing even at high costs due to the instantaneous access
to cash they allow, and the fact that they must be repaid quickly to avoid the severe costs
of default, can create demand for borrowing in the alternative financial system. Further ­
aggressive pricing of overdrafts can amplify this demand for alternative borrowing and can
cause low income consumers to get caught in a potential spiral of growing fees and indebt-
edness15 . Although policymakers today are focused on ensuring that poorer areas get served
by traditional financial institutions, our results suggest that bank practices in these areas
can be harmful and be part of the reason that households end up using high-cost credit from
alternative providers.
       One potential effect of forcing banks to lower overdraft fees is the possibility that these
banks would then find it optimal to stop providing services altogether to low-income house-
holds.16 Intuitively, since overdraft fees are an important source of revenue for banks, the
lawsuits that force banks to cease high-to-low reordering may then prompt banks to close the
now unprofitable branches. We examine this hypothesis by testing whether behavior change
banks are more likely to exit from certain zip-codes after the lawsuit decisions. We find
  14
     The existing literature has documented a substitute relationship between overdraft and payday lenders.
See Bair (2005), Stegman (2007), and Melzer and Morgan (2015).
  15
     We note that the inability to repay an overdraft and the need to roll it over, indicates that borrowers
are likely entering into unsustainable debt contracts in the first place of the type discussed in Morgan and
Strain (2008).
  16
     See for example Dlugosz et al. (2020).


                                                     6
that banks are significantly more likely to close their branches after being required to stop
the practice of high-to-low reordering. Furthermore, this effect is concentrated in zip-codes
where sued banks have a low number of branches and in low-income zip-codes. These results
suggest that the high-to-low reordering bans make it less likely that households will turn
to alternative lenders in the near term but more likely that households will lose access to
traditional financial services altogether in the longer term. Although a full welfare analysis
is outside the scope of the paper, our findings on improved consumer financial health and
improved access to more mainstream credit as a result of the lawsuit outcomes, suggest that
it is likely the reduced need to borrow from payday lenders is the dominating effect.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses related literature and
Section 3 provides background on bank overdrafts and the lawsuits lodged against banks for
high-to-low reordering. Section 4 describes the data, while Section 5 presents motivating
evidence. Section 6 discusses the main results. Section 7 concludes.



2     Related Literature
This paper is related to three main strands of the existing literature. The first strand of liter-
ature examines linkages between the payday and overdraft short term credit markets. There
are a number of studies that show that payday loans and overdrafts are likely substitutes for
one another. For example, Morgan et al. (2012) find that the number of returned checks and
the amount of bank overdraft fee income increase after payday credit bans, consistent with
overdrafts being costlier substitutes for payday loans. Melzer and Morgan (2015) further find
that when payday lending is prohibited, both overdraft prices and overdraft limits decline.
However, in his review of the payday lending market, Stegman (2007) notices a link between
overdrafts and payday loans also as potential complements, stating "As banks have become
fee-based businesses, their bottom lines are better served by levying bounced check and over-
draft fees on the payday loan customer base than they would be by undercutting payday
lenders with lower cost, short-term unsecured loan products." We find, as Stegman suggests,
that payday lenders and banks that charge aggressive overdraft fees seem to compete for a
similar customer base. Miller and Soo (2020) is a closely related, recent piece of work that
links the traditional and alternative credit systems by investigating how greater access to
traditional credit (through the removal of a Chapter 7 bankruptcy flag) affects alternative


                                                7
credit usage. They do not find a significant reduction in payday borrowing perhaps because
it is still needed to pay for basic expenses.
       The papers in this cluster of literature draw a link between payday lending and the pricing
and provision of short-term credit by banks, by taking consumers' demand for credit as given
and then studying the substitution patterns induced by supply changes in payday lending
markets. In this paper we argue and provide evidence consistent with the idea that the
nature of overdraft credit can induce demand for payday borrowing and aggressive practices
such as high-to-low reordering can amplify this demand.
       This paper is also related to the large literature on consumer liquidity constraints. Deaton
(1991) introduces the standard framework for impatient consumers with uncertain income
and liquidity constraints, while Hayashi (1985), Hayashi (1987), Zeldes (1989), Jappelli
(1990) and Gross and Souleles (2002) provide indirect and direct empirical evidence of liq-
uidity constraints. A follow-up literature beginning with Bacchetta and Gerlach (1997)
shows that, if some consumers are liquidity constrained, aggregate consumption should be
excessively sensitive to credit conditions as well as to income. We add to this literature
by demonstrating that a reduction in debt service costs (overdrafts in our setting) causes
consumers with likely binding liquidity constraints and little cash on hand not only to in-
crease consumption but also to experience improved credit health and increased access to
traditional credit. We note that, according to the standard framework in Deaton (1991),
liquidity constraints would heighten the precautionary savings motive, which is at odds with
the empirical fact that 60% of Americans cannot come up with $1000 to cover an emer-
gency.17 While Laibson et al. (1998) and Harris and Laibson (2001) show that hyperbolic
discounting can explain the missing precautionary savings effect, we do not take a stand on
the exact type of discounting at play. Instead, we take as given the fact that the majority
of U.S. consumers have limited access to liquid assets and credit.
       Finally, this paper is related to the small literature on debt traps. As noted in Morgan
et al. (2012), the debt trap concept is close to the poverty trap model in Sachs (1983). Sachs
(1983) illustrates how a nation may become trapped in poverty if its debt burden becomes
too great: debt servicing slows capital accumulation, which slow income growth and reduces
saving. Reduced saving feeds back to reduce capital accumulation even further, leading to a
  17
     See CNBC (2019). Also Dynan (1993) and Guiso et al. (1992) report the missing precautionary savings
effect.



                                                   8
downward spiral. A reduction in borrowing costs in this scenario can reverse the spiral. Our
evidence ­ that a reduction in overdraft costs improves consumer credit health and ultimate
access to traditional credit ­ indicates that either aggressively priced overdrafts themselves
or the payday loans obtained to repay such overdrafts create a debt spiral.18 This finding
is consistent with ample anecdotal evidence, such as in Faris and Stegman (2003), that the
financial performance of the high-cost short-term loan industry is significantly enhanced by
the successful conversion of more and more occasional users into chronic borrowers.



3        Background
This section draws from several recent policy studies to highlight the key features of the
traditional and alternative financial systems that are relevant for our analysis.
       We start by noting that bank overdraft programs are widespread. According to a 2009
FDIC report, most banks (approximately 75 percent) automatically enrolled customers in
automated overdraft programs. Post Regulation E, customers are now required to affirma-
tively opt in to an overdraft program, however, persistent use of overdrafts and lawsuits
brought by the CFPB against some banks question the effectiveness of Regulation E in
reducing the use of overdrafts19 .
       An overdraft occurs when a customer makes a purchase but does not have enough money
in their account to cover the transaction. Banks can either allow the transaction to proceed
and charge an overdraft fee as well as extend credit to cover the transaction, or they can
decline the transaction and charge a non-sufficient funds (NSF) fee. As well as charging
overdraft and NSF fees, most banks surveyed by the FDIC also assess fees on persistent
negative balance status accounts. In 2015, consumer overdraft fees and non-sufficient funds
fees (NSF) comprised almost two-thirds of all reported bank deposit account fee revenues.20
       Overdrawn accounts can lead to a cascade of fees, and eventually loss of access to financial
services. For example, if an overdraft fee remains unpaid after one week, most banks charge
additional daily fees for a persistent negative balance account. After around two months of
a persistent negative balance account, consumers may face an involuntary account closure,
  18
     Either the loan was "unsustainable" in the first place, or payday borrowing itself causes repeat borrowing.
  19
     For example, on January 19, 2017, the CFPB sued TCF National Bank in the United States District
Court of Minnesota for devising a strategy to persuade its customers to opt-in to overdraft services. Further,
a CFPB 2017 White Paper on Overdrafts shows high rates of opt-ins from persistent overdrafters
  20
     We also find that deposit fee income accounts for between 5-30% of bank ordinary revenues.


                                                       9
a charge-off of any unpaid balances, which are then taken over by a collections agency, and
a black-listing in ChexSystems. The latter is a centralized system used by banks to verify
customers' good standing with other institutions before allowing a customer to open a bank
account. Hence a black-listing in ChexSystems can make it difficult, if not impossible, to
open an account at a different bank. According to the CFPB, among all accounts that were
open during a one-year period, six percent experienced an involuntary closure.
      The burden of these fees is not equally shouldered by all customers and falls particularly
heavily on the financially fragile, as several recent studies have shown. For example, the
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) collected data from a representative ran-
dom sample of checking accounts from several large banks between June 2011 to June 2012
in order to shed light on overdraft practices. Their analysis highlights that around nine
percent of all accounts incur more than 10 overdrafts in a 12-month period. This relatively
small fraction of all overdrafters account for 79 percent of all overdraft fees earned by the
banks studied. In addition, a study by the Pew Charitable Trusts in 2014 highlights the
demographic characteristics of overdrafters, documenting that younger, lower-income, and
non-white individuals, as well as those who do not possess a credit card, are among those
significantly more likely to pay an overdraft fee. Pew further reports that 28 percent of
people who paid an overdraft fee decide to close their checking accounts because of overdraft
fees. Through interviews, the CFPB has also documented that consumers are surprised by
overdraft fees, uncertain about bank policy, and sometimes neglectful of automated pay-
ments that trigger overdrafts. Interviewed consumers explain, "If you overdraft, the risk is
that you are going to end up with your whole entire deposit being eaten up by overdraft
fees" (CFPB, 2017).
      Customers also tend to associate overdraft fees with payday loans, and overdrafters tend
to be the focus of customer acquisition campaigns by payday lenders.21 According to Rivlin
(2010), the payday industry grew considerably in recent times because "when the cost of a
payday loan is lower than the rising costs of a bounced check or credit card late fee, customers
find it optimal to use alternative lenders to cover their monthly shortfalls." Further, a
commonly used resource for customers of payday lenders, UStatesLoans.org, clearly states
(as of 2020) that "it is a good idea to use payday loans to avoid overdrafts. Short term loans
provide fast money required to keep you on track. The loan fee is significantly lower than
 21
      See for example Pew Charitable Trusts (2015).


                                                      10
NSF fee and occurs just once in the loan duration, thus you always know what to expect. All
this makes payday loan service much easier to use so you won't have to deal with overdrafts
in the future."
    Our paper investigates this relation between bank overdraft policies and the demand for
alternative loans, and ultimately the impact these policies have on consumer financial health.
To do so, we exploit a series of lawsuits against banks that employed high-to-low reordering
of deposit account transactions. More details on these lawsuits can be found in Section 4.



4     Data
One challenge of studying the interaction between the traditional and alternative financial
systems is gathering data on either system.
    In the traditional financial system, we are rarely privy to the policies of banks over
time, especially in the case of an arguably shrouded practice like high-to-low transaction
reordering. Bank policies are not highly publicized on a regular basis, and only the most
updated policy can be gleaned from reading current bank account disclosures. Therefore, in
order to observe overdrafts policies of banks over time, we bring in two data sources ­ one
pre-existing and one novel.
    The first data source is a 4-year study of large banks conducted by the Pew Charitable
Trusts. Each year from 2012 to 2015, Pew identified the 50 largest banks by domestic de-
posits and obtained each bank's checking account disclosure whenever available. We use this
information by Pew to create an indicator for whether a bank practices high-low overdraft
reordering at a given point in time. We combine this information with branch locations
from the FDIC's Summary of Deposits data and quarterly bank data from FRY9C to ob-
tain bank level outcomes. Panels A and B of Table 1 present summary statistics of our
Pew/Infogroup/Summary of Deposits merged data set. There are on average 1.38 branches
within each zip-code that employ high-to-low transaction ordering out of 4.7 total branches.
This high prevalence is likely due to the fact that some of the largest banks employed a
high-to-low reordering practice at some point in our sample, and large banks operate across
the US. Panel A also shows that on average there is one check cashier and payday lender
in each zip-code. However, forty percent of zip-code have at least one check cashier and
payday lender, which is consistent with these establishments concentrating in particular ar-


                                              11
eas with higher expected demand for their services. Panel B compares the number of check
cashiers and payday lenders that are close to branches with and without aggressive overdraft
practices. It shows that on average cash checkers and payday lenders tend to be closer to
branches of banks with high-to-low reordering practices, which suggests that both types of
institutions might compete for the same customers.
       The second data source is our own hand-collected set of lawsuits against banks who
engaged in high-to-low reordering. In recent years, in an effort to force banks to refrain
from aggressive overdraft practices, retail customers have sued financial institutions, arguing
that aggressive overdraft practices disproportionately impact low-income clients. To identify
relevant legal cases and build our lawsuits dataset, we query Nexis Uni for case documents
containing "overdraft," "re-sequenc," "resequenc," "reorder," or "re-order." For each legal
case, we read through the court docket and official documents to determine the final outcome.
We limit our focus to lawsuits that settled in court and exclude those that were dismissed or
settled via arbitration. Our final dataset includes 37 lawsuits, for which we note key event
dates and the terms of settlement between each bank and its consumers. In particular, we
document whether and when each bank was required to institute behavioral relief, i.e. cease
high-to-low transaction reordering.22 See Table A.1 for an overview of our lawsuits dataset.
For each lawsuit, we report the name of the sued bank, the date when the lawsuit was filed,
the date when the judge granted final approval of the settlement, and the date when the
bank was required to cease high-to-low transaction reordering, if at all.
       Haubrich and Young (2019) examine the different components of non-interest income for
banks and find that, in the wake of the 2008 crisis, securitization income dried up while
service charge income (primarily overdraft fees and non-sufficient funds fees) increased dra-
matically.23 One explanation is that the housing crash destroyed an important source of
revenue for banks that then reacted by extracting more fees from deposit accounts. Another
explanation is that the low interest rate environment following the Great Financial Crisis left
banks scrambling to find other sources of non-interest income. Indeed, the wave of lawsuits
in our dataset begin in 2008, perhaps because consumers were responding to bank practices
  22
     In the cases of Trustmark National Bank, Webster Bank, U.S. Bank, and PNC Bank, the exact behavioral
relief date could not be found in legal documents or news articles. Instead, we use the settlement final
approval date or the date of the earliest document that reports that the bank has recently stopped high-to-
low reordering. Given that our analysis is at the quarterly level, this procedure in these few cases should
not affect our results.
  23
     Figure 3 in Haubrich and Young (2019) documents the breakdown of non-interest income through time.


                                                    12
that maximized deposit fees to make up for other lost income.
   There is room for non-uniform ruling in these lawsuits because the practice of high-to-low
reordering is not, in of itself, illegal. In the deposit account agreement ­ the contract that
sets the rules of the consumer-bank relationship ­ banks often reserve the right to reorder
transactions freely, which makes it difficult for consumers to claim unlawfulness or deception
afterwards. All of the lawsuits in our sample were ultimately settled with no admission of
liability or wrongdoing from banks. Instead, banks generally claimed that they were only
providing monetary relief (a cash payment) and in some cases also behavioral relief (an end
to high-to-low reordering) in order to avoid an expensive, drawn-out legal process.
   For our outcome variables of interest, we argue that these lawsuit outcomes generate
quasi-exogenous shocks to the high-to-low reordering practices of banks. The lawsuits were
lodged against a wide array of banks, ranging from systemically important financial insti-
tutions (Bank of America, Citibank, JPMorgan Chase, and Wells Fargo) to regional banks
(e.g. Independent Bank, Great Western Bank, Northwest Savings Bank, and Umpqua Bank).
When we compare banks that were required to stop the practice of high-to-low reordering to
those that maintained the practice, we observe a similar presence of systemically important
financial institutions and regional banks. For example, JPMorgan Chase and Wells Fargo
stopped high-to-low reordering, while Bank of America and Citibank did not. Great Western
Bank and Northwest Savings Bank stopped high-to-low reordering, while Independent Bank
and Umpqua Bank did not.
   More specifically, we argue that the determinants of lawsuit outcomes are plausibly unre-
lated to our outcome variables of interest (low-income consumers' credit health, consumption,
and demand for payday loans and installment loans). One determinant of the lawsuit out-
come was whether it became a part of the multi-district litigation MDL 2036. The purpose
of multi-district litigation is to consolidate cases with shared key elements and handle them
with greater efficiency and speed. In our setting, we find that lawsuits in MDL 2036 had
a 68.2% (15 / 22) probability of enacting behavioral relief, while the other lawsuits had a
53.3% (8/15) probability of enacting behavioral relief. This is suggestive evidence that the
MDL structure may have influenced lawsuit outcomes by increasing the likelihood of bank
behavioral relief. Similarly ­ as noted in the CFPB 2015 Arbitration Study ­ while there
was broad similarity in business practices and the legal claims against the banks, there was
variety in the contracts between the consumers and the banks and also in their approach to


                                             13
litigation. For example the CFPB note that, "some banks did not have arbitration clauses in
their checking account agreements with consumers and settled the cases, generally providing
both monetary and behavioral relief. Other banks had arbitration clauses in their agreements,
moved to compel arbitration, and secured dismissal of federal class actions in favor of indi-
vidual consumer arbitration. Yet other banks had arbitration provisions in their consumer
agreements and nevertheless settled either without invoking the arbitration clause or after
invoking the clause with something less than complete success". We argue that the ex-ante
variation in contracts likely led to different lawsuit outcomes, and that it is highly improb-
able that consumers were aware of these ex-ante contract differences. Hence it is highly
unlikely that there is any selection into different banks, and that customers of banks that
ultimately ceased the practice of high-to-low reordering are different along any meaningful
dimension to customers of sued banks who continued the practice. Finally, empirically, we
find no existence of pre-trends in any of our outcome variables, which is consistent with the
quasi-exogeneity of the behavioral relief treatment from the lawsuits. In sum therefore, we
argue that the lawsuits serve as a natural experiment to study the impact of aggressive bank
practices on consumer credit health and activity in the alternative financial system.
   In the alternative financial system, there is a similar data availability issue. The alter-
native financial system is not as centrally organized or regulated as the banking system.
Although the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act endowed the
CFPB with the ability to regulate payday lenders, there remains state-level variation in pay-
day lending prohibition and rules. There is also no designated regulator in charge of jointly
evaluating the different components of the alternative financial system, which includes not
only payday lenders but also check-cashers and issuers of prepaid debit cards. We overcome
this data availability challenge in the alternative financial system by exploiting several data
sources.
   The first data source is the Infogroup Historical Business database, which consolidates
business names, locations, and other details from public sources such as the Yellow Pages.
The data is available from 1997 to 2018. As in Bord (2020), we systematically identify check
cashers, payday lenders, and pawn shops in Infogroup. A business is identified as a check
casher if it has 6-digit SIC code 609903 or if its name contains both "Check" and "Cash."
A business is identified as a payday lender if it has 6-digit SIC code 614113 or if its name
contains "Cash" but not "Check" or "Gold." A business is identified as a pawnshop if it has


                                              14
6-digit SIC code 593229.
       We then use the 5-year American Community Survey conducted by the Census Bureau
to obtain zip-code-level characteristics (on age, race, education, household type, poverty,
income, public assistance, employment, and housing) on an annual basis from 2011 to 2018.
       Our main credit data source is Experian's proprietary alternative finance credit bureau
Clarity Services. Launched in 2008, Clarity is now the largest alternative credit bureau
overseen by the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA). Clarity gathers data from alternative
financial service providers, such as payday lenders, with a particular emphasis on non-prime
and under-banked borrowers. The purpose of Clarity is to provide lenders with information
about prospective borrowers - such as payday borrowing histor - that would not be tracked
by a traditional credit bureau. Our Clarity dataset includes an inquiries file and a tradelines
file. Inquiries are requests made by prospective borrowers to prospective lenders. We observe
inquiries from 2012 to 2020 with details on prospective loan type and borrower characteristics.
Tradelines are actual extended loans. We observe tradelines from 2013 to 2020 with details
on loan amount, loan type, and repayment behavior. In the inquiries and tradelines dataset,
the most granular information we have about a borrower's location is his or her zip-code.
Panels A and B of Table 2 present the summary statistics of the Clarity data used in this
study. We draw a random sample of one million borrowers and observe the number of
inquiries for these borrowers, as well as the number of tradelines and their characteristics,
e.g. whether the loan has been repaid or charged off. We also provide separate statistics
for single payment micro loans (SPML) which are the way payday loans are recorded in the
dataset.
       We complement this data with information for a representative sample of borrowers
present in Equifax. Although payday lenders do not report payday loans to the major credit
bureaus, we can still identify other loan types that are routinely used by credit-constrained
borrowers. Installment loans are an alternative to payday loans for individuals with poor
credit. There are in fact numerous online installment lenders who serve the same clientele as
payday lenders, e.g. Oportun, Opploans, OneMain Financial, and Upgrade, who do report to
credit bureaus.24 Furthermore, all of the largest payday lenders now offer installment loans,
in addition to conventional payday loans that are due in a single lump sum.25 The Consumer
  24
     See for instance this article https://www.nerdwallet.com/best/loans/personal-loans/installment-loans-
bad-credit.
  25
     See the information available here https://www.pewtrusts.org/fr/research-and-analysis/issue-


                                                   15
Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) in June 2016 proposed a rule requiring payday loans to
be repayable in installments to try to address the debt spirals typical of payday lending. This
regulatory pressure is one of the main factors driving this trend toward offering installment
loans. Panels C and D report statistics for these loans and specifically for the borrowers in
the lowest income quintile. Consistent with the hypothesis that installment loans are payday
loans in disguise, we find that the average size of these loans turns out to be similar to the
average payday loan size for low income borrowers.
    We obtain weekly zip-code level aggregate expenditure data from Earnest, who collects
credit and debit card transaction-level data for a representative sample of the US.
    Finally, Table 3 contains branch summary statistics of treatment and control zip-codes
where treated zip-codes are zip-codes that contain branches of sued banks with mandatory
behavior changes, and control zip-codes are those within 7 miles of treated zip-codes that
contain branches of sued banks with no mandatory behavior changes. We show the number
of branches in treatment and control zip-codes in each of the treatment years identified by
the lawsuits data, and next document the number of branches belonging to sued banks in
each treatment and control zip-code. Table 3 highlights that sued banks comprise a large
portion of total branches within a zip-code on average.
    By connecting the described datasets, we are able to examine the relationship between
the U.S. traditional and alternative financial systems at a relatively granular level (zip-code
level).



5     Motivating Facts

5.1       Co-Location of Banks and Alternative Lenders
We start by examining whether banks with aggressive overdraft policies and payday lenders
cater to the same customers.26 If traditional banks tend to serve households with different
characteristics than households served by payday lenders, changes in bank behavior may not
affect customer demand for alternative financial services.
briefs/2016/08/from-payday-to-small-installment-loans.
  26
     Prager (2014) investigates the determinants of alternative financial service providers location choice and
points to demographic characteristics and the legal and regulatory environment. We offer a complementary
viewpoint by showing that aggressive banks and alternative financial service providers co-locate and we argue
that traditional bank policy affects customer demand for alternative financial services.



                                                      16
   Table 4 tests whether banks, and in particular banks that employ high-to-low reordering,
are indeed likely to compete for customers of alternative financial institutions. Since most
individuals tend to favor financial institutions that are physically closer to their home or
workplace, if banks and alternative lenders compete for the same customers, one can expect
them to have physical locations relatively close to each other. Table 4 explores this hypothesis
in a granular way by estimating a within zip-code conditional logit regression. The dependent
variable takes a value of 1 if there is a payday lender and/or a check casher within 0.25 miles,
0.5 miles, 1 mile, 1.5 miles or 2 miles, and a value of 0 otherwise. The independent variable
is a dummy variable that takes a value of 1 if the branch within the zip-code belongs to
a bank with aggressive overdraft policies (high-to-low reordering procedure as identified by
Pew), and 0 if the branch belongs to a bank that is within the 50 largest banks studied by
Pew but that does not have an aggressive overdraft policy. Comparing branch locations of
banks within the largest 50 ensures that we are not comparing locations that are mainly
served by regional banks or credit unions with locations where large banks operate. We
find the coefficient of interest to be positive and highly significant, and it monotonically
declines as the distance from the aggressive branch increases. This within zip-code test
provides evidence that banks that practice high-to-low reordering are more likely to have
check cashers/payday lenders in close proximity.
   Overall, this evidence confirms that it is likely that banks with aggressive overdraft
policies service the same customers of alternative financial services providers such as payday
lenders and check cashers.


5.2    The Impact of High-to-Low Reordering Bans on Overdraft
       Revenues and Balances
While results in Table 4 shows a clear correlation between the presence of bank branches
belonging to banks with aggressive overdraft policies, and alternative finance providers, these
results do not provide a causal link between bank policies and activity in alternative finance
markets. This is because banks located in particular locations might endogenously tailor
their products and pricing to cater to local demographics. In other words a correlation
between the location of bank branches with high-to-low reordering and payday lenders, may
simply be a result of banks appropriately pricing overdraft products provided to customers


                                              17
who are more likely to use the overdraft service (as well as alternative financial services such
as payday loans).
       In order to investigate a causal link between bank overdraft polices and migration to the
alternative finance market, we make use of lawsuits against banks that employed high-to-low
reordering. Some of these lawsuits resulted in mandatory bank behavior changes whereby
banks were prohibited from employing high-to-low reordering after a specified date27 .
       Our second piece of analysis investigates the effects of these lawsuit behavior changes on
bank fee income earned from providing overdrafts, and overdraft balances. Intuitively, this
analysis serves as our first stage test of whether or not the lawsuit behavior changes resulted
in any meaningful decline in bank revenue from the provision of overdraft services.
       Figure 2 plots quarterly coefficients of a difference-in-differences regression for banks
affected by lawsuits resulting in mandatory behavior changes relative to similarly sized banks
operating in similar geographic areas with no behavior change28 . In Panel A of Figure 2,
the dependent variable is the log of "Other Consumer Loans" category in the FFIEC 031
regulatory call report data, in thousands of dollars. The other consumer loan category
contains overdraft balances that are persistently negative: if a bank provides an overdraft,
instead of reporting negative deposits, banks are required to report these overdraft balances
as part of other consumer loans.29 While measuring overdraft balances directly is not possible
with Call Report data, we argue that the other consumer loan category is the best possible
proxy for the quantity of persistent overdrafts.30 For the four quarters prior to the high-
to-low reordering ban, the treated banks do not disburse significantly more or less loans
within the "other consumer loan" category. However post ban, there is a significant and
obvious downward trend for all the quarters after the change. Figure 2 panel (b) also
shows in a similar results but for the revenues associated with overdrafts defined as the
sum of deposit fee income and interest income on other consumer loans divided by total
revenue. The results translate to a loss of, on average, approximately $9m of overdraft
  27
     Details of these lawsuits are recorded in Table A.1.
  28
     Each bank is assigned a primary state, which is the state that contains the majority of its deposits by
total branch deposits, and banks are matched on primary state. Further, banks are sorted into size deciles
each year and behavior change banks are also matched to non-lawsuit banks within the same annual size
decile.
  29
     See for example Instructions for Preparation of Consolidated Reports of Condition and Income (FFIEC
031 and 041) for details on how overdrafts are accounted for
  30
     Persistent overdrafts include not just one-time overdrafts that are quickly corrected by a consumer, but
also chronic overdrafts such as identified by CFPB and FDIC studies.



                                                     18
balances per quarter, which totals around $720 million annually for all sued banks with
high-to-low reordering ban31 . These findings are confirmed in Table A.2 where we report
the corresponding difference-in-differences specification. As a placebo test, we report the
same specification but for other outcome variables that should not be affected by the HTLR
ban, such as the investment banking or trading revenue, and find that these remain indeed
unchanged after the high-to-low reordering ban.
    Overall, these findings indicate that the lawsuits forcing banks to eliminate their high-
to-low reordering practices significantly reduced the sued bank revenue associated with over-
drafts.



6     Main Results

6.1       Household Demand for Alternative Loans
We now turn to our main analysis: assessing the effect of banning high-to-low reordering,
an arguably aggressive bank policy, on household behavior. We begin with Table 5, which
documents the effect of high-to-low reordering bans on household demand for payday loans.
    If overdrafts offered by these banks were simply fairly priced substitutes for payday
loans, we would expect the following possible outcomes: since the lawsuits mandated that
banks essentially drop the price of overdrafts, consumers would substitute away from payday
borrowing and towards the now cheaper overdraft borrowing. Alternatively, if the price
reduction resulted in a supply restriction, the excess unmet demand for short term credit
would be absorbed by payday borrowing. Under this substitution hypothesis, we would
expect to see the quantities of overdrafts and payday loans move in opposite directions post
high-to-low reordering bans.
    Alternatively, if overdrafts and particularly aggressively priced overdrafts create demand
for payday borrowing, we would expect to see quantity declines in both overdrafts and payday
borrowing after high-to-low reordering bans.
    To study household alternative loan demand response to the bank behavior changes
induced by the lawsuits, we estimate the following zip-code quarter level specification:
  31
     We show in Table A.3 that it does not look like banks located in close proximity to treated banks are
impacted by these changes. Specifically we compare control banks to similar-sized banks operating within
the same state and document no effect on overdraft balances or revenues associated with overdrafts



                                                   19
                 P aydayBorrowingzt =  · HT LR Banz · P ostt + nt + zt                       (1)

   where P aydayBorrowingzt is a payday borrowing outcome variable for the zip-code z in
quarter t. P ostt is a dummy variable taking a value of 1 for the four quarters following the
lawsuit outcome and a value of 0 for the four quarters prior to and including the lawsuit
event. HT LR Banz is a dummy variable taking on a value of 1 if the zip-code contains
branches that belong to a lawsuit bank where the outcome of the lawsuit was a mandatory
behavior change to cease high-to-low reordering, and a value of 0 if the zip-code contains
branches belonging to lawsuit bank where the outcome of the lawsuit required no behavior
change and the zip-code is within 7 miles of a treated zip-code. We choose to compare
zip-codes containing branches of HTLR ban banks with others that are local to them likely
experiencing similar local dynamics. In our preferred specifiation, we choose other zip-codes
within 7 miles that contain other lawsuit bank branches with no HTLR ban. We choose this
specification to further ensure that we are comparing local areas with likely similar types
of consumers (i.e. those targeted by high-to-low reordering practices). However robustness
checks in Table's A.5 and A.6 demonstrate that the choice of neighborhood radius and control
zip-codes more generally do not impact our main results.
   The coefficient of interest  measures the differential effect of the lawsuits in zip-codes
where banks had to stop reordering deposit account transactions from high to low, relative
to zip-codes with sued banks present with no such changes to overdraft practices. In other
words, the variation we capture is restricted to regions that are in close proximity, i.e. within
a 7 miles radius, and where banks in both the treatment and control areas are subject to
lawsuits. To control for heterogeneity across these areas, such as changes in local economic
conditions, we include neighborhood, quarter and, in the most conservative specification,
neighborhood by quarter fixed effects (nt ), where again, two zip-codes are defined to be in
the same neighborhood if they are within 7 miles of each other. Intuitively, we are exploiting
only variation within neighborhoods during the same quarter. This ensures that, for instance,
a sudden unemployment shock correlated with high-to-low reordering bans, that could drive
both the demand for payday loans and the use of overdraft, is not confounding our results.
We also allow arbitrary correlation of the standard errors within neighborhood and time by
double-clustering the standard errors at the neighborhood and quarter level.
   Table 5 presents the main result of this difference-in-differences specification using the

                                               20
Clarity data which allows us to focus on single payment micro loans32 , made to borrowers
in zip-codes below the median income in any given year. We find that these poorer zipcodes
are the ones where the demand for these high-cost loans is concentrated, and argue that this
could be a result of within bank heterogeneity in overdraft policies targeted at low-income
consumers specifically. We measure the credit demand from alternative lenders with both the
average total dollars disbursed per borrower/quarter(Columns 1-3), and the total number
of loans per borrower/quarter (Columns 4-6) allowing us to study both the intensive and
the extensive margins. We find that there is a significant reduction in all of our outcome
variables for the treated zip-codes. Specifically, we find that after the HTLR ban, dollars
disbursed decrease by $84 per branch per zip-code which translates to around a 16 per-cent
reduction relative to the per borrower/quarter mean. Table 5 further shows that also the
number of loans decline by 0.29 per zip-code quarter, which is equivalent to a 15 per-cent
reduction relative to its mean.
      Table 6 complements the previous analysis by showing our results within the Equifax
sample. We estimate the same differences-in-differences specification and we focus on the
installment loans made to the borrowers with income in the lowest quintile. The dependent
variables are the dollar amount of loans disbursed and the number of loans. Similarly to
the findings reported in Table 5, we find that there is a significant reduction in the amount
of installment loans after high-to-low reordering bans. The effects are also economically
meaningful with a $200 reduction per borrower/quarter, which corresponds to around a 6
percent reduction per borrower/quarter.
      Overall the results in Tables 5 and 6 indicate that the demand for loans from alternative
lenders declines significantly in the locations where banks are forced to cease the high-to-
low reordering pratice. In other words, our findings suggest that when banks are required
to lower arguably overdraft prices, consumers borrow less in alternative financial markets.
These findings are consistent with the idea that overdrafts, and particularly aggressively-
priced overdrafts, create demand for payday and installment loan borrowing.


6.2       Long Term Borrowing Activity after HTLR Bans
At this point, we next test whether or not these results reflect a permanent change in borrower
behavior or simply a short-term response to the HLTR ban. Table 7 tests this hypothesis
 32
      Payday loans are formally referred to as single payment micro loans (SPML).

                                                    21
using the same difference-in-differences specification as in the previous analysis using both
the Clarity sample (Panel A) as well as the Equifax one (Panel B). The dependent variables
are the total dollars of loans outstanding per zipcode/quarter. Each column focuses on a
different horizon ­ one, two and three years ­ by varying the period post HLTR ban included
in the specification. Panel A shows that the reduction in the single period micro loans is
persistent over time, although the point estimates suggest its magnitude declines slightly
from $84 in the first year to $50 after three years. Panel B shows that, if anything, the
magnitude of the decline is slightly increasing from $200 to $264. Overall, these findings
reinforce the hypothesis that aggressive overdraft policies might push borrowers into per-
sistently borrowing from alternative lenders with potentially adverse consequences for their
financial health.


6.3       Impact on Household Financial Health
Given the reduction in household demand for alternative loans in response to the high-to-low
reordering ban, we next investigate whether the financial health of low-income households
improves. This improvment in financial health may occur through two channels.
       First, if consumers turn to payday lenders to repay overdraft fees and balances, then the
high-to-low reordering ban effectively stems the flow of households into the alternative finan-
cial system. There is ample anecdotal evidence that payday loan users frequently become
chronic borrowers33 , and that payday borrowers hence get caught in "debt traps"34 . Hence
we argue that a reduced incentive to borrow from payday lenders in the first place reduces
the chances of entering into these "debt traps" often associated with payday borrowing.This,
in turn, can have knock on effects on ability to service other existing debt and hence overall
credit health.
       Second, it is also plausible that the high costs that result from high-to-low reordering
make the overdraft loan unsustainable in the first place, which again causes payday borrowing
and "debt spirals". Hence, the reduction in fees that result from the high-to-low reordering
ban might be sufficient to render the overdraft loan affordable which then reduces the need
to borrow from payday lenders to effectively roll over the loan.
  33
    For example a 2014 study by the CFPB notes that 4 out of 5 payday loans are rolled over or renewed.
  34
    The 2014 CFPB study also notes that 3 out of 5 payday loans are made to borrowers whose fee expenses
exceed amount borrowed, indicating that the original payday loan spirals into ever increasing amounts owed.



                                                    22
   We use several measures of the financial health of low-income consumer using Equifax
data: credit card balance and limits, fraction of installment loans, and total borrowing
in good standing. While household usage of alternative loans responds to the HTLR ban
relatively quickly, we might expect household financial health to take longer to improve.
Therefore, Table 8 reports our results for different horizons from 1 to 3 years.
   Using the same overall framework utlized in the previous section, we investigate household
financial health using the following zip-code quarter level specification:


                    CreditHealthzt =  · HT LR Banz · P ostt + nt + zt                       (2)

   We find that there is a significant increase in household financial health across the various
measures. Specifically, we find that, after the high-to-low reordering ban, both credit card
balance and credit limits increase significantly, i.e. credit card balances increases by $110
after two years and $195 after three, while credit card limits increase by $190 and $335
respectively.
   This increase in credit card balance and limits represents a substitution away from costly
alternative borrowing to cheaper mainstream credit. These findings also demonstrate that
traditional institutions might consider these borrowers to be in better financial shape, since
credit card limits and hence credit availability increase.
   Panel B complements these findings by showing that the percent of installment loans
decline significantly after the HTLR ban, indicating indeed a substitution away from install-
ment loans towards likely cheaper credit card debt. Furthermore, borrowers total balance in
good standing increase by $431 after two years and $611 after three. These results collec-
tively confirm borrower substitution away from likely expensive loan products, towards more
mainstream products and an increasing ability to keep finances in order, after a reduction
in aggressive overdraft fees.


6.4    Impact on Household Consumption
To further enstablish that borrowers benefit from constraining bank ability to charge high
overdraft prices, we next examine the impact of HTLR bans on household consumption
using zip-code expenditure data from Earnest ­ a company that collects credit and debit
card transaction-level data for a representative sample of the US.


                                              23
      We estimate the following zip-code quarter level specification:


                        Consumptionzt =  · HT LR Banz · P ostt + nt + zt                   (3)

      where our consumption outcome variables include dollars and items of expenditure for
durables, non-durable essentials, and non-durable other. Durable refers to expenditures
related to home and auto, e.g. car and roof repairs. Non-durable essential refers to ex-
penditures related to food and clothing. Non-durable other includes all other non-durable
expenditures.
      HT LR Banz is a dummy variable taking on a value of 1 if the zip-code contains branches
that belong to a lawsuit bank where the outcome of the lawsuit was a mandatory behavior
change to cease high-to-low reordering, and a value of 0 if the zip-code contains branches
belonging to lawsuit bank where the outcome of the lawsuit required no behavior change
and the zip-code is within 7 miles of a treated zip-code.
      Table 9 presents results of this exercise. Focusing on within-neighborhood-quarter vari-
ation ­ we find that after the high-to-low reordering ban ­ households increase durables
consumption by $107 and one extra unit while non-durables other consumption remains un-
changes. Non-durables essential consumption increases by $34 and roughly one unit also.
This finding is consistent with our hypothesis that low-income households likely experienced
binding liquidity constraints prior to the high-to-low reordering ban and were only able to
consume the necessities. The high-to-low reordering ban then reduced their overdraft burden,
improved credit health/loosened their constraints which ultimately led to cheaper access to
more mainstream credit. Thus, the increase in consumption we document is likely the result
of both a direct substitution between fees and consumption, but also because of an increased
access to mainstream credit. After a reduction in overdraft fees, low-income households now
have the capacity to increase their consumption of durables and non-durable essentials - all
likely essential expenditures.
      These findings are consistent with a large literature starting with Bacchetta and Ger-
lach (1997) that shows if some consumers are liquidity constrained, aggregate consumption
should be "excessively sensitive" to credit conditions35 . Results in Table 9 suggest that
a reduction in debt service costs related to overdrafts cause consumers to not only to in-
 35
      as well as to income.



                                               24
crease consumption but also to experience improved credit health and increased access to
traditional credit. These findings are consistent with the existence of liquidity constrained
low-income consumers.
      To put these magnitudes into context, we note that according to the CFPB 28 million
customers were involved in the MDL 2036 lawsuit. Scaling up to include other non-MDL
2036 lawsuits, we approximate roughly 48 million customers involved in total36 . We note
that a bank customer is automatically involved in the lawsuit if it had an account with a
sued bank and incurred at least one overdraft within a certain time period. Using FDIC
estimates of the percentage of chronic over-drafters and quarterly dollar estimates of the
reduction in overdraft related fees as a result of high-to-low reordering bans, we conservatively
estimate a cost saving per customer of roughly $100 per quarter on fees alone (or roughly 3
overdraft fees). We further note the potentially large dollar savings that consumers obtain
from substituting away from costly alternative lending to mainstream credit products such
as credit cards. For example, switching to a subprime credit card with an annual APR of
56% from a payday loan with an annual APR of 426%37 will result in a quarterly savings
of roughly $135. Hence we argue that customers are plausibly saving in excess of $230 per
quarter in fees and interest payments alone. These savings are consistent with the increases
in consumption that we observe. We note that customers potentially also have a reduced
precautionary savings motive given greater access to credit and we argue that consumers
likely used extra cash as a result of this and cost savings to better service existing debt.
While this analysis requires a lot of assumptions and we cannot precisely track savings and
expenditures, we argue that the magnitudes across our analysis are roughly consistent with
one another.


6.5       Impact on Bank Branch Operations
Finally, we complement the previous analysis by examining whether the lawsuits impacted
banks' presence in these low-income regions. For some banks, overdraft fees constitute a
significant fraction of revenue, especially in low income areas. Hence, by forcing banks to
change their high-to-low overdraft practices, the resulting drop in revenue might make it
unprofitable for banks to operate in those areas anymore. We investigate this hypothesis in
 36
      60% of lawsuits were MDL lawsuits, hence 28/0.6 is approximately 48m.
 37
      arising from a standard cost of $17.5 per $100


                                                   25
Table 10 by estimating the following branch/year level regression:


                           Exitizt =  · HT LR Bani · P ostt · +z·t + izt                         (4)


       where the dependent variable Exitizt is a dummy variable that takes a value of 1 if a
branch belonging to bank i exited the zip-code in that year, and 0 otherwise. HT LR Bani
is a dummy variable taking a value of 1 if bank i the branch belongs to was a lawsuit bank
and required to cease high-to-low reordering, and takes a value of 0 for all other branches
of all other banks. Post is a dummy variable taking a value of 1 for the year of the HTLR
ban and up to three years after, and a value of 0 for the three years prior to the HTLR ban.
Zip-code x year fixed effects ­ z·t ­ are included.
       The first three columns of Table 10 include all zip-codes. Bank incentives to close are
strongest in areas where the geographic redundancy is highest, hence in the second set of
three columns we focus on zip-codes where the treated banks only have less than or equal
to 2 branches38 . In the last set of columns, we check whether the results are any different in
zip-codes with low median household income in any given year, as captured by the dummy
Low.
       We find that banks are significantly more likely ­ with up to 2 percent higher probability
­ to close their branches after lawsuit outcomes that required the bank to cease high-to-
low reordering. This effect is concentrated in zip-codes where the treated banks have a low
number of branches and in low income areas.
       Note that since the data is at the zip-code/year/bank level, we are able to control non-
parametrically for a number of other factors that could affect the bank's exit decision. First
of all, time-invariant differences across zip-codes and time do not seem to affect the results
as we control for zip-code and year fixed effect. However, some zip-codes might be subject
to specific economic shocks that might make it unprofitable for some banks to operate. We
control for this possibility by including also zip-code by year fixed effects in Columns 3,
6 and 9, which means we are identifying within zip-code/year variation in exits. Finally,
there might also be bank-specific preferences for closing some branches in some regions, e.g.
economies of scale from having a larger market share in a particular location. That is why we
also control for bank by zip-code fixed effects. Consistently across specifications, we find that
  38
    Note these results are not dependent on the "low" threshold number of branches, we believe 2 is a
reasonable number.


                                                 26
banks are more likely to close their branches after they are forced to change their overdraft
policies.
       These results are can help to inform the debate on "financial deserts". There are large
swaths of neighborhoods without bank branches ­ indeed starting after the Great Recession,
more than 6,000 branches closed across the US.39 This phenomenon has generated concerns
among policy makers about the possible adverse effects these closures might have on access to
financial services and credit, especially for people most in need of these services. Furthermore,
there is evidence that bank closures have negative real effects on income (Ashcraft, 2005)
as well as on small business lending and local employment (Nguyen, 2019). Our results
highlight how households living in low income areas, who are more likely to have overdrawn
their accounts, are also more likely to have reduced access to traditional financial services
as banks likely only marginally value these areas. However given that we find after HTLR
bans, consumers financial health and access to traditional credit improves, we argue that it
seems likely being under-banked is suboptimal, but banking at a "bad bank" is worse.


6.6        Robustness
In this section we discuss a number of robustness checks to show that our main results hinge
on the choice of the control group and the choice of neighborhood. In Table A.5. we first
check whether our restriction of control zip-codes to contain branches of sued banks with no
HTLR ban is material. In Columns (1) and (2) of both Panel A and B, we still restrict our
control group zip-codes to be with 7 miles of the treated zip-code. However we eliminate
zip-codes that contain branches of sued but non-HTLR ban banks.
       Even with this significantly more restrictive specification, we find similar declines in
payday and installment loan borrowing. In columns (3) and (4) we eliminate the restriction
that control group zip-codes must be within the same 7-mile neighborhood of treated zip-
codes and instead simply compare treated zip-codes (those with HTLR ban bank branches)
to any other zip-code within the same state. Again we find similar declines in payday and
installment loan borrowing, comparable to our main results.
       Table A.6 explores whether our results crucially depend on the definition of our neigh-
borhood, which in our main specification is a radius of seven miles from treated zipcodes.
We report our main findings for the Clarity sample (Panel A) and the Equifax (Panel B)
  39
       See the statistics reported here https://ncrc.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/NCRC Branch Deserts Research Memo 05

                                                    27
changing our neighborhood distance to 5 miles (Column 1 and 2) and 10 miles (Columns 3
and 4). We find consistent results across specifications with slightly larger magnitudes for
the five miles specifications40 . Results in Tables A.5 and A.6 reassure us that the choice of
the control group is not a key driver of our results.
      An additional dimension that we can further exploit in our data to test the robustness of
our findings is the information about borrowers' income contained in Equifax data. Specif-
ically, we expect our results to be concentrated among low-income individuals only, since
these individuals are likely to have bank account balances close to zero and hence are likely
impacted by bank overdraft pratices. We test this hypothesis in Table A.7 by estimating
our main regression using Equifax data separately for each income quintile41 . As expected,
we find that installment loans decline significantly after the HTLR ban for the bottom two
quintiles only. Similarly, we report in Table A.8 the effects on micro loans and installment
loans for high income zipcodes. Both the statistical and economical significance of the results
disappear when we focus on richer regions.
      Finally, another market characteristic that is likely to be important is market concen-
tration, i.e. the number of treated branches with respect to the total number of branches
in the same location. Intuitively, if treated banks operate only a few number of branches
in locations where they face significant competition from other banks, it is less likely that
high-to-low reordering bans are going to impact aggregate access to payday lending on a
per borrower basis. We confirm this hypothesis in Table A.9 where we document no result
for the subset of zipcodes where treated branches are a small fraction of the overall bank
branches.



7       Conclusion
A growing fraction of Americans are turning to alternative finance providers (such as payday
lenders and check cashers) to fulfill their most basic financial needs. This phenomenon
has attracted the attention of federal and state regulators, who are concerned that these
alternative lenders exploit the financial fragility of these individuals and place them at risk of
being blacklisted from financial services altogether. Our paper adds a different perspective to
 40
      Although statistically indistinguishable from the magnitudes in our main results
 41
      Note, we do not have borrower income level for our Clarity sample.



                                                     28
the policy conversation. We suggest that low income consumers may turn to the alternative
system for good reason ­ if traditional banks do not necessarily serve them well. We argue
that banks can therefore play a role in "pushing" customers out of the traditional system
and into the alternative system.
   Our findings provide evidence of a link between overdraft credit provided by traditional
banks and alternative credit provided by institutions such as payday lenders. We find that,
after a reduction in costs associated with obtaining overdraft credit, consumers borrow less
in alternative credit markets, suggesting that overdrafts may create a demand for payday
borrowing.
   This may come at a hefty price tag. As is well documented in the literature, payday
borrowing and high cost short term loans more generally, can potentially trap consumers in
a cycle of debt. Indeed we find that, after a reduction in overdraft fees and a subsequent
reduction in alternative credit borrowing, consumers financial health and access to cheaper
traditional credit improves.
   Results in this paper may inform policy makers in their attempt to regulate the use of
payday loans and ultimately improve the overall financial health of lower-income consumers.
Furthermore, our findings cast doubt on the notion that being "banked" is necessarily a
panacea for individuals living below zero.




                                             29
References
Ashcraft, Adam B. (2005), "Are banks really special? new evidence from the fdic-induced
  failure of healthy banks." American Economic Review, 95.

Bacchetta, Philippe and Stefan Gerlach (1997), "Consumption and credit constraints: In-
  ternational evidence." Journal of Monetary Economics, 40.

Bair, Sheila (2005), "Low-cost payday loans: Opportunities and obstacles." The Annie E.
  Casey Foundation.

Bertrand, Marianne and Adair Morse (2011), "Information disclosure, cognitive biases, and
  payday borrowing." Journal of Finance, 66, 1865­1893.

Bord, Vitaly M. (2020), "Bank consolidation and financial inclusion: The adverse effects of
  bank mergers on depositors." Working Paper.

Campbell, Dennis, F. As´      ~
                       is MartAnez-Jerez,  and Peter Tufano (2012), "Bouncing out of the
  banking system: An empirical analysis of involuntary bank account closures." Journal of
  Banking & Finance, 36, 1224­1235.

CFPB (2017), "Consumer voices on overdraft programs." Report.

CNBC (2019), "A $1,000 emergency would push many americans into debt."
 Https://www.cnbc.com/2019/01/23/most-americans-dont-have-the-savings-to-cover-
 a-1000-emergency.html.

Deaton, Angus (1991), "Saving and liquidity constraints." Econometrica, 59.

Dlugosz, Jennifer L., Brian T. Melzer, and Donald P. Morgan (2020), "Who pays the price?
  overdraft fee ceilings and the unbanked." Wokring paper.

Dynan, Karen (1993), "How prudent are consumers?" Journal of Political Economy, 101.

Faris, Robert and Michael Stegman (2003), "Payday lending: A business model that encour-
  ages chronic borrowing." Economic Development Quarterly, 17.

FDIC (2017), "FDIC national survey of unbanked and underbanked households." Report.

Gross, David B. and Nicholas S. Souleles (2002), "Do liquidity constraints and interest rates
  matter for consumer behavior? evidence from credit card data." Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 117.

Guiso, Luigi, Tullio Jappelli, and Daniele Terlizzese (1992), "Earnings uncertainty and pre-
 cautionary saving." Journal of Monetary Economics, 30.

Harris, Christopher and David Laibson (2001), "Dynamic choices of hyperbolic consumers."
  Econometrica, 69.



                                             30
Haubrich, Joseph G. and Tristan Young (2019), "Trends in the noninterest income of banks."
  Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Economic Commentary, 2019-14.

Hayashi, Fumio (1985), "The effect of liquidity constraints on consumption: A cross-sectional
  analysis." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 100.

Hayashi, Fumio (1987), "Tests for liquidity constraints: A critical survey and some new ob-
  servations." In Advances in Econometrics (Truman F. Bewley, ed.), Cambridge University
  Press.

Jappelli, Tullio (1990), "Who is credit constrained in the u. s. economy?" Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 105.

Laibson, David, Andrea Repetto, and Jeremy Tobacman (1998), "Self-control and saving for
  retirement." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 29.

Melzer, Brian T. and Donald P. Morgan (2015), "Competition in a consumer loan market:
 Payday loans and overdraft credit." Journal of Financial Intermediation, 24, 25­44.

Miller, Sarah and Cindy K. Soo (2020), "Does increasing access to formal credit reduce
 payday borrowing?" Working paper.

Morgan, Donald P., Michael R. Strain, and Ihab Seblani (2012), "How payday credit access
 affects overdrafts and other outcomes." Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 44.

Nguyen, Hoai-Luu Q. (2019), "Are credit markets still local? evidence from bank branch
  closings." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 11.

Nu~
  nez, Stephen, Kelsey Schaberg, Richard Hendra, Lisa Servon, Mina Addo, and Andrea
 Marpillero-Colomina (2016), "Online payday and installment loans: Who uses them and
 why?: A demand-side analysis from linked administrative, survey, and qualitative inter-
 view data." Subprime Lending Data Exploration Project.

Pew Charitable Trusts (2015), "Overdraft frequency and payday borrowing." Brief.

Pew Charitable Trusts (2016), "Consumers need protection from excessive overdraft costs."
  Brief.

Prager, Robin A. (2014), "Determinants of the locations of alternative financial service
  providers." Review of Industrial Organization, 45, 21­38.

Rivlin, Gary (2010), "Payday nation." Strategic Direction, 26.

Stegman, Michael A. (2007), "Payday lending." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21, 169­
  190.

Zeldes, Stephen P. (1989), "Consumption and liquidity constraints: An empirical investiga-
  tion." Journal of Political Economy, 97.



                                             31
Figure 1: Illustrative example of high-to-low transaction reordering. Figure 1: Illustrative
example of high-to-low transaction reordering. This figure illustrates the mechanics of high-
to-low transaction reordering for a consumer Annie. Annie begins the month with $400 in
her checking account. Early in the day, her electric bill is deducted via automatic payment.
During the day, she buys groceries. At the end of the day, her landlord deposits her rent
check. Annie's bank charges a $35 fee per overdraft. Under chronological transaction order-
ing, Annie would only incur 1 overdraft for her rent payment. Under high-to-low transaction
reordering, she incurs overdrafts for every single transaction.




                                             32
                                    (a) Other Consumer Loans




                                (b) Yield on Other Consumer Loans

Figure 2: Coefficients are plotted for -4 quarters to +4 quarters for a difference-in-differences
regression of the log of other consumer loans and deposit account related income (defined as
total interest income on other loans plus fees related to deposit accounts) , divided by total
revenues, for banks with mandatory behavior change relative to similar-sized banks with no
behavior change. Quarters are relative to the behavior change.



                                               33
                   (a) SPML in Lowest Quintile Income Zip-Codes - Clarity Data




             (b) Installment Loans to Lowest Quintile Income Borrowers - Equifax Data

Figure 3: Coefficients are plotted for -4 quarters to +4 quarters (when available) for a
difference-in-differences regression of dollars disbursed, for zip-codes containing mandatory
behavior change banks relative to zip-code neighbors within 5 miles containing lawsuit non-
behavior change banks. Quarters are relative to the quarter of the behavior change.



                                               34
                                       (a) All Zip-Codes




                            (b) Zip-Codes with Few Treated Branches

Figure 4: Coefficients are plotted for -3 years to +3 years for a within zip-code difference-
in-differences regression of exit, a dummy variable taking a value of 1 if the bank exits the
zip-code in any given year, for banks with mandatory behavior change relative to all other
banks. Years are relative to the year of the behavior change.



                                              35
                    Table 1: The Largest 50 Banks ­ Summary Statistics

This table contains summary statistics for the banks included in the Pew study on overdrafts from 2012
and 2015. In each year of study, the Pew study covered the largest 50 US. banks. Aggressive banks are
defined as banks that employ high-to-low reordering of deposit transactions. Large banks are defined as
the 50 largest banks identified by Pew. Below, bank-level data comes from the Summary of Deposits, while
establishment-level data comes from InfoGroup. Panel A provides zipcode-level statistics, and Panel B
provides branch-level statistics.

                                        Panel A - Zip Code Level Stats


   Variable                                                Mean          Std. Dev.           Min            Max


   No. Branches Aggressive                                        1.38                2.27             0         30
   No. Branches Large Banks                                       2.15                3.19             0         51
   No. Branches                                                   4.72                5.19             1         66
   No. Banks                                                      3.72                3.45             1         42
   Total Deposits Aggressive ($1000's)                             198               3,294             0    351,000
   Total Deposits Aggressive Large ($1000's)                       309               4,504             0    427,000
   Total Deposits ($1000's)                                        484               5,012             0    429,000
   No. Check Cashers                                              1.03                2.17             0         25
   No. Payday Lenders                                             1.13                2.43             0         58
   No. Establishments                                              729                 902             1     14,133
   Fraction of Zip Codes¿0 payday lenders/check cashers           0.40                0.49             0          1



                                    Panel B - Branch Level Stats


   Bank Type                                               Aggressive    Non- Aggressive     All Branches


   No.   Check Cashers Within 0.25 miles                          0.28                0.23           0.26
   No.   Check Cashers Within 0.5 miles                           0.59                0.51           0.56
   No.   Check Cashers Within 1 mile                              1.40                1.22           1.34
   No.   Check Cashers Within 1.5 miles                           2.54                2.18           2.41
   No.   Check Cashers Within 2 miles                             3.93                3.33           3.71
   No.   Payday Lenders Within 0.25 miles                         0.34                0.31           0.32
   No.   Payday Lenders Within 0.5 miles                          0.72                0.66           0.69
   No.   Payday Lenders Within 1 mile                             1.63                1.52           1.59
   No.   Payday Lenders Within 1.5 miles                          2.84                2.63           2.76
   No.   Payday Lenders Within 2 miles                            4.26                3.91           4.13




                                                          36
                Table 2: Clarity and Equifax Data - Summary Statistics

This table contains zipcode/quarter level summary statistics of data from Clarity (Panels A and B),
which contains consumer level borrowing activity from non-traditional sources such as payday lenders, and
Equifax (Panels C and D), which contains borrowing activity from traditional lenders. In Panels A and B
we observe data on extended loans from 2013 to 2020 with details on loan amount and loan type. Panel A
contains statistics for single period micro loans (SPML), and Panel B contains statistics for all loans. In
Panels C and D we document statistics on extended loans including credit quality statistics such as current
balance of loans in good standing. Panel C contains statistics on loans made to borrowers in the lowest
income quintile, and Panel D contains statistics on all installment loans. All data for both Equifax and
Clarity are for zip-codes with a median income below the median.

                                      Panel A: Clarity Data - SPML

                                              Mean     Min       25      50       75      Max
             Dollars Disbursed                 522      50      300      450      600       3,300
             Number Opened                     1.4      1.0     1.0      1.0      1.0        8.0

                                 Panel B: Clarity Data - All Loan Types

                                              Mean     Min       25      50       75      Max
             Dollars Disbursed                 968      42      400      600     1,000     20,920
             Number Opened                     1.3      1.0     1.0      1.0      1.0        7.0

             Panel C: Equifax Data - Installment Loans Lowest Income Quintile Borrowers

                                              Mean     Min       25       50       75     Max
             Dollars Disbursed                 4,270   1,484   2,750    3,750    5,112     12,544
             Number Opened                      1.6     1.0     1.3       1.5      2.0       6.0
             Credit Card Balance               1,266     -       84       695     1,800    27,304
             Credit Card Limit                 2,005     -      204      1,137    2,875    45,303
             Total Dollars in Good Standing   13,623     -     9,107    12,430   16,691    99,897

                         Panel C: Equifax Data - Installment Loans Full Sample

                                              Mean     Min       25       50       75     Max
             Dollars Disbursed                10,415   3,154   6,486    9,226    13,168    30,836
             Number Opened                      1.4      1       1.2      1.4     1.6         6
             Credit Card Balance               9,751     -      3,840    8,147   13,741     60,502
             Credit Card Limit                21,221     -      8,616   17,589   29,623    132,372
             Total Dollars in Good Standing   58,378     -     40,958   56,250   72,993    392,024




                                                       37
                                     Table 3: Lawsuit Banks - Treatment/Control Summary Statistics

     This table contains summary statistics of treatment and control zipcodes. The first set of columns report the average, minimum, and maximum
     number of branches in a zipcode in each of the treatment years from events listed in Table A.1. An event is defined as an instance where a lawsuit
     bank was required to change behavior and cease the practice of high to low reordering. The second set of columns reports the number of branches
     belonging to lawsuit banks in control zip codes, which are defined as zip-codes containing lawsuit bank branches (and no behavior change branches)
     that are within 5 miles of zip-codes containing lawsuit behavior change branches. The third set of columns reports the number of branches belonging
     to lawsuit behavior changes banks in treated zip codes, which are defined as zip-codes containing branches belonging to banks that were required to
     stop the practice of high-to-low reordering.

                                                              Panel A: Branch Count by Zip-Code




38
                               Num of Neighborhoods                 Treated Zip-Codes                             Control Zip-Codes
           Year                  With HTLR Ban        Mean Num HTLR Ban Branches Mean Num Branches    Mean Num HTLR Branches Mean Num Branches

                       2011            2171                      2.2                      9.5                    1.5                   8.6
                       2013            4,089                     2.1                      7.7                    1.2                   8.3
                       2014             93                       2.9                      9.3                    1.5                   8.5

                                                             Panel B: Census Statistics by Zip-Code

                                 Total Poprulation          Median Income           Rate Unemployed    Prop Below Poverty Line

           Treated Zip-Codes          20,220                   $36,781                    11%                   25%
           Control Zip-Codes          28,447                   $36,637                    11%                   26%
               Table 4: The Largest 50 Banks ­ Extensive Margin Tests

This table presents the results of a conditional logit regression using bank branch/year level data. The
dependent variable is a dummy variable that takes on a value of 1 if there is a payday lender and/or
check casher within a certain radius (ranging from 0.25 to 2 miles) of the bank branch. The independent
variable is a dummy variable that takes on a value of 1 if the branch belongs to a bank that practices
high-to-low transaction reordering (as documented by the Pew study on overdrafts from 2012 to 2015).
The dummy variable takes on a value of 0 if the branch belongs to a bank that is among the large
Pew-studied banks but that does not practice high-to-low reordering at the given point in time. Zipcode
x year fixed effects are included, and standard errors are clustered by zipcode. Zipcode level data on
payday lenders and check cashers comes from Infogroup, zipcode level data on branches comes from the
Summary of Deposits, and data on the overdraft policy of banks comes from the Pew study of bank overdrafts.

                 Dependent Variable               0.25 miles   0.5 miles   1 mile     1.5 miles   2 miles


                 HTLR Branch                      0.140***     0.124***    0.0364**    0.0272      0.0139
                                                  (0.0167)     (0.0164)    (0.0178)   (0.0209)    (0.0242)

                 Zip x Year FE                        Y           Y           Y          Y           Y


                 Observations                      102,618     104,635      90,492     71,495     55,823
                 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                          39
          Table 5: Household Demand for Payday Loans after HTLR Bans

This table contains the results of zipcode/quarter difference-in-differences regressions using the Clarity
alternative credit bureau data. Loans are single period micro loans. The dependent variables are the total
dollars of loans disbursed per zipcode/quarter, and the number of loans made per zipcode/quarter. The
sample is restricted to zip-codes with an average income below the median. HTLR Ban is a dummy variable
taking on a value of 1 if the zipcode contains branches that belong to a lawsuit bank where the outcome of
the lawsuit was a mandatory high-to-low reordering ban, and a value of 0 if the zipcode contains branches
belonging to lawsuit bank where the outcome of the lawsuit required no ban and the zipcode is within 7
miles of a treated zip-code. Lawsuit and behavior change banks are listed in Table A.1. Post is a dummy
variable taking a value of 1 if the quarter is greater than 0 quarters and less than 4 after the behavior
change and a value of 0 if the quarter is less than or equal to the quarter of behavior change and greater
than 4 quarters prior. Varying levels of fixed effects are included, and standard errors are clustered at
the neighborhood level and year/quarter (where a neighborhood contains treated zip-codes and control
zip-codes within 7 miles of each other).

             Dependent Variable                         Amount                           Number


             Post x HTLR Ban                  -45.35*   -44.60*   -84.84***   -0.222**    -0.210*   -0.289***
                                              (22.37)   (22.20)    (24.04)    (0.0902)   (0.0930)    (0.0714)


             Neighborhood FE                    Y         Y          N           Y          Y          N
             Year/Quarter FE                    N         Y          N           N          Y          N
             Neighborhood x Year/Quarter FE     N         N          Y           N          N          Y



             Observations                     9,870     9,870       9,870      9,870      9,870       9,870
             R-squared                        0.311     0.317       0.408      0.319      0.334       0.384
             *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                         40
       Table 6: Household Demand for Installment Loans after HTLR Bans

This table contains the results of zipcode/quarter difference-in-differences regressions using data from
Equifax, a traditional credit bureau. The dependent variables are the dollar amount of installment loans
disbursed, and the number of installment loans disbursed to borrowers with income below the 20th
percentile. The sample is restricted to zip-codes with an average income below the median. HTLR Ban is
a dummy variable taking on a value of 1 if the zipcode contains branches that belong to a lawsuit bank
where the outcome of the lawsuit was a mandatory high-to-low reordering ban, and a value of 0 if the
zipcode contains branches belonging to lawsuit bank where the outcome of the lawsuit required no ban and
the zipcode is within 7 miles of a treated zip-code. Lawsuit and behavior change banks are listed in Table
A.1. Post is a dummy variable taking a value of 1 if the quarter is greater than 0 quarters and less than 4
after the behavior change and a value of 0 if the quarter is less than or equal to the quarter of behavior
change and greater than 4 quarters prior. Varying levels of fixed effects are included, and standard errors
are clustered at the neighborhood and year/quarter level (where a neighborhood contains treated zip-codes
and control zip-codes within 7 miles of each other).

              Dependent Variable                         Amount                           Number


              Post x Behavior Change            -98.61   -166.6**   -200.3**    -0.0352    -0.0342    -0.0314
                                               (58.10)    (62.05)    (74.70)   (0.0263)   (0.0223)   (0.0297)


              Neighborhood FE                    Y          Y          N          Y          Y          N
              Year/Quarter FE                    N          Y          N          N          Y          N
              Neighborhood x Year/Quarter FE     N          N          Y          N          N          Y



              Observations                     38,313    38,313     38,313     38,313     38,313     38,313
              R-squared                        0.084     0.104      0.278      0.091      0.128      0.294
              *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                         41
              Table 7: Long Term Borrowing Activity After HTLR Bans

This table contains the results of zipcode/quarter difference-in-differences regressions using the Clarity
alternative credit bureau and Equifax data. The dependent variables are the total dollars of loans
outstanding per zipcode/quarter. Panel A contains results for single period micro loans using Clarity data.
Panel B contains results using installment loans disbursed from Equifax data. The sample is restricted to
zip-codes with an average income below the median. HTLR Ban is a dummy variable taking on a value
of 1 if the zipcode contains branches that belong to a lawsuit bank where the outcome of the lawsuit was
a mandatory high-to-low reordering ban, and a value of 0 if the zipcode contains branches belonging to
lawsuit bank where the outcome of the lawsuit required no ban and the zipcode is within 7 miles of a
treated zip-code. Lawsuit and behavior change banks are listed in Table A.1. Post is a dummy variable
taking a value of 1 if the quarter is greater than 0 quarters and less than 4 (column (1)), 8 (columns (2)), or
12 (column(3)) quarters after the behavior change and a value of 0 if the quarter is less than or equal to the
quarter of behavior change and greater than 4 quarters prior. Varying levels of fixed effects are included,
and standard errors are clustered at the neighborhood and year/quarter level (where a neighborhood
contains treated zip-codes and control zip-codes within 7 miles of each other).
                                                      Panel A


                          Dependent Variable                                 SPML

                                                                1 Year      2 Years      3 Years


                          Post x Behavior Change            -84.84***      -72.02***     -50.47**
                                                             (24.04)        (19.62)       (17.58)

                          Neighborhood x Year/Quarter FE           Y           Y         Y


                          Observations                           9,870       18,813       31,348
                          R-squared                              0.421        0.450       0.460

                                                      Panel B


                          Dependent Variable                               Installment

                                                                1 Year      2 Years      3 Years


                          Post x Behavior Change                -200.3**    -230.0**     -264.8***
                                                                 (74.70)     (86.77)      (81.08)

                          Neighborhood x Year/Quarter FE           Y           Y         Y


                          Observations                          38,313       54,847       70,852
                          R-squared                             0.278         0.283       0.278
                          *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                           42
                   Table 8: Long Term Credit Health After HTLR Bans

This table contains the results of zipcode/quarter difference-in-differences regressions using data from the
traditional credit bureau Equifax. Panel A contains results for total credit card balances (columns (1-3))
and credit card limits (columns(4-6)). Panel B contains results for the total percentage of outstanding
balances comprised of installment loans (columns (1-3)) and the total balance of credit in good standing
(columns( 4-6)), for borrowers in the bottom income quintile. The sample is restricted to zip-codes with an
average income below the median. HTLR Ban is a dummy variable taking on a value of 1 if the zipcode
contains branches that belong to a lawsuit bank where the outcome of the lawsuit was a mandatory
high-to-low reordering ban, and a value of 0 if the zipcode contains branches belonging to lawsuit bank
where the outcome of the lawsuit required no ban and the zipcode is within 7 miles of a treated zip-code.
Lawsuit and behavior change banks are listed in Table A.1. Post is a dummy variable taking a value of 1
if the quarter is greater than 0 quarters and less than 4 (column (1)), 8 (columns (2)), or 12 (column(3))
quarters after the behavior change and a value of 0 if the quarter is less than or equal to the quarter of
behavior change and greater than 4 quarters prior. Varying levels of fixed effects are included, and standard
errors are clustered at the neighborhood and year/quarter level (where a neighborhood contains treated
zip-codes and control zip-codes within 7 miles of each other).
                                                         Panel A


          Dependent Variable                      Credit Card Balance                   Credit Card Limits

                                            1 Year        2 Years      3 Years    1 Year    2 Years   3 Years


          Post x Behavior Change             53.07        110.9*      195.5***     124.8    190.7**   334.8***
                                            (57.27)       (63.29)      (69.42)    (76.43)   (91.08)    (116.0)

          Neighborhood x Year/Quarter FE      Y              Y             Y        Y         Y          Y

          Observations                      60,085        86,516       112,260    60,785    87,510    113,541
          R-squared                         0.366          0.383        0.420      0.386     0.406     0.444
          *** p¡0.01, ** p¡0.05, * p¡0.1

                                                         Panel B


          Dependent Variable                         Percent Installment          Total Balance in Good Standing

                                            1 Year        2 Years      3 Years    1 Year    2 Years   3 Years


          Post x Behavior Change           -0.00570*    -0.00710**   -0.00679**    134.4    431.1*    611.5**
                                           (0.00294)     (0.00288)    (0.00285)   (219.2)   (237.8)   (238.1)

          Neighborhood x Year/Quarter FE      Y              Y             Y        Y         Y          Y

          Observations                      51,479        74,937       98,178     59,397    85,605    111,196
          R-squared                         0.320          0.315       0.316       0.251     0.259     0.266
          *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                            43
         Table 9: Lawsuit Banks - Differences-in-Differences - Consumption

This table contains the results of zipcode/quarter difference-in-differences regressions using consumption data
from Earnest. The dependent variables are the total dollars of expenditures per consumer/zipcode/quarter.
Columns (1)-(2) is total durables expenditures /number of units - where durables are defined as home and
auto expenditures. Columns (3)-(4) is total food and clothing expenditures /number of units. Columns
(5)-(6) is total non-durable non-essential expenditures/number of units where non-durable essentials are
defined as all other non-durable consumption except food and clothing. The sample is restricted to zip-codes
with an average income below the median. HTLR Ban is a dummy variable taking on a value of 1 if the
zipcode contains branches that belong to a lawsuit bank where the outcome of the lawsuit was a mandatory
high-to-low reordering ban, and a value of 0 if the zipcode contains branches belonging to lawsuit bank
where the outcome of the lawsuit required no ban and the zipcode is within 7 miles of a treated zip-code.
Lawsuit and behavior change banks are listed in Table A.1. Post is a dummy variable taking a value of 1
if the quarter is greater than 0 quarters and less than 8 quarters after the behavior change and a value of
0 if the quarter is less than or equal to the quarter of behavior change and greater than 4 quarters prior.
Neighborhood x year/quarter are included, and standard errors are clustered at the neighborhood and
year/quarter level (where a neighborhood contains treated zip-codes and control zip-codes within 7 miles of
each other).

                                               Durables            Food/Clothing         Non-Durable Other
         Dependent Variable               Amount Num. Units      Amount Num. Units      Amount Num. Units


         Post x Behavior Change           107.7**   1.036**      34.07*    1.107**       21.67     0.342
                                           (52.6)      (0.505)    (7.97)      (0.563)   (27.15)   (0.502)


         Neighborhood x Year/Quarter FE     Y            Y          Y           Y         Y         Y

         Observations                      9,912       9,912      7,077       7,077      7,028     7,028
         R-squared                         0.523       0.518      0.583       0.673      0.566     0.586
         *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                          44
                Table 10: Behavior Change Banks - Bank Branch Closures

This table contains results of a zipcode/year/bank level regression. The dependent variable - exit - is a
dummy variable that takes a value of 1 if the bank exited the zip-code in that year, and 0 otherwise.
HTLR ban is a dummy variable taking a value of 1 if the bank was a lawsuit bank and required to cease
high-to-low reordering as outlined in Table A.1, and takes a value of 0 for all other banks. Post is a dummy
variable taking a value of 1 for the year of the behavior change and up to three years after, and a value of 0
for the three years prior to the behavior change. The first three columns All are tests on all zip-codes, the
second three columns Low are tests restricted to zip-codes where the lawsuit behavior change banks only
have less than or equal to 2 branches, low is a dummy variable taking a value of 1 for zip-codes below the
median level of median household income in any given year. Increasing levels of fixed effects are included.
Standard errors are clustered by bank and zipcode.

 Dependant Variable                                                                       Exit
                                                  All                                 Low Number                                All


 Post x HTLR Ban                  0.00711***   0.00896***   0.0108***    0.0164***     0.0185***    0.0206***   0.00517***   0.00682***   0.00761***
                                  (0.000811)   (0.000828)   (0.000939)   (0.000972)    (0.000989)   (0.00117)    (0.00136)    (0.00137)    (0.00158)
 Post x Behavior Change x Low                                                                                    0.00298*    0.00334**    0.00481**
                                                                                                                 (0.00170)    (0.00169)    (0.00196)


 Zip-Code FE                          Y            Y            N            Y             Y           N            Y            Y            N
 Year FE                              N            Y            N            N             Y           N            N            Y            N
 Zip-Code x Year FE                   N            N            Y            N             N           Y            N            N            Y
 Bank x Zip FE                        N            N            Y            N             N           Y            N            N            Y

 Observations                      509,807      509,807      496,461      457,857       457,857      444,292     509,807      509,807      496,461
 R-squared                          0.025        0.028        0.298        0.027         0.030        0.302       0.026        0.028        0.298
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                 45
Table A.1: Key Events of Lawsuits Lodged Against Banks for High-to-low Trans-
action Reordering

This table contains a list of the banks that were sued by customers for the high-to-low reordering (also
known as high-to-low re-sequencing) of transactions posted to customers' deposit accounts. The date of
lawsuit filing is the date when the lawsuit was initially filed. The date of final settlement is the date when
the litigation reached a final settlement, and the date of behavioral relief is the date found in official court
documents (often the settlement agreement) when the defendant bank instituted behavioral relief by ceasing
to practice high-low transaction reordering.

                                                           Date of           Date of            Date of
      Bank
                                                        Lawsuit Filing   Final Settlement   Behavioral Relief
                                                                                                (if any)
      Associated Bank                                    2-Apr-2010        2-Aug-2013         1-Feb-2011
      Banco Popular North America                       14-Nov-2012        7-Aug-2018         1-Aug-2013
      BancorpSouth Bank                                 18-May-2010        15-Jul-2016
      Bank of America                                    1-Dec-2008       22-Nov-2011
      Bank of the West                                   5-Apr-2010       18-Dec-2012          1-Jul-2011
      BOKF                                              17-Aug-2010       13-Sep-2012
      Capital One                                       18-May-2010       22-May-2015
      Citibank                                          19-Dec-2011       14-Nov-2014
      Citizens                                          26-Jan-2010       12-Mar-2013         30-Jun-2013
      Comerica Bank                                     17-Feb-2010       10-Jun-2014
      Commerce Bank                                      6-Apr-2010        2-Aug-2013         29-Mar-2013
      Community Bank                                     20-Jul-2012      25-Nov-2013          1-Mar-2011
      Compass Bank                                       4-May-2010        7-Aug-2013         12-Mar-2013
      Fifth Third Bancorp                               21-Oct-2009        29-Jul-2011         1-Apr-2011
      Great Western Bank                                15-Jun-2010        2-Aug-2013          1-Jul-2010
      Harris                                            23-Apr-2010        5-Aug-2013         31-Mar-2013
      HSBC Bank USA                                      1-Mar-2011       18-Oct-2016
      IBERIABANK Corporation                            18-Feb-2011       26-Apr-2012         1-Nov-2011
      Independent Bank                                   31-Jul-2013      11-Jan-2018
      JPMorgan Chase Bank                                24-Jul-2009      19-Dec-2012         29-Mar-2010
      Marshall & Ilsley Bank                            16-Jun-2010        2-Aug-2013         31-Mar-2013
      M&T Bank                                          21-Aug-2009       13-Mar-2015          1-Jan-2013
      National City Bank                                17-Feb-2010        1-Dec-2011
      Northwest Savings Bank                             7-May-2012        7-Apr-2015         1-Jul-2011
      PNC Bank                                           8-Oct-2009        5-Aug-2013         5-Aug-2013
      RBC Bank (USA)                                      2-Jul-2010
      Susquehanna Bank                                   29-Jul-2011       1-Apr-2014          1-Oct-2011
      Synovus Bank                                      21-Sep-2010        2-Apr-2015
      TD Bank                                           15-Dec-2009       18-Mar-2013
      Carolina First Bank (including Mercantile Bank)   21-Aug-2013       24-Jan-2020
      Trustmark National Bank                            2-Dec-2011       25-Mar-2014         25-Mar-2014
      U.S. Bank                                         17-Apr-2009        3-Jan-2014         24-Jul-2013
      Umpqua Bank                                       29-Dec-2011       28-Apr-2015
      Union Bank                                         16-Jul-2009       4-Oct-2012         1-Aug-2010
      Webster Bank                                      29-Apr-2010       28-Mar-2011         30-Sep-2010
      Wells Fargo & Company                             21-Nov-2007        5-Aug-2013         1-Jan-2010
      Woodforest National Bank                          11-Jan-2012       19-May-2014         1-Mar-2010
               Table A.2: Bank Level Overdraft Responses to HTLR Ban

This table contains results of a bank/quarter level regression. The dependent variable is either the log
of other consumer loans or overdraft related revenue, which is defined as the sum of fees associated with
deposit accounts plus interest income on other consumer loans, all divided by total revenue. Each bank is
assigned a primary state, which is the state in which the bank primarily operates as measured by fraction
of total branches. Each year banks are sorted in size deciles. HTLR Ban is a dummy variable taking on
a value of 1 if the bank is a lawsuit bank with a mandatory high-to-low reordering ban, and a value of 0
otherwise. Post is a dummy variable taking a value of 1 for the 4 quarters post the behavior change and a
value of 0 for the 4 quarters prior. Year/Quarter x Primary State and size decile and bank fixed effects are
also included. Standard errors are clustered by bank and year/quarter.


           Dependent Variable               Log (Other Consumer Loans)   Overdraft Income/Revenue


           Post x HTLR Ban                            -0.155*                  -0.00693***
                                                     (0.0834)                   (0.00185)

           State x year/quarter FE                         Y                        Y
           Size Decile FE                                  Y                        Y
           Bank FE                                         Y                        Y

           Observations                               3,676                       3,671
           R-squared                                  0.993                       0.988
           *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                      ii
  Table A.3: Other Bank Responses to HTLR Ban - Local Non-Lawsuits Banks

This table contains results of a bank/quarter level regression. The dependent variable is either the log
of other consumer loans or overdraft related revenue, which is defined as the sum of fees associated with
deposit accounts plus interest income on other consumer loans, all divided by total revenue. Each bank is
assigned a primary state, which is the state in which the bank primarily operates as measured by fraction
of total branches, and similarly a primary county. Each year banks are sorted in size deciles. Matched is a
dummy variable that takes a value of 1 for banks in the same size decile and primary county as HTLR ban
banks, and a value of 0 for all other banks in the same decile and same primary state as HTLR ban banks.
Post is a dummy variable taking a value of 1 for the 4 quarters post the behavior change and a value of
0 for the 4 quarters prior. Year/Quarter x Primary State and size decile and bank fixed effects are also
included. Standard errors are clustered by bank and year/quarter.


            Dependent Variable               Log (Other Consumer Loans)   Overdraft Income/Revenue



            Post x Matched                            0.00489                    -0.000973
                                                      (0.0924)                   (0.00243)

            State x Year/quarter FE                      Y                           Y
            Size Decile FE                               Y                           Y
            Bank FE                                      Y                           Y

            Observations                               3,493                       3,488
            R-squared                                  0.991                       0.988
            *** p¡0.01, ** p¡0.05, * p¡0.1




                                                        iii
Table A.4: Bank Level Responses to HTLR Ban - Non-Overdraft Related Revenue



This table contains results of a bank/quarter level regression. The dependent variable is either log(total
revenue) or ­ revenue from the sale of other assets, revenue from the sale of real estate assets, revenue from
the sale of loans or leases, revenue related to insurance activities, revenue related to servicing mortgages,
revenues from investment banking activities, revenues from trading, revenues from fudiciary activities and
other­ each divided by total revenue. Each bank is assigned a primary state, which is the state in which
the bank primarily operates as measured by fraction of total branches. Each year banks are sorted in
size deciles. HTLR Ban is a dummy variable taking on a value of 1 if the bank is a lawsuit bank with a
mandatory high-to-low reordering ban, and a value of 0 otherwise. Post is a dummy variable taking a value
of 1 for the 4 quarters post the behavior change and a value of 0 for the 4 quarters prior. Year/Quarter
x Primary State and size decile and bank fixed effects are also included. Standard errors are clustered by
bank and year/quarter.


      Dependent Variable               Post x Behavior Change   Standard Error   Observations   R-squared


      Log (Revenue)                    0.0259                   (0.0284)         3,613          0.998
      Sale Other Assets /Revenue       -0.000611                (0.000660)       3,671          0.517
      Sale Other Real Estate/Revenue   0.000893                 (0.00106)        3,671          0.592
      Sale Loans Leases /Revenue       -0.000897                (0.00471)        3,671          0.841
      Insurance /Revenue               0.000176                 (0.00107)        3,671          0.976
      Servicing /Revenue               0.000655                 (0.00156)        3,671          0.851
      Investment Banking /Revenue      -0.00115                 (0.00107)        3,671          0.949
      Trading Revenue/Revenue          0.000521                 (0.000869)       3,671          0.824
      Fudiciary /Revenue               0.00157                  (0.00147)        3,671          0.996
      Other /Revenue                   0.00590                  (0.00755)        3,671          0.867
      *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                      iv
                   Table A.5: Robustness - Alternative Control Groups

This table contains the results of zipcode/quarter difference-in-differences regressions using the Clarity
alternative credit bureau and Eqiufax data. In Panel A the dependent variables are the total dollars of
single period micro loans disbursed per zipcode/quarter, and the number of loans made per zipcode/quarter.
In Panel B the dependent variable is the dollar amount of installment loans disbursed, and the number of
installment loans disbursed to borrowers with income below the 20th percentile. The sample is restricted
to zip-codes with an average income below the median. In columns (1) and (2) of Panels A and B,
HTLR Ban is a dummy variable taking on a value of 1 if the zipcode contains branches that belong to
a lawsuit bank where the outcome of the lawsuit was a mandatory high-to-low reordering ban, and a
value of 0 if the zipcode is within 7 miles of a treated zip-code and contains no HTLR Ban branches.
In Columns (3) and (4) of Panels A and B, HTLR Ban is a dummy variable taking on a value of 1 if
the zipcode contains branches that belong to a lawsuit bank where the outcome of the lawsuit was a
mandatory high-to-low reordering ban, and a value of 0 if the zipcode is within the same state and contains
no HTLR Ban branches. Lawsuit and behavior change banks are listed in Table A.1. Post is a dummy
variable taking a value of 1 if the quarter is greater than 0 quarters and less than 4 after the behavior
change and a value of 0 if the quarter is less than or equal to the quarter of behavior change and greater
than 4 quarters prior.Neighborhood x year/quarter or state x year/quarter fixed effects are included,
and standard errors are clustered at the neighborhood level and year/quarter (where a neighborhood
contains treated zip-codes and control zip-codes within 7 miles of each other) or state and year/quarter level.

                                              Panel A - Clarity


                                                   Within Neighborhood        Within State

                Dependent Variable                 Amount     Number      Amount      Number


                Post x HTLR Ban                    -64.61**   -0.232***   -114.9***   -0.248***
                                                    (29.03)    (0.0813)    (25.28)     (0.0806)

                Neighborhood x Year/Quarter FE        Y           Y          N           N
                State x Year/Quarter FE               N           N          Y           Y


                Observations                        6,658       6,658      13,927      13,500
                R-squared                           0.443       0.408      0.271       0.328

                                             Panel B - Equifax


                                                   Within Neighborhood        Within State

                Dependent Variable                 Amount     Number      Amount      Number


                Post x HTLR Ban                    -190.1**     -0.0273   -131.00**    -0.0260
                                                    (81.77)    (0.0267)    (64.43)    (0.0124)

                Neighborhood x Year/Quarter FE        Y           Y          N           N
                State x Year/Quarter FE               N           N          Y           Y


                Observations                        48,798     48,798      60,128      60,128
                R-squared                           0.286       0.304      0.061        0.059
                *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


                                                      v
     Table A.6: Robustness - Alternative Control Group Neighborhood Radii

This table contains the results of zipcode/quarter difference-in-differences regressions using the Clarity
alternative credit bureau and Eqiufax data. In Panel A the dependent variables are the total dollars of
single period micro loans disbursed per zipcode/quarter, and the number of loans made per zipcode/quarter.
In Panel B the dependent variable is the dollar amount of installment loans disbursed, and the number of
installment loans disbursed to borrowers with income below the 20th percentile. The sample is restricted
to zip-codes with an average income below the median. In columns (1) and (2) of Panels A and B, HTLR
Ban is a dummy variable taking on a value of 1 if the zipcode contains branches that belong to a lawsuit
bank where the outcome of the lawsuit was a mandatory high-to-low reordering ban, and a value of 0 if
the zipcode is within 5 miles of a treated zip-code and contains branches belonging to sued banks with no
HTLR Ban. In Columns (3) and (4) of Panels A and B, HTLR Ban is a dummy variable taking on a value
of 1 if the zipcode contains branches that belong to a lawsuit bank where the outcome of the lawsuit was
a mandatory high-to-low reordering ban, and a value of 0 if the zipcode is within 10 miles of a treated
zip-code and contains branches belonging to sued banks with no HTLR Ban. Lawsuit and behavior change
banks are listed in Table A.1. Post is a dummy variable taking a value of 1 if the quarter is greater than 0
quarters and less than 4 after the behavior change and a value of 0 if the quarter is less than or equal to
the quarter of behavior change and greater than 4 quarters prior. neighborhood x year/quarter fixed effects
are included, and standard errors are clustered at the neighborhood level and year/quarter level (where a
neighborhood contains treated zip-codes and control zip-codes within 5 or 10 miles of each other).

                                             Panel A - Clarity


                                                          5 miles               10 miles

                  Dependent Variable               Amount     Number     Amount      Number


                  Post x Behavior Change           -106.4**   -0.386**   -67.91**    -0.257**
                                                    (36.95)    (0.125)    (27.46)    (0.0987)

                  Neighborhood x Year/Quarter FE      Y             Y       Y              Y



                  Observations                      4,359       4,359     16,302      16,302
                  R-squared                         0.444       0.450     0.363       0.391

                                             Panel B - Equifax


                                                          5 miles               10 miles

                  Dependent Variable               Amount     Number     Amount      Number


                  Post x Behavior Change           -205.5**    -0.0430   -218.7***    -0.0197
                                                    (96.93)   (0.0303)    (54.09)    (0.0247)

                  Neighborhood x Year/Quarter FE      Y             Y       Y              Y



                  Observations                      20,662     20,662     71,555      74,183
                  R-squared                         0.326       0.349     0.226       0.241
                  *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


                                                    vi
Table A.7: Household Demand for Installment Loans after HTLR Bans by Income
Level



This table contains the results of zipcode/quarter difference-in-differences regressions using data from
Equifax, a traditional credit bureau. The dependent variable is the dollar amount of installment loans
disbursed to borrowers with income by income quintile (quintile 1 is borrowers with income less than the
20th percentile). The sample is restricted to zip-codes with an average income below the median. HTLR
Ban is a dummy variable taking on a value of 1 if the zipcode contains branches that belong to a lawsuit
bank where the outcome of the lawsuit was a mandatory high-to-low reordering ban, and a value of 0 if the
zipcode contains branches belonging to lawsuit bank where the outcome of the lawsuit required no ban and
the zipcode is within 7 miles of a treated zip-code. Lawsuit and behavior change banks are listed in Table
A.1. Post is a dummy variable taking a value of 1 if the quarter is greater than 0 quarters and less than 4
after the behavior change and a value of 0 if the quarter is less than or equal to the quarter of behavior
change and greater than 4 quarters prior. Varying levels of fixed effects are included, and standard errors
are clustered at the neighborhood and year/quarter level (where a neighborhood contains treated zip-codes
and control zip-codes within 7 miles of each other).

                   Dependent Variable                             Log (Installment Loans)
                                                              1         2         3       4            5


                   Post x Behavior Change           -200.3***     -494.8**    70.63     -220.4    -270.2
                                                     (74.96)       (211.4)   (292.6)   (499.8)   (866.9)


                   Neighborhood x Year/Quarter FE      Y             Y         Y         Y         Y



                   Observations                      38,313       33,422     29,938    19,948    11,064
                   R-squared                         0.278         0.282     0.302     0.312      0.373
                   *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                        vii
Table A.8: Household Demand for Payday and Installment Loans after HTLR
Bans - High Income Zip-codes



This table contains the results of zipcode/quarter difference-in-differences regressions using data from
Clarity and Equifax. The dependent variable in columns (1) and (2) is the dollar and number of single
period micro loans and in columns (3) and (4), the dollar amount of and number of installment loans
disbursed to borrowers with income less than the 20th percentile. The sample is restricted to zip-codes
with an average income above the median. HTLR Ban is a dummy variable taking on a value of 1 if the
zipcode contains branches that belong to a lawsuit bank where the outcome of the lawsuit was a mandatory
high-to-low reordering ban, and a value of 0 if the zipcode contains branches belonging to lawsuit bank
where the outcome of the lawsuit required no ban and the zipcode is within 7 miles of a treated zip-code.
Lawsuit and behavior change banks are listed in Table A.1. Post is a dummy variable taking a value of 1
if the quarter is greater than 0 quarters and less than 4 after the behavior change and a value of 0 if the
quarter is less than or equal to the quarter of behavior change and greater than 4 quarters prior. Varying
levels of fixed effects are included, and standard errors are clustered at the neighborhood and year/quarter
level (where a neighborhood contains treated zip-codes and control zip-codes within 7 miles of each other).

                      Dependent Variable                   SPML             Installment Loans
                                                       Amount Number        Amount Number


                      Post x Behavior Change            15.95     -0.0195    -68.46    -0.0267
                                                       (30.04)   (0.0798)   (101.1)   (0.0252)


                      Neighborhood x Year/Quarter FE      Y         Y         Y          Y



                      Observations                      5,910     5,910     40,839    40,839
                      R-squared                         0.262     0.251     0.293     0.315
                      *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                       viii
Table A.9: Household Demand for Payday and Installment Loans after HTLR
Bans -Zip-codes with few HTLR Ban Branches



This table contains the results of zipcode/quarter difference-in-differences regressions using data from
Clarity and Equifax. The dependent variable in columns (1) and (2) is the dollar and number of single
period micro loans and in columns (3) and (4), the dollar amount of and number of installment loans
disbursed to borrowers with income less than the 20th percentile. The sample is restricted to zip-codes with
an average income below the median, with less than the median number of treated branches and greater
than the median number of branches overall. HTLR Ban is a dummy variable taking on a value of 1 if the
zipcode contains branches that belong to a lawsuit bank where the outcome of the lawsuit was a mandatory
high-to-low reordering ban, and a value of 0 if the zipcode contains branches belonging to lawsuit bank
where the outcome of the lawsuit required no ban and the zipcode is within 7 miles of a treated zip-code.
Lawsuit and behavior change banks are listed in Table A.1. Post is a dummy variable taking a value of 1
if the quarter is greater than 0 quarters and less than 4 after the behavior change and a value of 0 if the
quarter is less than or equal to the quarter of behavior change and greater than 4 quarters prior. Varying
levels of fixed effects are included, and standard errors are clustered at the neighborhood and year/quarter
level (where a neighborhood contains treated zip-codes and control zip-codes within 7 miles of each other).

                      Dependent Variable                   SPML            Installment Loans
                                                       Amount Number       Amount Number


                      Post x Behavior Change            27.20    0.0143     -86.82    -0.0465
                                                       (40.36)   (0.109)   (108.4)   (0.0280)


                      Neighborhood x Year/Quarter FE     Y         Y         Y          Y



                      Observations                      3,949    3,949     14,364    14,364
                      R-squared                         0.258    0.265     0.302     0.300
                      *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                       ix
