                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       WHY DO SECTORAL EMPLOYMENT PROGRAMS WORK? LESSONS FROM
                            WORKADVANCE

                                            Lawrence F. Katz
                                             Jonathan Roth
                                             Richard Hendra
                                            Kelsey Schaberg

                                         Working Paper 28248
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w28248


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2020




This paper was prepared for the JOLE Virtual Conference in Honor of Alan Krueger, October 16,
2020. We are grateful to David Card and the conference participants for insightful comments and suggestions.
The WorkAdvance demonstration is registered at the AEA RCT Registry as AEARCTR-0001646.
Roth gratefully acknowledge financial support from the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship under
Grant DGE1144152. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w28248.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Lawrence F. Katz, Jonathan Roth, Richard Hendra, and Kelsey Schaberg. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Why Do Sectoral Employment Programs Work? Lessons from WorkAdvance
Lawrence F. Katz, Jonathan Roth, Richard Hendra, and Kelsey Schaberg
NBER Working Paper No. 28248
December 2020
JEL No. J24,J38

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper examines the evidence from randomized evaluations of sector-focused training programs
that target low-wage workers and combine upfront screening, occupational and soft skills training,
and wraparound services. The programs generate substantial and persistent earnings gains (11 to 40
percent) following training completion. Theoretical mechanisms for program impacts are explored
for the WorkAdvance demonstration. Earnings gains are generated by getting participants into higher-wage
jobs in higher-earning industries and occupations not just by raising employment. Training in transferable
and certifiable skills (likely under-provided from poaching concerns) and reductions of employment
barriers to high-wage sectors for non-traditional workers appear to play key roles.


Lawrence F. Katz                                    Richard Hendra
Department of Economics                             MDRC
Harvard University                                  200 Vesey Street, 23rd Floor
Cambridge, MA 02138                                 New York, NY 10281
and NBER                                            richard.hendra@mdrc.org
lkatz@harvard.edu
                                                    Kelsey Schaberg
Jonathan Roth                                       MDRC
Office of the Chief Economist                       200 Vesey Street, 23rd Floor
Microsoft                                           New York, NY 10281
Redmond, WA 98052                                   kelsey.schaberg@mdrc.org
Jonathan.Roth@microsoft.com
1 Introduction
       U.S. wage inequality has soared over the past four decades with rising educational
wage differentials playing a major role (Goldin and Katz 2008; Autor 2019; Autor, Goldin,
and Katz 2020). A consequence has been the emergence of a large and greatly expanded
economic divide between college-educated workers and those with less than a college
degree. The real hourly wages of non-college workers have stagnated since 1980 including
a decline in real earnings of non-college males (Economic Policy Institute 2020). The
pathways to jobs at high-wage employers appear to be increasingly perilous for non-
college workers as seen in a rise in the correlation of firm wage premiums with worker
education and worker wage fixed effects (the permanent wage component that persists
across employers) both in the United States (Song et al. 2019) and Europe (Card, Kline, and
Heining 2013). The decline in U.S. worker power and institutions supporting the wages of
non-elite workers (unions and the federal minimum wage) has also contributed to these
trends (Farber, Herbst, Kuziemko and Naidu 2020; Fortin, Lemieux and Lloyd 2019;
Stansbury and Summers 2020).
       One response to the large college wage premium is to expand access to college and
expand training opportunities for non-college workers. Credible recent evidence indicates
high returns on the margin to increased access to U.S. four-year public universities using
regression discontinuity designs at admission cut-offs (Zimmerman 2014; Smith, Goodman,
and Hurwitz 2020) and to access to rationed vocational programs at community colleges in
high-demand fields such as nursing using admission lotteries (Grosz 2020). In contrast,
increases in enrollments at private, for-profit colleges in the 2000s (and especially during
the Great Recession and its immediate aftermath) appear to have generated low and
possibly even negative labor market returns (Cellini and Turner 2019). Non-college
training options and career pathways may be particularly important for individuals who do
not thrive in traditional schooling environments (Cass 2019). But U.S. government-
sponsored training and employment programs have a mixed record for youth,
disadvantaged adults, and dislocated adult workers with limited cases of large persistent
improvements in earnings (Card, Kluve, and Weber 2018; Greenberg, Michalopoulos, and
Robbins 2003; Naidu and Sojourner 2020; Stanley, Katz, and Krueger 1998).
       Sector-focused training programs (also known as sectoral employment programs)
have emerged over the past couple decades as a promising approach to workforce
development for disadvantaged workers (typically without college degrees) that tries to
meet the needs of both job seekers and employers (Schaberg 2020). Sectoral employment
programs train job seekers for "high -quality" employment in specific industries and
occupational clusters that are believed to have strong current local labor demand and
opportunities for longer-term career advancement. Targeted sectors typically have
included health care, information technology (IT), and manufacturing. A goal is to open the
doors for individuals with non-traditional backgrounds to assist them in attaining high-
wage jobs in the targeted sectors. The programs attempt to forge strong employer



                                                                                          1
relationships, do some upfront screening of applicants, combine soft skills (or work-
readiness) training with occupational skills training, are involved in job development and
placement, provide wraparound support services to help participants complete the
program, and often include follow-up services to participants after program completion
and to employers after job placement. Sector-focused programs have training components
that typically are six months or less and fill an important niche for individuals who may not
thrive in community colleges and for dislocated workers.
        Community-based organizations originated the sectoral approach starting in the
late 1980s (Mangat 2007). The promising findings of substantial earnings increases over a
two-year horizon in three mature sector-focused programs using a randomized controlled
trial (RCT) in the Sectoral Employment Impact Study (SEIS) of Maguire et al. (2010)
increased interest in sectoral approaches. Sector strategies have been integrated into U.S.
government-sponsored training and employment policies as a component of the 2014
Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA). Private-sector foundation and
investor interest has also expanded for sector-focused programs offering training and
wraparound services to individuals facing barriers to education and employment as seen in
the development and funding of Career Impact Bonds by Social Finance, a non-profit social
investment organization, and in the rise of innovative and comprehensive training
programs focused on technology sector jobs such as Pursuit. 1
        In this paper, we seek to better understand the sources of potential effectiveness of
sectoral employment programs. We first reexamine the evidence on the impacts of sector-
focused programs on earnings from four RCT-based major evaluations ­ the SEIS,
WorkAdvance, Project Quest, and Year-Up ­ of eight different programs/providers (with
one provider Per Scholas appearing in two different evaluations). Programs are geared
toward opportunity youth and young adults (Year Up) or broader groups of low-income (or
disadvantaged) adults. Participants are disproportionately drawn from minority groups
(Blacks and Hispanics), low-income households, and individuals without a college degree.
The sector-focused programs evaluated in these four RCTs generate substantial earnings
gains from 14 to 39 percent the year or so following training completion. And all three
evaluations with available longer-term follow-ups (WorkAdvance for six years after
random assignment, Project Quest for nine years, and Year Up for three years) show
substantial persistence of the early earnings gains with little evidence of the fade out of
treatment impacts found in many evaluations of past employment programs. Sector-
focused programs appear to generate persistent earnings gains by moving participants into
jobs with higher hourly wages rather than mainly by increasing employment rates.
      We further probe the mechanisms for the earnings impacts of sector-focused
programs using the individual-level data from the MDRC WorkAdvance demonstration of a
common program model implemented by four different providers in three different
geographic settings (New York City, Tulsa, and Northeast Ohio). We find that WorkAdvance

1See   https://socialfinance.org/up-fund/ and https://www.pursuit.org/.


                                                                                            2
more than doubled the share of treatment group participants working in the targeted
sectors relative to the control group two years after random assignment. And
WorkAdvance substantially served to raise earnings through improved job quality as
measured by higher average earnings in the occupations and industries of the treatment
group than the control group. Changes over time in the service mix from earlier job
placements to more upfront occupational-skills training at two of the sites (Towards
Employment and Madison Strategies) provide suggestive evidence that the occupational
and soft skills training components are crucial and the earnings impacts don't just reflect
screening and placement services.
       The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides background on
the sectoral employment programs assessed in four recent evaluations using RCTs and re-
examines the core findings on earnings impacts. Section 3 discusses the potential role of
sectoral employment programs in addressing market failures in the training and job
placement markets and the theoretical mechanisms for possible persistent earnings
impacts as well as general equilibrium considerations. Section 4 uses the data from the
WorkAdvance evaluation to explore the proposed mechanisms. Section 5 concludes.

2 Background on Sectoral Employment Programs and Evaluations
2.1 Program and Participant Characteristics
       Table 1 provides an overview of four randomized evaluations of sectoral
employment programs. Each RCT randomized access to a sectoral employment program
among eligible applicants who had passed pre-enrollment screens. Sectoral employment
programs typically serve low-income adults seeking to advance in the labor market. The
programs work with local employers in targeted sectors to identify in-demand occupations
offering high starting wages and benefits as well as career advancement opportunities. The
programs then train participants to fill such jobs and to attain an appropriate
postsecondary credential or certification to more broadly enhance their employment
prospects. The core idea behind sectoral employment programs is that improvements in
employment-related skills strategically directed towards areas of strong (and rising) labor
demand combined with intermediaries to break down barriers to employment for workers
with non-traditional backgrounds for the targeted jobs should lead to durable earnings
gains and advancement in the labor market. 2
       The first evaluation summarized in Table 1 covers MDRC's WorkAdvance program
implementing a common model across four providers operating in diverse settings: Per
Scholas (in New York City) targeting the IT sector, Towards Employment (in Northeast
Ohio) targeting health care and manufacturing, Madison Strategies (in Tulsa, Oklahoma)
targeting transportation and manufacturing, and St. Nick's Alliance (in New York City)


2The programs may also be attractive to employers as a means to improve workforce diversity in sectors
(such as IT) where minorities and women are under-represented.


                                                                                                         3
focused on environmental remediation. 3 The WorkAdvance evaluation enrolled
participants from June 2011 to June 2013.
        The common elements of the WorkAdvance model include (i) screening before
enrollment to make sure participants can take advantage of the offered skills training; (ii)
sector-appropriate pre-employment and career readiness services; (iii) sector-specific
occupational skills training; (iv) sector-specific job development and placement services;
and (v) postemployment retention and advancement services with providers attempting to
maintain close continuing contact with placed participants and their employers. The
primary enrollment requirements (used in pre-enrollment screening by WorkAdvance
providers) are summarized in Table 1 and include some behavioral requirements (such as
passing a drug test) and skill requirements varying from 6th to 10th grade math and reading
achievement up to a high school degree (or GED) (as in the case of Per Scholas). Required
attendance at pre-enrollment interviews and sessions is likely to play a subtler screening
role for motivation and possibly other soft skills.
       The four WorkAdvance providers differed in their previous experience with sector-
focused employment programs with Per Scholas (PS) being a mature sector-focused
program (and having participated in the earlier SEIS evaluation), St. Nicks Alliance (SN)
being a multi-service organization with ten years of experience with vocational training
programs but not with all the elements of the WorkAdvance model, and the other two,
Towards Employment (TE) and Madison Strategies (MS), essentially creating new sector-
focused programs for the WorkAdvance evaluation. 4 Career readiness training in
WorkAdvance ranged from 5 to 12 (typically full-day) sessions depending on the provider.
Occupational-skills training lasted 15 weeks at Per Scholas, from 5 to 12 weeks at St. Nicks
Alliance, and ranged across programs from 2 to 32 weeks at Towards Employment and
Madison Strategies.
        The earlier SEIS evaluation starting in 2003 by Public/Private Ventures studied
three mature programs including an earlier incarnation of Per Scholas focused on
computer technician and computer refurbishment training as compared to the broader IT
training focus and more extensive post-employment advancement services of Per Scholas
in the later WorkAdvance evaluation. The other two programs in the SEIS are Jewish
Vocational Service-Boston (JVS-Boston) focused on health care jobs in clerical and medical
office occupations with training programs of around 20 weeks, and the Wisconsin Regional
Training Partnership (WRTP), an association of employers and unions in Milwaukee,
developing training programs of 2 to 8 weeks to meet specific employer requests targeting
construction, manufacturing, and health care (Maguire et al. 2010). The WRTP is
distinctive in the central role played by worker representatives in program design,
administration, and operation (as emphasized by Naidu and Sojourner 2020).


3Hendra et al. (2016) provides a more detailed description of WorkAdvance and the MDRC evaluation.
4Towards Employment was already running a health care training program but not with the key elements of
the WorkAdvance model and expanded its training activities into the manufacturing sector for WorkAdvance.


                                                                                                        4
        Table 1 also includes the long-term evaluation of Project Quest in San Antonio by
the Economic Mobility Corporation (Roder and Elliott 2018, 2019) and the large-scale
national evaluation of the Year Up program by Abt Associates as part of the broader set of
Pathways for Advancing Careers and Education evaluations (Fein and Hamadyk 2018).
Project Quest, founded by a pair of San Antonio community-based organizations in 1992,
provides long-term navigation and training services targeted at the health care sector. It
supports participants to attend full-time occupational training at local community colleges
for non-degree certificates and associate's degrees (such as nursing) lasting one to three
years with longer durations for students needing to improve basic reading and math skills.
Project Quest largely serves a population of Hispanic women. Year Up, founded in Boston
in 2000, is a year-long program for "disconnected" young adults (age 18 to 24) with a high
school degree (or equivalent) that starts with a six month Learning and Development phase
of classroom training on occupational skills and career readiness (soft) skills and then
involves a six-month internship phase with students working in professional entry
positions at local employers (often major corporations). Year Up has expanded nationally
and works with a wide range of employers but focuses on IT and business and financial
operations positions.
       Table 2 provides summary statistics on the characteristics of the participants of the
sectoral employment program evaluations. Year Up only serves young adults. The other
programs serve a broader range of low-income and disadvantaged adults. The vast
majority of participants in the programs focused on the health care sector (such as Project
Quest and JVS-Boston) are female, and most of the participants in programs targeting other
sectors (such as IT and manufacturing) are male. The majority of program participants are
Black or Hispanic. Sectoral-employment training programs largely serve individuals
without traditional post-secondary degrees. But almost all the participants have a high
school degree (or GED), and a substantial fraction have some post-secondary schooling
experience. Most participants are disconnected from employment at the time of program
entry with Project Quest being the primary exception. The pre-enrollment screening also
means that sector-focused training program participants are likely to be highly motivated
and to have stronger basic skills than the typical participants in employment programs
targeted at low-income and disadvantaged individuals.
       Table 2 also shows that the individual provider (site level) sample sizes range from
328 for JVS-Boston to 698 for Toward Employment, with the pooled evaluation samples
sizes going from 1014 for SEIS to over 2500 for Year Up and WorkAdvance. The four
evaluations combined included 6465 participants. Random assignment appears to have
been well implemented in all four evaluations and at all participating sites as seen in
substantial balance in the observed characteristics of treatment and control groups (Fein
and Hamadyk 2018; Hendra et al. 2016; Maguire et al. 2010; Roder and Elliott 2018)




                                                                                              5
2.2 Program Impacts on Labor Market Outcomes

        We summarize the impacts of access to a sectoral employment program on an
outcome for eligible applicants in each RCT summarized in Table 1 through intent-to-treat
(ITT) comparisons of the mean outcome of treatment group members (randomized into
access to the program) minus the mean outcome of control group members (randomized
out of program access).5 Each of the four evaluations collected data on participant
outcomes from follow-up surveys ranging from 18 months after random assignment for
Year Up to around two years after for WorkAdvance and SEIS to six years after for Project
Quest. And the WorkAdvance, Project Quest, and Year Up evaluations also collected
administrative earnings records for longer-term tracking of employment outcomes.

        A first question is the extent to which access to sector programs actually increased
the training and employment services received as well as credential or certification
attainment beyond the levels of the control group members (who potentially could use
alternative providers such as community colleges and other training programs for further
education and career services). Schaberg (2020, Table 2) shows that all the programs
studied in the four evaluations generated substantial and statistically significant increases
in credential and certification attainment relevant to the targeted sectors at the time of the
follow-up surveys, with ITT impacts ranging from 21 percentage points (pp) for Year Up
(from 16 to 37 percent) to around 45 pp for Per Scholas in both the SEIS and WorkAdvance
evaluations (from 8 to 54 percent in WorkAdvance). 6

         All four WorkAdvance sites produced large expansions in the receipt of any
education and training, from 21 pp at St. Nick's Alliance to 27 pp at Madison Strategies and
even larger increases in the shares receiving career readiness, job search, and
postemployment services (Hendra et al. 2016, Table 3.2 and Figure 3.1). Access to Year Up
similarly increased the receipt of any education and training by 23 pp, the share taking a
life skills course by 44 pp (from 32 to 76 percent), and the share receiving career
counseling by 33 pp (Fein and Hamadyk 2018, Exhibits 5.2 and 5.3). Project Quest
increased the receipt of any health care certificate by 26 pp (from 42 to 68 percent) and of
any education credential by 18 pp in the six years after random assignment (Roder and
Elliott 2018, Figures 11 and 12).

       Sectoral employment programs substantially increase training and career services
received and lead to increased attainment of educational credentials and certificates


5The reported ITT estimates in the studies summarized in Table 1 typically control for baselines covariates.
6No information was gathered on credential receipt for JVS-Boston in the SEIS evaluation. WRTP yielded
substantial positive impacts on certification in the targeted occupations in health care (certified nursing
assistant and certified medical assistant) and in construction (Maguire et al. 2010, Table 10).


                                                                                                               6
particularly those related to targeted sectors. We next examine whether increased human
capital investments and employment services pay off in terms of labor market outcomes.

        Table 1 summarizes the ITT impacts on earnings of each program at the common
period of Year 2 after random assignment and for the latest follow-up period available after
Year 2. Sector programs typically involve some modest decline in earnings during the
period of full-time core service receipt in the first year following enrollment (or through
the second year of full-time education in Project Quest). The three programs where
training lasted one year or less all then generate large earnings increases in Year 2, ranging
from 14 percent in WorkAdvance (pooled across all four providers) to 29 percent for the
SEIS (pooled across the three programs) to 39 percent for Year Up. Per Scholas strikingly
yields similarly large Year 2 earnings gains of 35 percent in its earlier version in the SEIS
for participants entering around 2004 and of 26 percent in its later incarnation in
WorkAdvance for participants entering around 2012. All three SEIS programs in different
settings and targeting different sectors led to substantial Year 2 earnings impacts ranging
from 27 to 35 percent. The WorkAdvance providers generated a more heterogeneous
pattern of Year 2 earnings impacts with three having (at least marginally) significant
positive impacts of 12 to 26 percent and one (St. Nick's) having little earnings impact.

       The short-term earnings gains for both WorkAdvance (pooled) and Year Up are
sustained in the longer-term. The Year Up earnings impact remains at 40 percent in Year
3.7 The WorkAdvance pooled earnings gain persists at 12 percent in Year 3, 11 percent in
Year 5 to 6 (calendar year 2017), and 12 percent in Year 6 to 7 (calendar year 2018) as
documented in Schaberg (2017, Figure 1) and Schaberg and Greenberg (2020, Table 2.5).

        Project Quest involves a longer full-time upfront training period than the other
training programs with most participants still in full-time education in Year 2. Project
Quest earnings impacts using Texas state administrative earnings data are modestly
negative in the first two years after random assignment, turn positive (but not significantly
so) in Year 3, become larger and statistically significantly positive in Years 4 to 6 reaching
21 percent in Year 6 and persisting at 18 percent into Year 9 (Roder and Elliott 2019,
Figures 4 and 5).8



7 An earlier much smaller scale RCT evaluating Year Up by Economic Mobility Corporation (with 102
treatment group members and 41 control group members) also found large ITT earnings gains of 64 percent
in Year 2 and 34 percent in Year 3 (Roder and Elliott 2014). The earnings impact faded a bit to 12 percent in
Year 4. But the dynamic pattern of earnings impacts is difficult to interpret in this evaluation since control
group members were allowed to reapply to Year Up after 10 months and about 30 percent of the control
group participated in Year Up in the second and third years after random assignment.
8 A quite similar pattern of Project Quest impacts on earnings for Years 1 to 6 is found in the survey data from

the six-year follow-up survey (Roder and Elliott 2019, Figure 5).


                                                                                                               7
       Sectoral employment programs appear to generate substantial earnings increases in
the year following training completion that persist in the evaluations with longer term
follow-up evidence. 9 To what extent do sectoral employment programs lead to persistent
earnings increases by raising employment rates, hours worked per week, or hourly wages
(through employment in higher-quality jobs)? The sectoral employment programs do seem
to noticeably raise employment rates in the period following initial job placement after
training completion as seen in an increase in current employment by 5.3 pp at the time of
Year 2 survey in WorkAdvance pooled (Hendra et al. 2016, Table 6.4), of 5 pp in the Year 2
employment rate in SEIS pooled (Maguire et al. 2010, Table 3), and of 3 to 5 pp in quarterly
employment rates for Year Up in Year 2 (Fein and Hamadyk 2018, Exhibit 6-3). But
program employment impacts faded out in Year 3 for Year Up (Fein and Hamadyk 2018,
Exhibit 6-3) and by Years 5 and 6 for WorkAdvance (Schaberg and Greenberg 2020, Table
2.5). Project Quest generated little persistent impact on quarterly employment rates
(Roder and Elliott 2019, Figure 7). Year Up in Year 2 and Project Quest in Years 4 to 6 do
generate substantial increases in full-time employment rates and SEIS lead to substantial
increases in monthly hours worked in Year 2. But increases in employment rates and
hours worked do not appear to be large enough and persistent enough to produce the
observed persistent gains in earnings.

       The findings from the follow-up surveys for all four evaluations suggest the earnings
gains are substantially driven by increasing the share of participants working in higher-
wage jobs. The pooled results indicate WorkAdvance increased the share of participants
employed and with an hourly wage above $15 an hour in Year 2 by 5.5 pp from 20.8 to 26.3
percent (based on Table 5.1 of Hendra et al. 2016) with Per Scholas raising the share by
16.2 pp. The positive impacts of WorkAdvance on higher wage employment persist
through Year 6 with a gain in the share with earnings over $30,000 being 7.2 pp in Year 5
and 6.4 pp in Year 6 (Schaberg and Greenberg 2020, Table 2.5). The pooled SEIS result
show the programs increased the Year 2 share with earnings above $11 an hour by 13 pp
from 42 to 55 percent and the share with earnings above $13 an hour by 8 pp from 13 to 24


9 Schaberg (2020) summarizes the findings from three other randomized evaluations of sector-focused
programs with earnings impacts available. The Accelerated Training for Illinois Manufacturing program
targeted high-wage manufacturing positions and generated at 55 pp increase in certificate attainment and a
28 percent earnings increase in Year Two almost identical to the Year 2 earnings gain found in the WRTP with
a similar focus. The Health Professional Opportunity Grants (HPOG) Impact Study of diverse programs with a
single funding stream largely servicing TANF recipients generated no detectable earnings gains through Year
3 but provided short-term training and earlier placement into lower-wage health care jobs. The Pathways to
Health Care Program of Pima Community College focused on longer-term post-secondary credential and
degree programs for health led to large increases in post-secondary credentials but not to detectable earnings
gains by Year 3 similar to Project Quest (Litwok and Gardiner 2020). Two recent RCTs of health care training
programs similar to HPOG with shorter-term training targeted at lower-wage jobs increase employment in
health care but have no detectable earnings impacts over three years (Farrell et al. 2020; Glosser and Judkins
2020).


                                                                                                            8
percent (Maguire et al. 2010, Table 3). Project Quest increased the fraction earning over
$15 an hour in Year 6 by 11 pp from 34 to 46 percent (Roder and Elliott 2018, Figure 8).
And Year Up shows the most dramatic impact on high-wage employment in tripling the
share at 18 months who are working and earning at least $15 from 15 to 46 percent
representing an increase of 31 pp (Fein and Hamadyk 2018, Exhibit 6-4). Year Up even
increased the share of participants earning over $20 an hour by 11.1 pp from 3.5 to 14.6
percent.

        The strong impacts of sector programs on employment in higher-wage jobs are
likely to be facilitated by substantial positive impacts on the share of participants gaining
employment in the targeted sectors for the occupational-skills training and career services.
All the programs with information available generated large treatment impacts on
employment in the target sectors at the time of the follow-up surveys. WorkAdvance
increased employment in the targeted sectors by over 12 pp at all four providers including
by over 40 pp for Per Scholas (Hendra et al. 2016, Figure 6.1). Project Quest increased the
share working in health care by 12 pp from 31 to 43 percent at Year 6 (Roder and Elliott
2018, Figure 10). Year Up increased the percentage of participants working in a targeted
occupation by 28 pp from 18 to 46 percent and similarly increased the share in jobs
requiring at least mid-level skills by 28 pp from 15 to 43 percent in Year 2 (Fein and
Hamadyk 2018, Exhibit 6-4).

       The estimated earnings gains from access to high-performing sectoral employment
programs summarized in Table 1 are among the largest found in evaluations of U.S. training
and employment services programs. The Year Up impact of 40 percent earnings gains in
Years 2 and 3 (covering the first two years following training completion) compare quite
favorably to those of other comprehensive youth and young adult programs. For example,
RCTs evaluating the Job Corps, YouthBuild, and New York City's Young Adult Internship
Program all yield earnings impacts of under 10 percent at three to four years after random
assignment using administrative earnings data (Bloom and Miller 2018; Schochet 2020).
Year Up is distinctive in the extent of pre-enrollment screening and focus on training,
internships, and placements in higher wage positions. The earnings gains of 20 percent or
more at two to nine years after random assignment in SEIS, Per Scholas in WorkAdvance,
and Project Quest are much larger than for traditional programs for adults such as the
Adult and Dislocated Worker programs under WIOA (previously the Workforce Investment
Act or WIA) evaluated in the WIA Gold Standard RCT or the earlier Job Training
Partnership Act adult programs (McConnell et al. 2019; Stanley, Krueger, and Katz 1998).




                                                                                            9
        A remaining issue is the extent to which the earnings gains for participants
generated by sectoral employment programs outweigh the program costs.10 Schaberg and
Greenberg (2020, Chapter 3) provide a detailed benefit-cost analysis of the WorkAdvance
program over a five-year horizon. The net program costs for WorkAdvance (in 2018
dollars) comparing direct program costs to comparable service costs for the control group
range from $4459 for Per Scholas to $7527 for St. Nick's Alliance. The cumulative
estimated earnings gains from Per Scholas over five-years of $28,661 are much larger than
net (or gross) program costs and adding in the value of participant fringe benefit gains
further improves the net benefits to society from the program. Towards Employment and
Madison Strategies also look favorable on societal benefit-cost measure over 5 years, but St.
Nick's does not. The societal benefit-cost value of WorkAdvance will be more favorable to
the extent earnings gains are sustained beyond five years. Direct program costs for Project
Quest are around $10, 500 per participant (not including additional costs of post-secondary
institutions) indicating cumulative earnings gains likely outweigh program costs by Year 9
(Roder and Elliott 2018). Year Up direct program costs are larger at around $28,000 per
participant but 59 percent of the cost are covered by employers providing internships,
suggesting their benefits at least cover that part of the costs. The observed Year Up
earnings gains would need to be sustained at least for several years beyond Year 3 to
justify the remaining program costs.

3 Possible Mechanisms
       Sectoral employment programs potentially can play a role in assisting low-wage
workers without post-secondary degrees who may not be able to thrive in traditional post-
secondary education institutions (at least without additional supports) and may not be
considered by employers for positions with training and career advancement prospects.11
Sector-focused training programs attempt to reduce human capital deficits through
occupational skills, soft skills, and career readiness training. The programs also help
overcome social capital deficits, employer discrimination, and limited job referral networks
through pre-employment services and a brokering and vouching role with employers as
intermediaries in the job development and placement process. The upfront screening for
motivation and basic skills by sectoral employment programs may reduce high-wage
employers' hesitation to consider non -traditional job candidates. The post-employment

10 Hendren and Sprung-Keyser (2020) provide welfare analyses of the WorkAdvance and Year Up programs
using a Marginal Value of Public Funds (MVPF) approach and the early earnings impacts of both programs.
Year Up looks particularly promising on an MVPF basis if the earnings gains are sustained beyond Year 3.
Hendren and Sprung-Keyser also not that Project Quest generates an MVPF above 1 (of 1.52) using the nine-
year follow-up results.
11 See Hendra et al. (2016, Chapter 1) for a discussion of the labor market obstacles facing low-wage workers

and how the WorkAdvance model was designed to respond to these barriers to advancement. Enhanced
support services for low-income community college students through the Accelerated Study in Associates
Programs (ASAP) have been found in two RCTs (in New York City and Ohio) to greatly increase persistence
and degree completion rates (Gupta 2017; Miller et al. 2020).


                                                                                                           10
follow-up services and continuing connection to participants and communication with
employers can help resolve emerging workplace problems and help workers to handle life
shocks that otherwise might derail their labor market progress. The post-placement
involvement of program staff may also better allow participants to overcome problems of
supervisor implicit bias and discrimination against minority and non-traditional employees
in work assignments and career advancement opportunities (Glover, Pallais, and Pariente
2017). The focus on sectors with current and expected strong labor demand and close staff
involvement with employers may serve to reduce the misalignment with the labor market
that is thought to hinder some publicly-sponsored training programs.
       We now outline several specific theoretical mechanisms that could potentially
explain the promising experimental earnings impacts of sector-focused training programs.
We then discuss the distinctive empirical predictions of each of the models.
        Static (or Persistent) Inefficiencies in Training Provision. One explanation for
why sector-focused training programs may return large gains is that the market may
under-provide training in transferable skills useful at multiple employers in particular
sectors. Imperfect labor market competition (monopsony power) or labor market frictions
leading to wages below marginal products combined with uncertainty about future worker
turnover at the time of training investment will generate a "poaching externality" leading
incumbent employers to under-provide valuable training in transferable skills since part of
the return will accrue to future employers (Stevens 1994; Acemoglu and Pischke 1999).
The key ingredients are as follows: suppose that certain skills are valuable to multiple firms
in a sector. If workers are able to switch between firms (possibly with some switching
cost), then the marginal value for a particular firm of providing its employee with training
is lower than the social benefit of training, since the worker may leave the firm and thus
some of the benefit of training will accrue to other firms. If workers are themselves credit-
constrained or face imperfect information and are not able to invest in the training
themselves, then training may be further under-provided even though its societal marginal
benefits exceeds its cost. Intermediaries may also serve to reduce the onboarding costs of
employers for newly trained employees. Sector-focused training programs could be
effective by increasing the provision for valuable transferable sector-specific skills that are
under-provided by employers. The close involvement of sectoral employment program
staff with employers in targeted sectors may help staff to recognize the types of training
that are under-provided because of poaching concerns but highly valued by employers.
        Dynamic Adjustments and Inefficiencies in Training Provision. A second
explanation is that sector-focused training providers might be particularly attuned to
changes in the demand for different skills in their targeted sectors. Thus, the programs
may be able to redesign training offerings to speed up labor supply adjustments and allow
participants to realize the (possibly temporary) higher wage premia in expanding
occupations. For example, the ability of Per Scholas to shift its training offerings from
computer refurbishing and repair in the early 2000s to a wider range of in-demand IT skills
in the 2010s may be a key to how the program produced large earnings gains for


                                                                                            11
participants both in the earlier SEIS and later WorkAdvance evaluations spanning these
two periods of the rapidly changing IT skills market.
        Benefits of Wraparound Services. A third possibility is that the primary benefits
of the programs is not actually the sector-focused training, but rather the provision of
wraparound services, including life skills training and job placement and retention
services. If employers in high-wage sectors do not generally consider candidates with the
backgrounds of the typical sector-focused training program participants, even if they are
potentially qualified for open positions, then such services may be essential for matching
such disadvantaged candidates to appropriate jobs. Occupational skills training and
employment services are likely to be complements with the training improving
participants qualifications for high-wage positions and the intermediary services breaking
down discriminatory barriers.
       Predictions of the Different Explanations:
       We now discuss some predictions of each of the models, and how one might use
these predictions to distinguish between them.
   ·   Both the Static Under-Provision and Dynamic Adjustment models predict that
       sectoral employment programs should increase the likelihood that participants
       obtain jobs in higher-wage sectors (industries and occupations). If trainees do not
       gain increased entry into high-earning sectors and occupations, we would interpret
       this as evidence against these two models. Wraparound services alone may also
       help participants gain increased entry into high-earning sectors, but they also could
       largely speed up job search and improve earnings from increased employment
       without increased hourly wages.
   ·   A key distinction between the Dynamic and Static Under-Provision models is
       whether the earnings gains should fade over time: in the static model, the earnings
       gains should be persistent, whereas the Dynamic model predicts that may fade as
       other trainees enter the profession and erode a transitory wage premium.
   ·   If the Wraparound Services Alone model is correct, then workers should realize
       similar gains if they only receive these services and not the sectoral-focused training
       programs. As we discuss in more detail below, the WorkAdvance demonstration
       provides some evidence on this prediction, since two of the sites began with a
       placement-first model in which they attempted to place job seekers before
       providing them with sectoral-skills training.


Of course, several of these mechanisms may be at play simultaneously, and so finding
evidence in favor of one mechanism does not necessarily preclude a role for the others (e.g.
sustained earnings impacts do not preclude a role for sectoral programs in reducing
Dynamic Inefficiencies especially if training geared to short-run high-wage placements also
breaks down barriers to longer-run career advancement).

                                                                                           12
       General Equilibrium Considerations. A concern in the interpretation of
evaluations of the impact of employment services programs using individual-level RCTs is
that the observed gains in employment and earnings for the treatment group over the
control group could partially come at expense of the control group (or other competing job
seekers) through displacement effects if the stock of vacancies is relatively fixed or slow to
adjust (Naidu and Sojourner 2020). Although the existing RCTs do not provide direct
evidence on the general equilibrium impact of sectoral training programs, several features
of these programs likely mitigate negative general equilibrium impacts.
         Crépon et al. (2013) use a clever two-level clustered randomized experiment of job
search assistance to young unemployed job seekers in France and find evidence for
substantial displacement effects in weak labor markets (with high unemployment and
likely job rationing) but not in tight labor markets (with low unemployment) where
increased job search effort and placement services might speed up the filling of vacancies
and expand employment. Sectoral employment programs are designed to minimize
displacement effects by focusing job placement efforts on positions in high demand and
rapidly expanding parts of the labor market. Since sector-focused programs appear to
raise participant earnings by increasing employment in high-wage jobs typically with
substantial training or post-secondary education requirement, the other workers
potentially displaced from such positions are likely well-suited to gain employment in
comparable outside options.
        To the extent the earnings gains from sectoral employment programs are driven by
increased human capital from training, these earnings gains are likely to substantially
reflect aggregate earnings (and productivity) gains. Aggregate gains are especially likely if
the programs correct market inefficiencies by expanding transferable occupational skills
training that is under-provided by employers from poaching externalities. If the training
programs are customized too much to the idiosyncratic needs of single employers, one may
be more worried about enhancing such employers' monopsony power with possibly
negative spillovers on the wages of co-workers in similar jobs. But sectoral programs try to
tailor occupational skills training to help participants earn broader industry-recognized
credentials to improve outside options and career mobility prospects. Furthermore, the
wraparound services, connections to employers, and training provided by sectoral
employment programs may help improve the economy's allocation al efficiency and
contribute to economic growth by reducing the discriminatory barriers to human capital
accumulation and employment in high-skill positions for talented underrepresented
minority and disadvantaged workers.12



12Hsieh, Hurst, Jones, and Klenow (2019) provide suggestive evidence from changes in occupational
distributions integrated into a general equilibrium growth model that such reductions in barriers to human
capital investment and employment for women and minorities have been a major factor accounting for as
much as 40 percent of aggregate U.S. productivity growth since 1960 but at a declining rate in recent decades.


                                                                                                           13
4 Evidence from WorkAdvance
       In this section, we use data from the WorkAdvance randomized evaluation as a lens
for investigating the mechanisms by which sectoral training programs affect participant
labor market outcomes. WorkAdvance attempted to implement a common sector-focused
model across four providers: Per Scholas (PS), St. Nick's Alliance (SN), Madison Strategies
Group (MG), and Towards Employment (TE). We present pooled results across the
providers and for each individual provider.
4.1 Data
       Our analysis uses the following sources of data, many of which were obtained via a
confidential data use agreement with MDRC.
        Quarterly UI Data. We obtained quarterly data from the unemployment insurance
(UI) agency in each of the three states containing a WorkAdvance experimental site, New
York (Per Scholas and St. Nick's), Oklahoma (Madison Strategies), and Ohio (Towards
Employment). The data contain each participant's quarterly earnings subject to
unemployment insurance within the relevant state. The data cover the period from 12
quarters (3 years) before random assignment through 12 quarters (3 years) after random
assignment for all sites. For the three sites other than Madison Strategies, the data extend
through 20 quarters (5 years) after random assignment. The limitations of the data are the
failure to capture out-of-state earnings and earnings from self-employment, gig, and
informal work.13
       Baseline Survey Data. All participants in the WorkAdvance experiment were
required to fill out a baseline survey before the randomization occurred. The survey
provides demographic information such as age, race, gender, highest level of education,
employment status at the time of randomization, and whether the person had worked
previously in the targeted sector.
       Two-Year Follow Up Survey. We also obtained data from a follow-up survey
conducted by MDRC approximately two years after random assignment. The two-year
follow up survey asked several important questions about the respondent's current or
most recent job, including: their occupation, the industry of the employer, and whether the
work was in the targeted sector. Respondents were also asked to report their income over
the previous year. The survey was administered between 18 and 30 months after random
assignment, and the average respondent received the survey 22 months after random
assignment. The survey achieved an overall response rate of 80 percent. The response rate
was slightly higher for the treatment group (83 percent) than the control group (77
percent). Hendra et al. (2016, Appendix A) explore the representativeness of the follow-up


13Schaberg and Greenberg (2020, Appendix A) find little difference in estimated earnings impacts of
WorkAdvance in the individual state UI data and in the more comprehensive National Directory of New Hire
administrative UI earnings data covering all states so that one can track earnings outside the baseline state.


                                                                                                            14
survey sample by provider and find little evidence of non-response bias and quite similar
employment and earnings impacts using the survey and UI administrative earnings data
covering the survey follow-up period.
        Occupation Data. As part of the two-year follow-up survey, respondents were
asked to describe their current or most recent job since the time of random assignment
with the following question, "What kind of work [do/did] you do? That is, what [are/were]
your main duties in this job?" We converted the free-form responses to Standard
Occupational Classification (SOC) System codes as follows. First, we used the O*NET-SOC
AutoCoder software developed by R.M. Wilson Consulting, Inc. for the Department of Labor
to automatically match the free-form responses to 6-digit SOC codes.14 The AutoCoder was
able to classify 88 percent of the survey responses. We then employed workers on Amazon
Mechanical Turk (MTurk) to code the remaining 12 percent of responses for which the SOC
AutoCoder could not produce a match. Appendix Section 8.1 provides additional details
about the procedure for MTurk workers.
        We then used these SOC Codes to compute the average annual earnings for workers
in the respondent's occupation. Specifically, we used data from the pooled 2013-2015
IPUMS American Community Survey (ACS) samples, which correspond roughly with the
timing of the two-year survey, since WorkAdvance participants were randomized into
treatment between 2011 and 2013. We computed the average annual wage income
(INCWAGE in IPUMS) in these ACS waves for each SOC code. The SOC codes contained in
the ACS data are based on a question about their current or most recent job in the past five
years; this closely mirrors the question asked to WorkAdvance respondents, with the one
difference that the WorkAdvance respondents were asked about the time since
randomization (roughly two years). We then matched each WorkAdvance respondent to
the most granular SOC code available in the ACS (i.e., 6-digit if available; if not then 5-digit,
and so on). See Appendix Table A1 for additional details on the match process.
Respondents who were not employed in the time since random assignment are coded as
having occupational earnings of zero.15
       Industry data. We have two sources of data on the industry in which WorkAdvance
participants worked. First, the state UI administrative data for Madison Strategies
(Oklahoma) and Towards Employment (Ohio) contain the NAICS code for the
establishment in which the participant worked. Second, respondents to the two-year
follow up survey were asked to describe the industry of their current or most recent job

14We are grateful to Bob Wilson of R.M. Wilson Consulting for providing us with the AutoCoder results.
15We compute occupation-level earnings, without residualizing against average education or other employee
characteristics, for two reasons. First, we are trying to measure whether WorkAdvance enables trainees to
gain employment in higher-paying occupations; this could be the result either of them joining occupations
with high-earnings premia relative to education, or by joining occupations that have average earnings premia
but generally higher levels of education and thus higher pay. Second, it is natural to code occupation-level
earnings as zeros for participants who were not employed since random assignment. It is not clear how
earnings for such individuals should be coded if occupation-level earnings are residualized against education
status.


                                                                                                          15
since random assignment via the question, "In what kind of business or industry is that
employer? What did they make or what service did they provide?" We then employed
workers on MTurk to match the free-form responses to this question to NAICS industry
codes. Finally, we matched this data to data on industry-level earnings in the ACS using a
process analogous to that described for occupation-level earnings above. Appendix Section
8.2 provides additional details on this process, as well as comparisons of the results from
the administrative data and the MTurk coding when both are available.

4.2 Empirical Specification
       We present ITT estimates of the impacts of eligibility for WorkAdvance services
from a series of regressions of the form
                              =   +   +  (1)


where  is an outcome of interest (e.g. earnings, average earnings in occupation),
 is an indicator for whether individual  was randomized into the WorkAdvance
treatment group, and  is a vector of control variables. For our main specifications, 
includes only a constant. The results are not sensitive to including the same baseline
control variables as in Hendra et al. (2016) and Schaberg and Greenberg (2020) as
illustrated for our main outcomes in Appendix Table A5. All regressions use White
heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors. We report regression results pooling across all
sites, as well as results disaggregated by site. We focus primarily on the first three years
after random assignment, for which data are available for all sites, although we present
some results on longer-run outcomes in Section 4.7; see, also, Schaberg and Greenberg
(2020) for longer-run results through six years after random assignment.
4.3 Basic Impacts on Earnings and Employment

        Figure 1 reports the pooled ITT effects for quarterly earnings using the state UI data
for the first 12 quarters following random assignment (the latest quarter for which data are
available for all sites). The regression specification above is run separately for earnings in
each quarter after random assignment. The WorkAdvance program exhibits negative
treatment effects in the first two quarters after random assignment ­ the period during
which treated individuals were in training ­ and positive effects thereafter. The estimated
treatment effects grow from approximately quarters 3 to 7 after random assignment, and
are subsequently stable at around $500 per month. As shown in the first column of Table 3,
overall the program increased mean annual earnings by $1,965 dollars in years 2 and 3
after random assignment, a 13 percent increase relative to the control mean.

      Figure 2 disaggregates the quarterly earnings results by site, and extends the results
through quarter 20 for the sites with longer-run data. The results are strongest for Per
Scholas, which has quarterly earnings impacts of around $1500 in the third year after
random assignment. The point estimates for Towards Employment and Madison Strategies


                                                                                           16
are also positive, although smaller in magnitude than for Per Scholas, and not always
statistically significant. The estimates for St. Nick's indicate treatment effects close to zero
in most quarters and are never statistically significant. Table 3 presents results by site for
the mean annual earnings ITT effects for years 2 and 3 after random assignment yielding a
13 percent earnings gain overall ranging from essentially no impact for St. Nick's and a 31
percent gain for Per Scholas.

       Table 4 shows the impact of WorkAdvance eligibility on the number of quarters
with positive earnings in years 2 and 3, a proxy for employment. Pooled across site the
WorkAdvance program had a positive effect of 0.25 quarters, which is 5 percent of the
control mean. The magnitude of this effect (5 percent) relative to the effect on earnings (13
percent) suggests that it is unlikely that the earnings effect of WorkAdvance can be
attributed only to increasing the number of quarters worked. Indeed, if this were the case,
then participants would have had to earn about 1.5 times as much (13/5) in the marginally
induced quarters of work than the average for the control group, which seems implausible.
We conclude that WorkAdvance likely substantially increased earnings for participants
who would have worked anyway, in addition to modestly increasing the employment rate.

        Table 5 shows the impact of WorkAdvance eligibility on the probability that an
individual has average annual earnings above a given threshold in years 2 and 3 after
random assignment. Specifically, we use the thresholds $10K, $20K, and $30K, which
correspond roughly with the median, 70 th, and 85th percentiles of the control distribution.
Pooling across sites, we find that treatment group participants are respectively 5 pp (10
percent), 7 pp (23 percent), and 4 pp (27 percent) more likely to earn above the three
thresholds. Per Scholas generated the largest impact in getting participants into high-wage
jobs, increasing the share earning over $30K by 9 pp (50 percent).
4.4 Impacts on Working in the Targeted Sector

        Table 6 shows the impact of WorkAdvance eligibility on whether an individual's
current or most recent job was in the targeted sector, as reported on the two-year follow
up survey.16 Overall, the program increased work in the targeted sector by 24 pp, relative
to the control mean of 21 pp, an increase of over 100 percent. The effects are large and
statistically significant across all four WorkAdvance sites with magnitudes following the
pattern of earnings impacts being largest for Per Scholas (42 pp) and smallest for St. Nick's
(11 pp).



16The targeted sector was described as "information technology" for Per Scholas; "pest control", "hazmat
commercial driver", or "environmental remediation" for St. Nick's, depending on the training received;
"health" or "manufacturing" for Towards Employment, depending on the training received; and
"manufacturing" or "transportation or aerospace manufacturing" for Madison Strategies, depending on the
training received. Appendix Table A4 shows similar results using the alternative in-sector measure used in
Hendra et al. (2016).


                                                                                                             17
         We note that if WorkAdvance eligibility affected earnings (in Year 2) only through
employment in the targeted sector (as of the Year 2 survey), then instrumental variables
(IV) estimates would suggest that working in the targeted sector has an effect on annual
earnings of about $10,500. For comparison, within the control group individuals who work
in the targeted sector earn about $5,000 more than those who do not.17 We would expect
the cross-sectional relationship in the control group to overstate the earnings premium of
working in the targeted sector if higher-skilled individuals are more likely to obtain such
jobs. It therefore seems unlikely that the WorkAdvance earnings gains operate only
through increasing employment in the targeted sector at the types of jobs control group
members can attain. WorkAdvance may also improve the quality of positions attained in
the targeted sectors (perhaps through placements into higher-wage employers in those
sectors). It might also increase earnings for treatment group members working outside the
targeted sector by improving transferable skills and improving opportunities in the
targeted sector (outside options).18 In other words, WorkAdvance likely increased
earnings for some participants for whom treatment status did not affect whether they
worked in the targeted sector (either "always takers" who would have worked in the
targeted sector regardless of treatment, or "never takers" who would have not worked in
the targeted sector regardless of treatment status). 19

4.5 Impacts on Occupation-Level and Industry-Level Earnings

       We next examine the effects of WorkAdvance eligibility on the quality of one's
occupation and industry, as measured by the average annual earnings for individuals in
that occupation or industry in the ACS.

       Table 7 shows the results for the impact of WorkAdvance eligibility on the average
earnings in one's occupation. Pooling across sites, individuals in the treatment group were
in occupations with average earnings $4,781 dollars higher than in the control group, a 19
percent increase over the control mean of $25,264. When disaggregating by site, the
results are largest for Per Scholas (around $12,600 or 45 percent), but are positive for the
other sites and statistically significant at the 10 percent level for Madison Strategies and
Towards Employment, each of which have estimated effects around $2,000 (or about 10
percent).

       Table 8 shows the analogous results for the impact of WorkAdvance eligibility on
the average earnings in one's industry. Poolin g across sites, those in the treatment group
were in industries with average earnings $3,371 higher than in the control group, an 11

17 To make the most direct comparison, we calculate these numbers using earnings in Year 2 only, since the
in-sector variable is measured as of the Year 2 survey. We also restrict attention to survey respondents. See
Table A3 in the appendix comparing earnings impacts for the full sample and survey respondents.
18 Hendra et al. (2016, Chapter 6) provide more detailed descriptive evidence on the characteristics of jobs of

treatment group members in the target sector vs. non-target sectors.
19 An alternative explanation could be that the "in sector" variable is measured with error, in which case the

cross-sectional relationship would be attenuated but the IV estimates would not.


                                                                                                             18
percent increase relative to the control mean. The results are concentrated primarily in Per
Scholas ($9503 or 28 percent) and Towards Employment (around 12 percent averaged
across the two approaches to coding industry); we do not find significant impacts on
average industry earnings for Madison Strategies or St. Nick's.

        Interestingly, both the treatment effect and control mean for average industry-level
and occupation-level earnings are higher than the corresponding treatment effect and
control mean for actual earnings for WorkAdvance participants. The implication is that
WorkAdvance participants tend to have lower-than-average earnings within their
industry/occupation. This finding suggests that the WorkAdvance treatment could increase
the absolute impacts on earnings to the extent individuals remain and move up the career
ladder in similar industries/occupations converging closer to the industry or occupation-
level averages over time. 20

        To understand how well the impacts of WorkAdvance eligibility on
occupation/industry quality explain the earnings impacts, it is again instructive to consider
the implied IV estimates if we thought that this was the only channel by which
WorkAdvance eligibility impacted earnings. If increasing occupation-level earnings (in year
2 after random assignment) were the only channel by which WorkAdvance eligibility
increased earnings (in year 2 after random assignment), IV estimates would suggest that an
additional dollar of occupation-level earnings translates to 56 cents of annual earnings.21
For comparison, among control units, a dollar of occupation-level earnings is associated
with only 23 cents of earnings. Likewise, if increasing industry-level earnings were the only
channel by which WorkAdvance eligibility increased earnings, IV estimates would suggest
that an additional dollar of industry-level earnings translates to 74 cents of annual
earnings, whereas the cross-sectional coefficient is only 27 cents. The fact that the IV
estimates are so much larger than the cross-sectional estimates is suggestive that
WorkAdvance treatment likely operates both through increasing occupation/industry-level
earnings as well as other mechanisms. However, measurement error in the
occupation/industry-level earnings measure, which would attenuate the cross-sectional
relationship, could also contribute to the gap between the IV and cross-sectional estimates.

       How much can the impacts of WorkAdvance on occupation and industry quality be
explained by increasing the share of work in the targeted sector? Table 9 and Table 10
show cross-tabulations of average occupation-level and industry-level earnings by
treatment status and whether one reported working in the targeted sector. Once we


20 Schaberg and Greenberg (2020) find only limited evidence for such a pattern in longer-run analyses of
WorkAdvance earning impacts by provider through five years after random assignment using state UI data.
But the findings for calendar 2018 from NDHD data do indicate larger absolute earnings impacts five to seven
years out for the pooled sample and for Per Scholas and St. Nick's.
21 All IV estimates in this section use Year 2 earnings, since our measures of industry and occupation quality

are based on the Year 2 survey. These numbers also restrict attention to survey respondents. See Table in the
appendix for a comparison of earnings impacts for the full sample and for survey respondents.


                                                                                                           19
condition on in-sector status, the average occupation-level and industry-level earnings are
generally quite similar for treatment and control groups (both pooling across sites and site-
by-site).22 However, occupation-level and industry-level earnings are higher for
individuals working in the targeted sector. One needs to be cautious in interpreting these
numbers since in-sector status is endogenously determined. Nevertheless, we interpret this
as suggestive evidence that the impacts of WorkAdvance treatment on occupation and
industry quality operate largely through increasing work in the targeted sector.

         Table 10 also offers one explanation for why St. Nick's appears to have relatively
small earnings impacts despite having substantial impacts on working in the targeted
sector: average industry-level earnings are similar for individuals working in and out of the
targeted sector. Furthermore, comparing across providers in Tables 9 and 10, we see that
the gap between in-sector earnings for the treated group and the average earnings for the
control group is largest for Per Scholas, medium for Towards Employment and Madison
Strategies, and smallest for St. Nicks, which is in line with the earnings impacts. The
WorkAdvance findings thus suggest larger earnings impacts from programs focused on
higher-wage target sectors. The even larger 40 percent earnings impact from Year Up
(Table 1) and its targeting of high-wage IT, business, and finance sector positions similarly
fits this pattern.

4.6 Comparison of Early and Late Cohorts

        Table 11 shows a comparison of the earnings impacts of WorkAdvance when dis-
aggregating by whether a participant was in the early or late assignment cohort, where
following Hendra et al. (2016) participants are classified as being in the early cohort if they
were randomly assigned to treatment/control on or before the third quarter of 2012. The
motivation for examining results separately by cohort is two-fold. First, the three
WorkAdvance sites other than Per Scholas were new to sectoral training, and so examining
cohort effects sheds light on whether the program impacts grow over time as the sites
gained experience. Second, Madison Strategies and Towards Employment both initially
implemented a "mixed model" in which they attempted to place half of the participants in
jobs prior to providing training. Anecdotally, the providers found that the placement-first
approach had subpar results, and they largely abandoned this model for the later cohort,
almost all of whom received training before placement. Differences between the earlier and
later cohorts for these two sites may therefore be indicative of the relative merits of the
placement-first and training-first regimes. (Unfortunately, the choice of training-first or
placement-first was not randomly assigned nor was it recorded in the data.) The pooled
point estimates indicate somewhat larger treatment effects for the later cohorts, and the
point estimates are also larger for three of the four sites (Per Scholas being the exception).
The differences are not statistically significant at conventional levels, however (the
difference for Madison Strategies is marginally significant, p =0.1). We thus find this

22One exception to this is Madison Strategies, for which treated in-sector treated individuals have larger
occupation-level earnings than in-sector controls.


                                                                                                             20
suggestive but largely inconclusive evidence regarding whether program strength
increased over time and the relative merits of the placement-first versus training-first
models.

4.7 Longer-run Outcomes

     Our analysis so far has focused on outcomes in the first 3 years after random
assignment, since UI data are available for all sites for this time period and our measures of
occupation and industry come from the Year 2 survey. As discussed in Section 2, Schaberg
and Greenberg (2020) find that WorkAdvance continues to have a significant 11.6 percent
impact on earnings in Year 6 after random assignment, using data from the National
Directory of New Hires (NDNH).

      We complement the analysis in Schaberg and Greenberg by evaluating how well
earnings and occupation/industry quality in year 2 "proxies" for longer-run outcomes. In
Table 12, we report regressions of annual earnings in years 4 and 5 on earnings in year 2
and either occupation- or industry-level earnings as derived from the Year 2 survey. We
find that earnings and occupation/industry quality in year 2 together explain a substantial
share of the variation in longer-run outcomes, with an R-squared of around 0.4.
Additionally, industry/occupation quality remains a significant predictor of long-run
outcomes even after controlling for year 2 earnings. We interpret this as suggestive
evidence that improving industry/occupation quality in the short run is a mediator for
improving long-run outcomes.

4.8 Implications for mechanisms

     We now discuss the implications of our analysis as they relate to the possible
mechanisms discussed in Section 3.

       First, our analysis demonstrates clearly that WorkAdvance treatment gets
participants into higher-earning industries and occupations, and these gains appear to be
primarily associated with increased work in the targeted sector. These findings are thus
highly consistent with the Static and Dynamic Inefficiency models, where the primary
mechanism is getting trainees into better-paying industries and occupations.

        Second, the sustained positive earnings gains from WorkAdvance through year 6
after random assignment ­ and for Project Quest through year 9 -- suggest that the gains
from sectoral training programs are not merely the result of smoothing over transitory
shocks in labor demand, at least if transitory is defined on the time-scale of 5-10 years. This
points in favor of the Static, rather than Dynamic, inefficiency model. Nevertheless, we
cannot fully rule out that the gains from sectoral training may fade out over longer
horizons, as the demand for the trained skills diminishes. Moreover, the results are
consistent with a modified version of the Static Inefficiencies model, in which training
participants in high-demand skills allows them to overcome barriers to entry to high-
paying sectors with greater career advancement opportunities.



                                                                                            21
       Third, we interpret both the anecdotal and empirical evidence from the early
cohorts at Madison Strategies and Towards Employment, in which some participants were
provided wraparound services without sectoral training, as suggestive evidence against the
hypothesis that the wraparound services are the main component of the earnings gains
from these programs. This evidence must be interpreted with some caution, however,
given that the placement-first model was not randomly assigned and the differences across
cohorts are imprecisely estimated.

         The randomized evaluation of the Health Professions Opportunity Grants (HPOG)
sector-focused program also emphasized short-term training and early placement plus
support services rather than more intensive upfront occupational skills training and led to
little earnings impact over three years (Schaberg 2020; Peck et al. 2018) as did two other
health care training programs in San Diego and Seattle with similar models (Farrell et al.
2020; Glosser and Judkins 2020). The HPOG and related program findings are further
suggestive evidence that the support services, pre-enrollment screening, and job placement
alone without more sustained occupational skills training do not generate large and
persistent earnings gains for participants. Persistent earnings gains from programs
emphasizing human capital accumulation in addition to support services as compared to
those more focused on job search assistance and early job placement is a systematic
pattern documented in the cross-country meta-analysis of active labor market program
evaluations by Card, Kluve, and Weber (2018). Nevertheless, even if we conclude that
wraparound services alone are not sufficient to generate the earnings gains in high-
performing sectoral employment programs, it remains plausible that these services are an
important complement to the sectoral skills training.

5 Conclusion
       This paper reviewed the evidence from four RCTs evaluating U.S. sectoral
employment programs. We outlined several possible mechanisms behind the substantial
earnings gains generated for participants in these programs, and used data from the
WorkAdvance demonstration as a lens for evaluating these mechanisms. Although not
entirely conclusive on the mechanisms, the evidence shows that sectoral training programs
operate in large part by getting participants into higher-wage jobs in higher-earning
industries and occupations rather than just by increasing employment rates. A
combination of upfront screening of applicants on basic skills and motivation, both
occupational skills (targeted to high-wage sectors and leading to an industry-recognized
credential) and soft skills/career readiness training, wraparound support services for
participants, and strong connections to employers characterize the sector-focused training
programs producing the largest and most persistent earnings gains such as Year Up, Per
Scholas, WRTP, and Project Quest. The support services may be particularly important for
participants subject to repeated life course shocks and who may find it difficult to thrive in
more traditional post-secondary educational institutions.

       Training for transferable skills valued by many firms in a sector may be under-
provided through on-the-job training by individual employers given poaching concerns.
Sectoral employment programs appear to be able to play a role in filling this gap in the


                                                                                            22
training market. The transferable and certified nature of the skills imparted in
occupational skills training by sector-focused training programs may be a key element of
the durability of the observed earnings gains for participants and in helping minority
workers gain opportunities in high-wage sectors. Alfonsi et al. (2020) similarly find in an
RCT for disadvantaged youths and young adults in Uganda that upfront vocational training
leading to certified and transferable sector-specific skills generates more persistent
earning gains than more idiosyncratic firm-provided training of the same duration. The
provision of both technical (hard) skills and soft skills training may also be essential as
indicated in an RCT of a vocational training program in Colombia by Barrera-Osorio, Kugler
and Silliman (2020).

         Sectoral employment programs have proven successful in improving the earnings
trajectories for low-wage workers without college degrees but with sufficient motivation
and basic skills (testing at 6 th to 10th grade level and with a high school degree or GED) to
gain program entry. An important issue going forward is the extent to which the sectoral
training model can be effective if expanded to cover a broader population of disadvantaged
workers by weakening the upfront screening criteria. It might be possible to create
pathways for more-disadvantaged individuals (such as high school dropouts unable to
initially pass the pre-enrollment screens) to progress from youth development programs
(such as YouthBuild) or transitional (subsidized) jobs into a sector-focused program as
proposed by Bloom and Miller (2018).

        Sector-focused training programs, such as Per Scholas and Year Up, have responded
to the Covid-19 pandemic through speeding up the implementation of remote (online)
versions of their training and support services (Lohr 2020). Crucial research questions
going forward are how effective are remote as compared to in-person versions of sectoral
employment programs and whether remote versions will allow the more rapid and lower-
cost scaling up of successful evidence-based training programs.




                                                                                            23
6 References
Acemoglu, Daron and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. 1999. "Beyond Becker: Training i n Imperfect
   Labour Markets." 109(1): 112-42.

Alfonsi, Livia, Oriana Bandiera, Vittorio Bassi, Robin Burgess, Imran Rasul, Munshi
    Sulaiman, and Anna Vitali. 2020. "Tackling Youth Unemployment: A Labor Market
    Experiment in Uganda." Econometrica, forthcoming.

Autor, David H. 2019. "Work of the Past, Work of the Future." AEA Papers and
    Proceedings 109: 1-32.

Autor, David, Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2020. "Extending the Race between
    Education and Technology." AEA Papers and Proceedings 110: 347-51.

Barrera-Osorio, Felipe, Adriana D. Kugler, and Mikko I. Silliman. 2020. "Hard and Soft Skills
    in Vocational Training: Experimental Evidence from Colombia." NBER WP No. 27548.

Bloom, Dan and Cynthia Miller. 2018. Helping Young People Move Up: Findings from Three
    New Studies of Youth Employment Programs. New York: MDRC.

Card, David, Jörg Heining, and Patrick Kline. 2013. "Workplace Heterogeneity and the Rise
    of West German Wage Inequality." Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(3): 967-1015.

Card, David, Jochen Kluve, and Andrea Weber. 2018. "What Works? A Meta-Analysis of
    Recent Labor Market Program Evaluations." Journal of the European Economic
    Association 16(3): 894-931.

Cass, Oren. 2019. The Workforce Training Grant: A New Bridge from High School to Career .
    New York: Manhattan Institute.

Cellini, Stephanie R. and Nicholas Turner. 2019. "Gainfully Employed? Assessing the
     Employment and Earnings of For-Profit College Students Using Administrative Data."
     Journal of Human Resources 52(4): 342-70.

Crépon, Bruno, Esther Duflo, Marc Gurgand, Roland Rathelot, and Philippe Zamora. 2013
    "Do Labor Market Policies Have Displacement Effects? Evidence from a Clustered
    Randomized Design," Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(2): 531-80.

Economic Policy Institute. 2020. State of Working America Data Library. "Wages by
   Education." https://www.epi.org/data/#/?subject=wage-education&g=*


                                                                                           24
Farber, Henry, Daniel Herbst, Ilyana Kuziemko, and Suresh Naidu. 2020. "Unions and
    Inequality over the Twentieth Century: New Evidence from Survey Data ," September.

Farrell, Mary, Randall Juras, David Judkins, and Samuel Dastrup. 2020. The San Diego
    Workforce Partnership's Bridge to Employment in the Healthcare Industry Program:
    Three-Year Impact Report. OPRE Report No. 2020-105. Washington, DC: U.S.
    Department of Health and Human Services.

Fein, David, and Jill Hamadyk. 2018. Bridging the Opportunity Divide for Low-Income Youth:
    Implementation and Early Impacts of the Year Up Program. OPRE Report No. 2018-65.
    Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

Fortin, Nicole, Thomas Lemieux, and Neil Lloyd. 2019. " Labor Market Institutions and the
    Distribution of Wages: The Role of Spillover Effects ," February.

Glosser, Asaph and David Judkins. 2020. Workforce Development Council of Seattle­King
    County's Health Career for All Program: Three-Year Impact Report. OPRE Report No.
    2020-112. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

Glover, Dylan, Amanda Pallais, and William Pariente. 2017. "Discrimination as a Self -
    Fulfilling Prophecy: Evidence from French Grocery Stores." Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 132(3): 1219-60.

Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2008. The Race between Education and Technology.
    Cambridge MA: Belknap for Harvard University Press.

Greenberg, David H., Charles Michalopoulos, Phillip K. Robins. 2003. "A Meta -Analysis of
    Government-Sponsored Training Program." ILR Review 57(1): 31-53.

Grosz, Michel. 2020. "The Returns to a Large Community College Program: Evidence from
    Admissions Lotteries." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 12(1): 226-53.

Gupta, Himani. 2017. The Power of Fully Supporting Community College Students: The Effects
   of CUNY's Accelerated Study in Associates Programs after Six Years. New York: MDRC.

Hendra, Richard, David H. Greenberg, Gayle Hamilton, Ari Oppenheim, Alexandra
   Pennington, Kelsey Schaberg, and Betsy L. Tessler. 2016. Encouraging Evidence on a
   Sector-Focused Advancement Strategy: Two-Year Impacts from the WorkAdvance
   Demonstration. New York: MDRC.




                                                                                            25
Hendren, Nathaniel and Benjamin Sprung-Keyser. 2020. "A Unified Welfare Analysis of
   Government Policies." Quarterly Journal of Economics 135(3):1209-1318.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai, Erik Hurst, Charles I. Jones, and Peter J. Klenow. 2019. "The Allocation of
    Talent and U.S. Economic Growth." Econometrica 87(5): 1439-74.

Litwok, Daniel and Karen Gardiner. 2020. Pima Community College's Pathways to
    Healthcare Program: Three-Year Impact Report. OPRE Report No. 2020-43.
    Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

Lohr, Steven. 2020. "Gaining Skills Virtually to Close the Inequality Gap ." The New York
   Times; June 7.

Maguire, Sheila, Joshua Freely, Carol Clymer, Maureen Conway, and Deena Schwartz. 2010.
   Tuning in to Local Labor Markets: Findings from the Sectoral Employment Study .
   Philadelphia: Public/Private Ventures.

Mangat, Ravinder. 2007. Sector Snapshots: A Profile of Sector Initiatives. Oakland, CA:
   National Network of Sector Partners.

McConnell, Sheena, Peter Schochet, Dana Rotz, Kenneth Fortson, Paul Burkander, and
   Annalisa Mastri. 2019. "Providing Public Workforce Services to Job Seekers: Findings
   from a Nationally Representative Multi-Armed Randomized Controlled Trial."
   Mathematica, October.

Miler, Cynthia, Camielle Hedlam, Michelle Mano, and Dan Cullinan. 2020. Increasing
    Community College Graduation Rates with a Proven Model: Three Year Results from the
    Accelerated Study in Associates Program (ASAP) Ohio Demonstration . New York: MDRC.

Naidu, Suresh and Aaron Sojourner. 2020. "Employer Power and Employee Skills:
    Understanding Workforce Training Programs in the Context of Labor Market Power ."
    Roosevelt Institute, December.

Peck, Laura R., Alan Werner, Eleanor Harvill, Daniel Litwok, Shawn Moulton, Alyssa Rulf
    Fountain, and Gretchen Locke. 2018. Health Profession Opportunity Grants (HPOG 1.0)
    Impact Study Interim Report: Program Implementation and Short-Term Impacts.
    Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

Roder, Anne and Mark Elliott. 2014. Sustained Gains: Year Up's Continued Impact on Young
   Adult Earnings. New York: Economic Mobility Corporation.




                                                                                            26
Roder, Anne and Mark Elliott. 2018. Escalating Gains: The Elements of Project Quest's
   Success. New York: Economic Mobility Corporation.

Roder, Anne, and Mark Elliott. 2019. Nine Year Gains: Project QUEST's Continuing Impact.
   New York: Economic Mobility Corporation.

Schaberg, Kelsey. 2020. Meeting the Needs of Job Seekers and Employers: A Synthesis of
    Findings on Sector Strategies. New York: MDRC.

Schaberg, Kelsey, and David H. Greenberg. 2020. Long-Term Effects of a Sectoral
    Advancement Strategy: Costs, Benefits, and Impacts from the WorkAdvance
    Demonstration. New York, NY: MDRC.

Schochet, Peter Z. 2020. "LongRun Labor Market Effects of the Job Co rps Program:
    Evidence from a Nationally Representative Experiment." Journal of Policy Analysis and
    Management, forthcoming.

Smith, Jonathan, Joshua Goodman, and Michael Hurwitz. 2020. "The Economic Impact of
    Access to Public Four-Year Colleges." NBER Working Paper No. 27177, May.

Song, Jae, David J. Price, Fatih Guvenen, Nicholas Bloom, and Till von Wachter. 2019.
   "Firming Up Inequality." Quarterly Journal of Economics 134(1): 1-50.

Stanley, Marcus, Alan B. Krueger, and Lawrence F. Katz. 1998. "Develop ing Skills: What We
    Know About the Impacts of American Employment and Training Programs on
    Employment, Earnings, and Educational Outcomes." G8 Economic Summit Briefing.

Stansbury, Anna and Lawrence H. Summers. 2020. "The Declining Worker Power
    Hypothesis: An Explanation for the Recent Evolution of the American Economy."
    Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, forthcoming.

Stevens, Margaret. 1994. "A Theoretical Model of On -the-Job Training with Imperfect
    Competition." Oxford Economic Papers 46(4): 537-62.

Zimmerman, Seth. 2014. "The Returns to College Admission for Academically Marginal
   Students." Journal of Labor Economics 32(4): 711-54.




                                                                                           27
7 Tables and Figures
Table 1. Overview of Four Randomized Evaluations of Sectoral Employment Programs




Notes: This table provides background information and earnings results for major randomized evaluations of sectoral employment programs. All of the programs
contain the following elements: upfront screening, sectoral-specific and soft-skills training, relationships with local employers, and job placement assistance. Year 6 for
WorkAdvance is calendar year 2018 ranging from 5 to 7 years after random assignment. The WorkAdvance earnings impacts for Year 2 are from Hendra et al. (2016,
Table 5.1 for individual providers and Table 6.4 for the pooled impacts) and for Year 6 are from Schaberg and Greenberg (2020, Table ES.2 by provider and Table ES.3
for the pooled results) using administrative state unemployment insurance earnings records from individual states for the Year 2 results and from the National
Directory of New Hires (NDNH) for the Year 6 results. The SEIS earnings impacts for Year 2 are from Maguire et al. (2010, Table 3 for pooled estimates and Tables 6, 13,
and 17 for the individual programs) using survey data. The Project Quest earnings impacts for Years 2 and 9 are from Roder and Elliott (2019, Figures 4 and 5) using
Texas state administrative unemployment insurance quarterly earnings records. The Year Up earnings impact estimates for Years 2 and 3 are from Fein and Hamadyk
(2018, Exhibit 6.1) using administrative quarterly earnings records from the NDNH. * p < 0.1; ** p<.05; *** p<.01.

                                                                                                                                                                         28
Table 2. Characteristics of Participants in Four Randomized Evaluation of Sectoral
Employment Programs




Sources: Hendra et al. (2016, Table 1.4), Maguire et al. (2010, Table 1, 5, 12 and 16); and
Fein and Hamadyk (2018, Exhibit 3-2).




                                                                                              29
Table 3. Impacts of WorkAdvance on Annual Earnings in Years 2 and 3

               Earnings Impacts in Years 2 and 3

                      All         PS        MS          TE            SN
                      (1)         (2)       (3)         (4)           (5)
Treatment Effect 1,965*** 4,877*** 870                1,532          -90
                  (609) (1,329) (1,092)               (935)        (1,555)
Control Mean       14,636*** 15,769*** 15,167*** 12,309*** 15,659***
                    (425)     (882)     (779)     (668) (1,143)
Observations        2,564         690       697         698          479
Note:                                                *p<0.1;**p<0.05;***p<0.01



Notes: The dependent variable is average annual earnings in years 2 and 3 after random
assignment. White heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
Results are shown pooling across sites (column 1) and by site.

Table 4. Impacts of WorkAdvance on Quarters with Positive Earnings in Years 2 and 3

Impacts on Quarters with Positive Earnings in Years 2 and 3

                            All     PS       MS           TE          SN
                            (1)     (2)      (3)          (4)         (5)
Treatment Effect        0.25**     0.56**    0.03       0.36         -0.05
                        (0.12)     (0.22)   (0.23)     (0.23)       (0.29)
Control Mean            5.03*** 4.92*** 5.25*** 5.06*** 4.80***
                        (0.09) (0.17) (0.16) (0.17) (0.20)
Observations            2,564       690      697         698         479
Note:                                                *p<0.1;**p<0.05;***p<0.01




Notes: The dependent variable is the number of quarters with positive earnings in years 2
and 3 after random assignment. White heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are
reported in parentheses. Results are shown pooling across sites (column 1) and by site.




                                                                                        30
Table 5. Impacts of WorkAdvance on Having Annual Earnings Above A Given Threshold In
Years 2 and 3

Impacts on Having Annual Earnings Above 10K in Years 2 and 3
                         All       PS        MS           TE          SN
                         (1)       (2)       (3)          (4)         (5)
Treatment Effect        0.05***   0.11***    0.01       0.07*        0.01
                        (0.02)    (0.04)    (0.04)     (0.04)       (0.05)
Control Mean            0.51***   0.53***   0.54***    0.47***      0.51***
                        (0.01)    (0.03)    (0.03)     (0.03)       (0.03)
Observations            2,564      690       697         698          479
Note:                                                 *p<0.1;**p<0.05;***p<0.01



Impacts on Having Annual Earnings Above 20K in Years 2 and 3

                          All       PS        MS          TE           SN
                          (1)       (2)       (3)         (4)          (5)
Treatment Effect        0.07***   0.14***    0.04        0.05         0.04
                        (0.02)    (0.04)    (0.04)      (0.03)       (0.04)
Control Mean            0.30***   0.31***   0.33***     0.25***      0.29***
                        (0.01)    (0.03)    (0.03)      (0.02)       (0.03)
Observations             2,564     690       697          698         479
Note:                                                 *p<0.1;**p<0.05;***p<0.01




Impacts on Having Annual Earnings Above 30K in Years 2 and 3
                          All       PS        MS           TE           SN
                          (1)       (2)       (3)          (4)          (5)
Treatment Effect        0.04***   0.09***    0.04         0.03       0.005
                        (0.01)    (0.03)    (0.03)       (0.02)      (0.04)
Control Mean            0.15***   0.18***   0.15***     0.09***      0.18***
                        (0.01)    (0.02)    (0.02)      (0.02)       (0.03)
Observations             2,564     690       697          698          479
Note:                                              *p<0.1;**p<0.05;***p<0.01

Notes: The dependent variable in each column is an indicator variables for having average
annual earnings above selected thresholds in years 2 and 3 after random assignment.


                                                                                        31
White heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Results are
shown pooling across sites (column 1) and by site.

Table 6. Impacts on Working in Targeted Sector

        Impacts on Working in Targeted Sector

                    All     PS     MS        TE          SN
                    (1)     (2)    (3)       (4)         (5)
Treatment Effect 0.24*** 0.42*** 0.23*** 0.18*** 0.11***
                 (0.02) (0.04) (0.04) (0.04) (0.04)
Control Mean      0.21*** 0.18*** 0.21*** 0.31*** 0.10***
                  (0.01) (0.02) (0.03) (0.03) (0.02)

Observations      2,034    549     551       554        380
                                     *p<0.1;**p<0.05;***p<0.01
Note:

Notes: The dependent variable is an indicator variable for working in the targeted sector,
as reported on the Year 2 survey. White heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are
reported in parentheses. Results are shown pooling across sites (column 1) and by site.


Table 7. Impacts of WorkAdvance on Average Occupation-level Earnings

          Impact on Average Earnings in Occupation

                  All       PS         MS             TE           SN
                  (1)       (2)        (3)            (4)          (5)
Treatment      4,781*** 12,592*** 2,467**          2,182*          218
                (763)    (1,694) (1,249)           (1,289)       (1,587)
Control Mean 25,264*** 27,748*** 27,506*** 21,160*** 24,713***
               (528)    (1,258)    (898)     (893)    (1,048)

Observations    2,037       545        557            556          379
                                                   *p<0.1;**p<0.05;***p<0.01
Note:


Notes: This table shows the control mean and the treatment effect of WorkAdvance
eligibility for the average annual earnings in one's occupation. Column (1) shows results
pooling across sites, and the remaining columns disaggregate by site. White
heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. See Section 4.1 and
Appendix Section 8.1 for details on how average occupation-level earnings are calculated.


                                                                                             32
Table 8. Impacts of WorkAdvance on Average Industry-Level Earnings

                        Impact on Average Earnings in Industry

                 All       PS      MS (MTurk) MS (UI) TE (MTurk) TE (UI)           SN
                 (1)       (2)         (3)     (4)        (5)      (6)             (7)
Treatment      3,371*** 9,503***       960      -385     2,497*    3,877*** -914
                (818)   (1,763)      (1,468)   (1,306)   (1,439)   (1,221) (1,630)
Control Mean 32,039*** 33,629*** 36,096*** 30,982*** 28,522*** 25,700*** 29,133***
               (580)    (1,235)   (1,111)    (961)    (1,033)    (866)    (1,134)

Observations    2,046      551        558       697        557        698          380
                                                                   *p<0.1;**p<0.05;***p<0.01
Note:


Notes: this table shows the control mean and the treatment effect of WorkAdvance
eligibility for the average annual earnings in one's industry. Column (1) shows results
pooling across sites, and the remaining columns disaggregate by site. Columns (4) and (6)
show results using administrative data for the two sites where it is available; the remaining
columns use NAICS classifications coded by MTurk workers. White heteroskedasticity-
robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. See Section 4.1 and Appendix Section
8.2 for details on how average industry-level earnings are calculated.




                                                                                               33
Table 9. Occupation-level earnings by treatment and in-sector status

                   All Sites

           Not In-Sector In-Sector        All

 Control       23,637          31,208 25,246
 Treated       24,273          36,943 30,028


                Per Scholas
           Not In-Sector In-Sector       All
Control       23,329        48,207 27,748
Treated       27,709        48,747 40,302


           Madison Strategies
           Not In-Sector In-Sector       All
Control       27,138        28,561 27,445
Treated       26,275        34,571 29,943


          Towards Employment

           Not In-Sector In-Sector       All

Control       19,922        24,080 21,222
Treated       20,148        26,543 23,311


                  St. Nick's
           Not In-Sector In-Sector       All
Control       24,022        29,516 24,590
Treated       23,403        30,820 24,982

Notes: This table shows the average occupation-level earnings for WorkAdvance participants by treatment
status and whether the participant worked in the targeted sector as of the Year 2 survey. The control means
in column 3 differ slightly from those reported in Table 7, since a small number of observations did not
respond to the in-sector question on the survey. White heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are
reported in parentheses.




                                                                                                          34
Table 10. Industry-level earnings by treatment and in-sector status

                  All Sites
           Not In-Sector In-Sector       All
Control       29,235        42,008 31,948
Treated       27,716        44,577 35,368


                Per Scholas
           Not In-Sector In-Sector       All
Control       29,431        52,658 33,582
Treated       27,124        53,939 43,119

            Madison Strategies
           Not In-Sector In-Sector        All
 Control       34,340         41,560 35,891
 Treated       32,544         42,685 37,028



          Towards Employment
           Not In-Sector In-Sector        All
Control       24,146          38,454 28,617
Treated       22,549          39,385 30,907


                  St. Nick's
           Not In-Sector In-Sector       All
Control       28,487        32,353 28,887
Treated       27,747        30,062 28,237

Notes: This table shows the average occupation-level earnings for WorkAdvance participants by treatment
status and whether the participant worked in the targeted sector as of the Year 2 survey. The control means
in column 3 differ slightly from those reported in Table 8, since a small number of observations did not
respond to the in-sector question on the survey. White heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are
reported in parentheses.




                                                                                                          35
Table 11. Treatment Effects and Control Means on Annual Earnings in Years 2 and 3 By
Cohort
                                              All        PS        MS        TE        SN
                                              (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)
Treatment - Early                            1,458*   6,339*** -923     625    -1,748
                                             (803)    (1,757) (1,499) (1,142) (1,853)
Treatment - Late                            2,429*** 3,141  2,633*  2,142   1,570
                                             (909) (2,012) (1,563) (1,421) (2,544)
Control Mean - Early                       13,019*** 13,750*** 14,360*** 10,019*** 14,362***
                                            (557) (1,134) (1,110) (810) (1,418)
Control Mean - Late                        16,366*** 18,164*** 15,901*** 14,667*** 17,263***
                                            (641) (1,362) (1,092) (1,041) (1,857)
p-val: Treatment-Early=Treatment-Late 0.42              0.23      0.1       0.41       0.29
Observations                          2,564             690       697       698        479
Note:                                                                   *p<0.1;**p<0.05;***p<0.01

Notes: This table shows treatment effects and control means for the effect of WorkAdvance
eligibility on average annual earnings in years 2 and 3 after random assignment. The
results are disaggregated based on whether participants were in the early or late cohort.
White heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. The table
presents p-values for the hypothesis that the treatment effects are the same for the early
and late cohorts.




                                                                                               36
Table 12. Year 2 Outcomes as a Proxy for Earnings in Years 4 and 5

                                                      Dependent variable:
                                                  Annual Earnings in Years 4-5
                                          (1)          (2)            (3)             (4)
Occupation-Level Earnings (Year 2)     0.292***      0.109***
                                       (0.031)       (0.027)
Industry-Level Earnings (Year 2)                                   0.310***        0.108***
                                                                   (0.029)         (0.027)
Earnings (Year 2)                                    0.800***                      0.806***
                                                     (0.038)                       (0.039)
Constant                             12,448.960*** 5,746.093*** 10,473.200*** 5,182.012***
                                       (868.099)    (705.259)     (934.100)    (787.489)

Observations                            1,480         1,480         1,488           1,488
R2                                      0.065         0.395         0.077           0.404
                                                                        *p<0.1;**p<0.05;***p<0.01
Note:

Notes: This table shows regressions of annual earnings in years 4 and 5 on earnings in year
2 and our measures of occupation- or industry-level average earnings derived from the
Year 2 survey. The regressions are pooled across the three sites for which long-run UI data
is available (all sites except Madison Strategies), and restricted to observations for which
we have information on industry- or occupation-level earnings. White heteroskedasticity-
robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.




                                                                                                    37
Figure 1. Impacts of WorkAdvance on Earnings by Quarter Since Random Assignment




Notes: This figure shows the earnings impacts of WorkAdvance eligibility by quarter since
random assignment. The results pool across the four evaluation sites. The black lines show
point estimates, and the gray shading represents 95% confidence intervals calculated using
White heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors.




                                                                                       38
Figure 2. Impacts of WorkAdvance on Earnings by Quarter Since Random Assignment - By Site




Notes: This figure shows the earnings impacts of WorkAdvance eligibility by quarter since
random assignment for each of the four WorkAdvance site. The black lines show point
estimates, and the gray shading represents 95% confidence intervals calculated using
White heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors.




                                                                                        39
8 Appendix
8.1 Details on coding of occupations and calculation of occupation-level earnings

We now provide additional details on the coding of occupations used to calculate
occupation-level earnings. As described in Section4.1, 88% of (non-blank) survey
responses were automatically coded using the O*NET-SOC AutoCoder. The remaining 12%
were coded using Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk). For the MTurk coding, we assigned
each survey response to three masters MTurk workers and asked them to match the survey
response to a 6-digit SOC code. We then selected the most granular SOC code at which at
least two of the three workers agreed. If at least two workers agreed on a 6-digit SOC code,
then we would use a 6-digit code; if not, then we would check if at least two workers
agreed on the first five digits; if they did not, we checked if they agreed on the first four
digits. A majority of MTurk workers agreed up to at least 4 digits in 76% of cases. For the
remaining cases, we used the average of the earnings for each of the codes provided by the
workers. We then matched the derived SOC codes to average annual earnings in the ACS.
Not all 6-digit SOC codes appear in the ACS, so we again start by matching on 6-digit SOC
codes, and if there is no match, we try 5-digit or 4-digit codes. Survey respondents who did
not work since random assignment are assigned occupation earnings of zero. A small
fraction (<1%) of survey respondents worked since random assignment but did not answer
the question describing their job; these respondents have occupational earnings set to N/A
(analogous to survey non-respondents).


Table A1. How Occupation-Level Earnings Was Determined


                                                                              Cumulative
SOC Code Match Type                                            N Percent
                                                                               Percent
1. Autocoded - Matched Using 6-digit SOC                      862    42           42
2. Autocoded - Matched Using 5-digit SOC                      725    35           77
3. Autocoded - Matched Using 4-digit SOC                       52     3           80
4. MTurk Coded - Matched Using 6-digit SOC                     88     4           84
5. MTurk Coded - Matched Using 5-digit SOC                     75     4           88
6. MTurk Coded - Matched Using 4-digit SOC                     16     1           89
7. MTurk Coded - No consensus; used average of codings         56     3           91
8. Not employed. Occupational earnings set to 0               163     8           99
9. Employed, didn't answer survey question. Occupational
                                                               16     1           100
earnings set to NA
10. Other                                                       1     0           100




                                                                                           40
8.2 Details on coding of industries and calculation of industry-level earnings

The process for computing industry-level earnings is similar to that used for the
occupation-level earnings. As discussed in Section 4.1, we used MTurk workers to classify
the industries of respondents to the two-year follow-up survey. For two of the sites,
Madison Strategies and Towards Employment, we also have NAICS codes from the UI
agencies.

The process of coding the industry responses using MTurk was similar to that described for
occupations above. We provided respondents' descriptions of their job and the industry of
their employer to three masters MTurk workers. We then selected the most granular NAICS
code at which at least two of the workers agreed. If there was not consensus up to at least
two digits, we computed the average industry-level earnings across the codes provided by
the three MTurk workers. We then matched these NAICS codes to the corresponding
industry-level earnings in the ACS. Survey respondents who did not work since random
assignment are assigned industry-level earnings of zero. A small fraction (<1%) of survey
respondents worked since random assignment but did not answer the question describing
their job; these respondents have industry-level earnings set to N/A and are removed from
the analysis (analogous to survey non-respondents). Table A2 shows a breakdown of how
the NAICS code was determined for survey respondents.

Table A2. How Industry Level Earnings Was Determined



                                                                           Cumulative
NAICS Code Match Type                                       N Percent
                                                                            Percent

1. Matched Using 4-digit NAICS                             711   34.62        34.62
2. Matched Using 3-digit NAICS                             602   29.31        63.92
3. Matched Using 2-digit NAICS                             357   17.38         81.3
4. No consensus. Used average of MTurk Codings             213   10.37        91.67
5. Not employed. Industry earnings set to 0                163    7.94        99.61
6. Employed, didn't answer survey question. Industry
                                                            8    0.39         100
earnings set to NA




For Madison Strategies and Towards Employment, the UI agencies provided quarterly data
with the earnings and NAICS code of each establishment in which the individual worked. To
facilitate comparison between the industry results obtained using the UI data and the
MTurk codings of the survey data, we examine the job held by an individual two years (8
quarters) after random assignment; or, if the individual did not hold a job in that quarter,


                                                                                         41
the most recent job held since the time of random assignment. For participants with
multiple jobs in the relevant quarter, we select the one with the highest earnings. This
selection process mimics as closely as possible the results of the two-year follow up survey,
which asked respondents about their current or most recent job since the time of
randomization. The timing does not align perfectly, however, as the survey was
administered approximately 2 after random assignment, but may not have been
administered exactly at 24 months. Nonetheless, there is moderately high agreement
between the NAICS codes obtained via MTurk and those from the UI data. Among
participants where NAICS codes are available from both data sources and the MTurk
workers reached a consensus of at least two-digits, the first two digits of the MTurk
Consensus matched the first two digits from UI data in 47% of cases. The correlation
between average earnings at the industry level computed using the MTurk data and
average earnings at the industry level using the UI data is 0.43 in the sample where both
are available.


9 Additional Tables and Figures

Table A3. Earnings Impacts for the Full Sample and Survey Respondents


                                     Dependent variable:
                    Earnings in Year 2 Annual Earnings in Years 2-3
                      (1)        (2)       (3)             (4)
Treatment           2,005*** 2,411***           1,965***           2,512***
                     (606)    (685)              (609)              (683)
Control Mean 13,726*** 14,124***                14,636***         14,896***
               (424)     (485)                    (425)             (479)

Sample                Full       Survey            Full             Survey
Observations         2,564       2,058            2,564             2,058
                                                         *p<0.1;**p<0.05;***p<0.01
Note:

Notes: This table shows the treatment impacts of WorkAdvance eligibility on earnings in
Year 2 and mean earnings in Years 2-3 after random assignment. Columns (1) and (3)
report results for the full sample, whereas columns (2) and (4) report results for survey
respondents. White heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
Our analysis of industry and occupation quality uses the Survey sample, after dropping a
small number of observations for which industry/occupation could not be classified; see
Appendix Section 8 for details.




                                                                                          42
Table A4. Impacts on Working In Targeted Sector - Alternative Measure

         Impacts on Working in Targeted Sector

                          All      PS        MS       TE        SN
                          (1)      (2)       (3)      (4)       (5)
Treatment Effect 0.23*** 0.42*** 0.15*** 0.18*** 0.13***
                 (0.02) (0.04) (0.04) (0.04) (0.04)
Control Mean           0.31*** 0.20*** 0.49*** 0.33*** 0.19***
                       (0.01) (0.02) (0.03) (0.03) (0.03)

Observations            2,044      551      557       555      381
                                   *p<0.1;**p<0.05;***p<0.01
 Note:
Notes: This table shows treatment impacts of WorkAdvance eligibility on working in the
targeted sector using the alternative measure of working in the targeted sector used in
Hendra et al. (2016). Their alternative measure combines information from the Year 2
survey question used in the main text with the free-form responses to the questions
describing the occupation and industry. White heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors
are reported in parentheses.

Table A5. Comparison of ITT Estimates With and Without Covariate Adjustment.


                                                            Dependent variable:
                      Annual            Annual
                                                       Occupational        Occupational   Industry   Industry
                     Earnings          Earnings
                                                         Earnings            Earnings     Earnings   Earnings
                    (Years 2-3)       (Years 2-3)
                        (1)               (2)                 (3)                (4)        (5)        (6)
Treatment
                      1,965***           1,831***           4,781***           4,547***   3,371***   3,057***
Effect
                        (609)             (553)              (763)              (727)      (818)      (781)

Controls?                No                Yes                No                 Yes        No         Yes
Observations            2,564             2,564              2,037              2,037      2,046      2,046
                                                                          *p<0.1;**p<0.05;***p<0.01
 Note:
Notes: This table compares the ITT estimates obtained from equation (1) when the
covariate vector  includes only a constant (as in the main text) and when it includes the
full set of covariates used in Hendra et al. (2016) and Schaberg and Greenberg (2020). We
pool results across the four WorkAdvance sites. White heteroskedasticity-robust standard
errors are reported in parentheses.




                                                                                                              43
