                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        AWAY FROM HOME AND BACK:
                COORDINATING (REMOTE) WORKERS IN 1800 AND 2020

                                         Réka Juhász
                                      Mara P. Squicciarini
                                       Nico Voigtländer

                                      Working Paper 28251
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28251


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020




Financial support from the National Science Foundation (Grant # 1628866) is gratefully
acknowledged. Sebastian Ottinger provided outstanding research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Réka Juhász, Mara P. Squicciarini, and Nico Voigtländer. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Away from Home and Back: Coordinating (Remote) Workers in 1800 and 2020
Réka Juhász, Mara P. Squicciarini, and Nico Voigtländer
NBER Working Paper No. 28251
December 2020
JEL No. F63,O14

                                        ABSTRACT

This paper examines the future of remote work by drawing parallels between two contexts: The
move from home to factory-based production during the Industrial Revolution and the shift to
work from home today. Both are characterized by a similar trade-off: the potential productivity
advantage of the new working arrangement made possible by technology (mechanization or ICT),
versus organizational barriers such as coordinating workers. Using contemporary data, we show
that organizational barriers seem to be present today. Without further technological or
organizational innovations, remote work may not be here to stay just yet.


Réka Juhász                                    Nico Voigtländer
Department of Economics                        UCLA Anderson School of Management
Columbia University                            110 Westwood Plaza
420 West 118th Street                          C513 Entrepreneurs Hall
New York, NY 10027                             Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER                                       and NBER
rj2446@columbia.edu                            nico.v@anderson.ucla.edu

Mara P. Squicciarini
Bocconi University
Department of Economics
Via Roentgen, 1
Milan 20136
Italy
mara.squicciarini@unibocconi.it
1       Introduction
For decades, observers have widely expected dramatic changes in working arrangements (Cairn-
cross, 1997; Friedman, 2005). While the ‘revolution’ in information communication technology
(ICT) has provided the equipment to make work from home (WFH) feasible for many occupations,
take-up largely stagnated over the past decade – until the COVID-19 pandemic brought about dra-
matic changes in the spring of 2020.1
    The disruptions to existing working arrangements caused by COVID-19 have led to a major
increase in WFH out of necessity. Once again, some observers confidently state that office work
will never be the same, and perhaps the entire structure of central business districts may need to
reconfigure to adapt to a post-pandemic world.2 Yet, a predominant reliance on production from
home is not novel in economic history. Before the rise of factories during the First Industrial
Revolution around 1800, most production took place at home.
    In this paper, we ask what lessons can be learned from the rapid change opposite to today’s
direction – when workers moved from their homes to the factory floor. We argue that the two
episodes share important similarities. While new technologies (mechanized machinery in the 19th
century or ICT today) increase productivity in the long run, organizational barriers – such as the
need to coordinate workers in the new setting – make a switch to the novel working arrangement
costly. Whether (and when) an industry switches to the new working arrangement depends on a
trade-off between the (potential) productivity advantage of the new setting and the organizational
cost associated with reaching the frontier.3 During the Industrial Revolution, it took a long time to
develop organizational innovations that reduced the cost side, and this was one reason for the slow
economy-wide transition to factory-based production. In this paper, we use contemporary data to
argue that similar challenges exist in terms of coordinating employees who work remotely today.
Based on these insights, we hypothesize that WFH may not be here to stay just yet.

2       Re-Organizing Work during the First Industrial Revolution
The rise of the factory system during the Industrial Revolution gave rise to one of the most dramatic
changes in the organization of work. Prior to 1800, workers in manufacturing predominantly
worked from home, on their own time. Throughout the 19th century, as factories became the
dominant organizational form in manufacturing in Northwestern Europe, both the location and the
nature of work changed. Work was moved from homes to centralized plants, and, under the mature
    1
     According to Gallup, among all U.S. workers, the average number of telecommuting days per month was 2.4 in
2019. This number had been largely unchanged since 2015. In 2006, it was 2.0. Source: Gallup article ‘U.S. Remote
Workdays Have Doubled During Pandemic’ (August 31, 2020).
   2
     See, for example The Economist article ‘The future of work: Is the office finished?’ (September 12, 2020).
   3
     We think of organizational barriers that reduce productivity relative to the frontier as “costs.” For example,
uncoordinated workers on a production chain effectively raise the cost per unit of output, relative to the production
possibility of the technology.

                                                         2
factory system, it became very closely regulated: “the employer dictated when workers worked,
their conduct on the job and that they steadily attend to their assigned tasks” (Clark, 1994, p. 128).
    This was an extraordinarily lengthy and uneven process, taking the best part of a century to
complete. In cotton textiles – the pioneer of the factory-system – the change took a few decades;
factory-based production, relying on a highly synchronized organization of machines and workers,
spread widely during the first half of the 19th century (Chapman, 1974, p. 470). In other industries,
the change was even slower, and it was only by the turn of the 20th century that the factory system
became the dominant organizational form.4
    Why was the transition so lengthy? Part of the answer is surely technological: In most indus-
tries, mechanization – that is, the introduction of machinery powered by inanimate sources such
as water or steam – made it necessary to concentrate workers under one roof. As mechanization
arrived at different times in different industries, it is unsurprising that the process was uneven and
lengthy. However, there is also growing evidence that technology is only part of the story. Orga-
nizing production in one location (i.e., a plant) led to a host of new challenges for workers and
firms.5 One distinguishing feature of the factory-system was the development of ‘flow-production’
– that is, the production of highly standardized goods at low unit cost by “arranging machines
and equipment in line sequence to process goods continuously through a sequence of specialized
operations” (Chapman, 1974, p. 470). This required both an extensive division of labor and coor-
dination across employees working on different parts of the production process (Clark, 1994). The
need to coordinate workers is illustrated vividly by Karl Marx, who quoted a large cotton man-
ufacturer, Henry Ashworth, noting that “When a laborer lays down his spade, he renders useless
for that period, a capital worth eighteen pence. When one of our people leaves the mill he renders
useless a capital that cost £100,000” (Clark, 1994, p. 129).
    The move to factory production initially proceeded without basic organizational knowledge
(Pollard, 1965). Instead, organizational innovations were developed through a long process of trial
and error that took generations to converge to best-practice methods. Labor managements practices
are a case in point. Workers moving from home production to factories were not accustomed to the
rhythm and discipline that factory work required. Employers first responded by using disciplinary
tools: Factory workers were fined or dismissed for minor infractions such as arriving to work a few
minutes late, being away from their machine, or talking or eating at work (Clark, 1994, p. 131).
Over time, however, employers learned that disciplinary measures led to inefficiently high turnover
rates. It took half a century for the cotton textile industry to move away from discipline as the main
   4
      Mokyr (2010, p. 339) estimates that two-thirds of the industrial workers in Britain were employed in factories by
1900.
    5
      We focus on organizational challenges related to employees working efficiently in the factory system. A more
complete discussion of the wider set of organizational challenges caused by the move to the factory system can be
found in Pollard (1965) and Mokyr (2010). In Juhász, Squicciarini, and Voigtländer (2020), we discuss the organiza-
tional challenges faced in mechanized cotton spinning.

                                                          3
labor management practice and settle instead on efficiency wages in the 1840s (Huberman, 1996).
    Why would these organizational challenges hamper the transition to factory-based production?
One implication of the lack of organizational knowledge was that many early factories were not
operating efficiently. Consistent with this, in Juhász et al. (2020), we show that the productivity
distribution of mechanized cotton spinning plants at the early stage of the Industrial Revolution in
France (circa 1800) was remarkably dispersed with a strikingly fat lower tail. We provide a set
of results suggesting that the reason for the fat lower tail was that many early adopters of the new
cotton spinning technology were not operating it efficiently, as knowledge about complementary
organizational innovations had not yet diffused across the economy. By 1840, when much of this
diffusion had taken place, the fat lower tail in the cotton spinning productivity distribution largely
disappeared.
    Our results imply that initially, many plants adopted the new technology despite the fact that
organizational costs reduced their productivity. What explains this decision? In sectors such as
cotton spinning, where the productivity advantage of moving to the new, mechanized technology
was strikingly large (Allen, 2009), adoption was profitable even at the cost of large organizational
inefficiencies. However, in sectors where the productivity advantage of the new technology was
smaller, adoption was delayed until organizational knowledge about factory production had ad-
vanced sufficiently.

3   Re-organizing Work Today
Our hypothesis is that the two opposing forces that influenced the move to factory-based produc-
tion are also at work today. For example, Bloom, Liang, Roberts, and Ying (2015) show in a
randomized control trial that a call center experienced important productivity benefits when mov-
ing some of its employees to remote working. That is, new technologies (ICT in particular) may
make it increasingly attractive to move workers off-site. However, working even part of the time at
a distance from co-workers and supervisors may also lead to significant costs. Challenges include
how to coordinate, monitor, and incentivize co-workers when they are not continuously co-located
with one another (Spreitzer, Cameron, and Garrett, 2017). Siebradt, Hoegl, and Ernst (2009, p.
64) list “difficulties in communication and coordination, reduced trust, and an increased inability
to establish a common ground” as some of the major issues in managing virtual teams. Work by
Andres (2012) suggests that technologically-mediated collaboration across workers creates lags in
information exchange, more misunderstandings, fewer attempts at seeking information, and inco-
herent messages. That is, the organizational and management practices developed for managing
workers on-site may not work as well when many employees are working off-site.
    In what follows, we examine modern-day data for evidence of the two forces at work: pro-
ductivity gains and organizational costs. Sectors that are technologically more suited to remote


                                                  4
work should see a higher share of employees working from home, as this is where the productivity
advantage of WFH will be large. As a proxy for this force, we use the Dingel and Neiman (2020)
measure, designed to capture the technological feasibility of work from home. However, in sectors
heavily reliant on management practices developed for on-site work, the switch to WFH may be
particularly costly. We focus on a central challenge that our historical discussion highlighted: the
need for coordination across specialized workers. We now introduce a measure designed to capture
this second force.
3.1     A Measure for Dependence on Coordination
We construct an industry-level variable indicating the importance of interpersonal cooperation
(which we call the ‘coordination measure’). This indicator is based on an occupation-level clas-
sification of cooperation-reliance from O*Net survey data. We classify an occupation into being
reliant on inter-personal cooperation if any of the responses to questions about needing to coor-
dinate or communicate with other workers are on average (across all participants) rated as “very
important” (at least 4 on a 1-5 scale):6

       • Communicating with supervisors, peers, or subordinates
       • Establishing and maintaining interpersonal relationships
       • Resolving conflicts and negotiating with others
       • Coordinating the work and activities of others
       • Developing and building teams
       • Training and teaching others
       • Providing consultation and advice to others
       • Interactions that require to work with or contribute to a workgroup or team
       • Interactions that require to coordinate or lead others in accomplishing work activities (not as
         a supervisor or team leader)

    Consider the first item. If respondents from a given occupation indicated, on average, that
communicating with supervisors, peers, or subordinates is (at least) “very important” in their job,
we classify the occupation as being reliant on coordination. We then follow Dingel and Neiman
(2020) to aggregate the coordination measure to the industry level using BLS data on the em-
ployment share for each occupation in given industries. The resulting measure has an intuitive
interpretation. For each industry, it shows the share of employees working in occupations that rely
   6
    We use the Generalized Work Activities Survey (questions 26, 28, 31, 33, 34, 35, and 38) and the Work Context
Survey (Questions 7 and 9). Overall, these data are available for 968 occupations. Dingel and Neiman (2020) use the
same surveys to construct a proxy for occupation-specific and industry-specific technological feasibility to work from
home. None of the survey questions that we use overlap with any of the questions used by Dingel and Neiman (2020).

                                                          5
on inter-personal cooperation. We aggregate to the industry level both for 4-digit NAICS indus-
tries and for 2-digit industries (i.e., the industries used in the RPS survey by Bick, Blandin, and
Mertens (2020)), depending on the level of detail at which our various analyses can be run. At
the 2-digit industry level, the average industry employs 83% individuals in occupations classified
as reliant on inter-personal cooperation, ranging from 61% (Transportation/Warehousing) to 92%
(Finance/Insurance).7 As a plausibility check, in the next section, we examine the relationship
between our coordination measure and the number of occupations in 4-digit industries.
3.2    Distinct Occupations and the Need for Coordination
Arguably, having more distinct occupations within an industry is an indicator for specialization on
specific tasks.8 Our hypothesis is that industries with higher specialization also have a stronger
need for coordination among employees. Table 1 first reports the raw correlation for all 4-digit
industries (column 1). The statistically highly significant coefficient indicates that a doubling in
the number of occupations is associated with an increase by 8.5 percentage points (p.p.) in the
need for coordination (relative to a mean of 80 percent). Since this relationship could be mechan-
ically driven by the size of the different sectors, column 2 controls for log employment. We also
add fixed effects for five aggregate industries.9 If anything, the relationship between the number
of occupations and the need for coordination becomes even stronger. In the remaining columns
of Table 1, we show that this result also holds within aggregate industries. The coefficient on the
number of occupations is particularly large for agriculture/mining/construction and for manufac-
turing. In these sectors, doubling the number of occupations is associated with 25-30 p.p. higher
need for coordination. In particular, the large (and highly significant) coefficient in manufacturing
is reassuring for drawing parallels with the Industrial Revolution, where the need for coordination
became a bottleneck in this sector. For the remaining industries (trade and services), the coefficient
is similar to our finding for all industries combined (column 2).
3.3    Coordination and Working from Home
How do technological feasibility and the need for coordination affect work from home? We ex-
amine the association between the share of respondents working from home and i) Dingel and
Neiman’s proxy for the technological feasibility to work from home, and ii) our coordination mea-
sure.10
    We first focus on the ‘steady state,’ examining the relationship in February 2020, prior to
COVID-19 disrupting existing working arrangements in the US. We then examine data from May
   7
     At the four-digit industry level, the mean is 80%, and the values range from 20% to 99%.
   8
     The average number of occupations is 148, ranging between 17 and 590, with a standard deviation of 89.
   9
     These are Agriculture, Building & Mining, Trade & Transportation, Services, and Public Administration.
  10
     Dingel and Neiman’s (2020) measure is designed to capture the technological feasibility of WFH, while our
coordination measure proxies for some of the organizational challenges to re-organizing work. Both measures were
constructed using a very similar methodology and both vary between 0 and 1.

                                                       6
                        Table 1: Need for coordination and number of occupations

                                   (1)         (2)               (3)             (4)           (5)            (6)
                                  All Industries        Agric, Mining,         Manu-        Trade &      Services &
                                                         Construction         facturing     Transp.         Public
 log(# of occupations)           0.085       0.119              0.249           0.295         0.083          0.112
                                (0.020)     (0.039)            (0.086)         (0.091)       (0.066)        (0.054)
 log(total employment)                      -0.024             -0.036          -0.072        -0.027         -0.023
                                            (0.014)            (0.022)         (0.036)       (0.025)        (0.021)
 Industry FE                                   X
 Mean Dep. Var.                   0.80        0.80              0.83             0.73         0.79           0.85
 R2                               0.09        0.18              0.46             0.24         0.03           0.08
 Observations                     250         250                21               69           62             98
Notes: Dependent variable: Sector-specific need to coordinate. Robust standard errors in parentheses.


2020 – a time by which many employees had moved to WFH as a consequence of COVID-19. The
data for both exercises are from Bick et al. (2020).11
    Table 2 shows our results. Consistent with our hypothesis, we find that the propensity to work
from home in February is positively associated with the technological feasibility of working from
home and negatively with our coordination measure. A one-standard deviation (s.d.) increase
(0.26) in the technological feasibility to work from home is associated with 1.8 p.p. more work
from home. Similarly, industries with a one s.d. (0.12) higher need to coordinate experienced 1.25
p.p. less working from home in the pre-pandemic steady state, relative to a sample mean of 8.4%.12
    Next, we perform the analysis using data from May 2020, when the pandemic-related lockdown
was in full force. Column 2 in Table 2 reports the results (with partial scatterplots shown in Figure
2). The Dingel and Neiman (2020) measure is strongly positively associated with WFH during
this time period (as has also been shown by Bick et al., 2020). However, strikingly, the need to
coordinate across workers is now uncorrelated with an industry’s share of working from home –
the coefficient is positive, statistically insignificant and close to zero.
    We interpret the two results together in the following way. COVID-19 temporarily shifted the
economy out of its long-run equilibrium. The ‘social distancing’ made necessary by the pandemic
led to a mass movement to WFH, wherever it was technologically feasible: any job that could
  11
     Bick et al. included questions on WFH in the Real-Time Population Survey (RPS) in May 2020. This repre-
sentative survey collected information on nearly 5,000 working age adults who report their employment in one of 17
sectors, and it also includes retrospective questions about the working situation in February 2020. We aggregate both
our coordination measure and the feasibility measure by Dingel and Neiman (2020) to these 17 sectors.
  12
     A natural concern given the small sample size is that these results may be driven by outliers. This is not the case:
Figure 1 shows that our findings reflect a coherent pattern.

                                                           7
                                                                                         Table 2: Work from Home in February and May 2020

                                                                                                                                                                                                             (1)                         (2)
                                                                                                                                                                                               Feb 2020                        May 2020
                                                                                            Technological Feasibility                                                                               0.070                             0.612
                                                                                                                                                                                                   (0.039)                           (0.053)
                                                                                            Need for Coordination                                                                                  -0.104                             0.050
                                                                                                                                                                                                   (0.055)                           (0.169)
                                                                                            Mean Dep. Var.                                                                                             0.084                          0.317
                                                                                            R2                                                                                                         0.20                            0.80
                                                                                            Observations                                                                                                 17                             17
                                                                                          Notes: Dependent variable: Share of employees in 17 U.S.
                                                                                          industries working from home every day in Feb / May 2020.
                                                                                          Robust standard errors in parentheses. See text for data sources
                                                                                          and construction of variables.




                                                                           Need for Coordination                                                                                                                           Technological Feasibility
                                           .075




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Wholesale Trade
                                                                                                                                                                                               .075




                                                                                         Wholesale Trade
   % Working from Home Feb 2020 (resid.)




                                                                                                                                                       % Working from Home Feb 2020 (resid.)
                                           .05




                                                                                                         Arts/Entert/Recr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Prof/Bus. Services
                                                                                                                                                                                               .05




                                                                           Agriculture                                                                                                                                      Arts/Entert/Recr
                                                                                             Prof/Bus. Services
                                           .025




                                                         Other Services
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Finance/Insurance
                                                                                                                                                                                               .025




                                                                                                                 Finance/Insurance
                                                                                            Real Estate/Rental              Accom/Food
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Agriculture                      Information
                                           0




                                                                                                           Information
                                                                                                                            Retail Trade                                                                                                                                        Other Services
                                                          Transp/Warehousing                                                                                                                                                               Real Estate/Rental
                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                           -.025




                                                                                         Manufacturing                Construction   Utilities                                                               Accom/Food
                                                                                                                                     Health Care
                                                                                                                         Mining                                                                        Retail Trade
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Utilities
                                                                                                                                                                                               -.025
                                           -.05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Transp/Warehousing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Health Care
                                                                                                    Education
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Manufacturing                                     Education
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Construction
                                           -.075




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Mining
                                                                                                                                                                                               -.05




                                                   -.3                    -.2               -.1                   0                     .1                                                             -.4         -.3         -.2          -.1         0         .1          .2         .3       .4
                                                                                 Need for Coordination (residual)                                                                                                            Technological Feasibility of WFH (residual)




                                                               Figure 1: WFH, Coordination, and Technological Feasibility: February 2020
Notes: The figure shows the partial scatterplots corresponding to column 1 in Table 2, for our coordination measure
(left panel) and for the technological feasibility measure (right panel). In both panels data are from February 2020.




be done remotely was moved to a WFH setup without much regard for the coordination costs
incurred (as the public health hazard was arguably too large). This suggests that as the public health
motivation for keeping workers offsite subsides over time, more and more firms – particularly those
in sectors heavily reliant on coordination – will re-evaluate the benefits and costs of working from
home.


                                                                                                                                                   8
                                                              Need for Coordination                                                                                                                  Technological Feasibility

                      .3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Prof/Bus. Services
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Finance/Insurance




                                                                                                                                                                             .2
                                                                                Arts/Entert/Recr                                                                                                      Arts/Entert/Recr                                           Education
    % Working from Home May 2020 (resid.)




                                                                                                                                         % Working from Home May 2020 (resid.)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Other Services
                                .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Wholesale Trade            Information
                     .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                               Agriculture




                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Manufacturing
                                                                              Finance/Insurance                                                                                                                                     Real Estate/Rental
                                            Other Services Agriculture                             Retail Trade                                                                                                                      Transp/Warehousing
                                                                      Prof/Bus. Services
                                                                Manufacturing                                                                                                                                   Utilities
                                                                                                                    Health Care
           0




                                                                                         Education Accom/Food
                                                                Wholesale Trade                                                                                                                                  Mining
                                                                                                           Mining
                                                                                                  Utilities                                                                        Retail Trade       Health Care
                                                                                   Information




                                                                                                                                       -.2
                                                                    Real Estate/Rental      Construction
                                                                                                                                                                                           Construction
                      -.1




                                                   Transp/Warehousing                                                                                                                   Accom/Food
                                            -.2                   -.1               0                         .1              .2                                                  -.4                      -.2                0                  .2                      .4
                                                                    Need for Coordination (residual)                                                                                                      Technological Feasibility of WFH (residual)




                                                       Figure 2: WFH, Coordination, and Technological Feasibility: May 2020
Notes: The figure shows the partial scatterplots corresponding to column 2 in Table 2, for our coordination measure
(left panel) and for the technological feasibility measure (right panel). In both panels data are from May 2020.



4                          Conclusion
We examined the trade-off faced by firms as they consider moving workers more permanently to
remote working arrangements. Informed by studying the monumental shift from home to factory-
based work during the Industrial Revolution, we have argued that firms face a trade-off: While
new technologies may give a productivity advantage to novel working arrangements, such a dras-
tic reorganization of production is costly in the absence of best-practice organizational techniques.
Using contemporary survey data, we have shown evidence consistent with firms facing organiza-
tional challenges to moving workers off-site. Our results also suggest that the mass movement to
remote working witnessed during the pandemic ignored these organizational barriers because of
the extraordinary public health hazard of onsite work. However, based on the lessons from the
Industrial Revolution, as well as the pre-pandemic results for February 2020, we expect organiza-
tional barriers to matter in the long run.
     Of course, neither technology nor management practices are static. This suggests that the trade-
off that governs the shift to WFH will change over time, depending on how the associated costs
and benefits evolve. In much the same way that the breakthrough technologies in cotton textiles led
to organizational innovations that then spilled over to other sectors and helped them move towards
factory-based production during the Industrial Revolution, the pandemic may lead to technological
and organizational innovations that make remote work profitable for an increasing number of firms
and sectors.13 However, the experience from the move to factory-based production suggests that

    13
    Patenting evidence suggests that innovation already shifted towards technologies facilitating remote work in early
2020 (Bloom, Davis, and Zhestkova, 2020).

                                                                                                                                   9
these types of major organizational innovations proceed slowly, so that the dramatic shift to work
from home in 2020 may not (yet) be permanent.




References
Allen, R. C. (2009). The British Industrial Revolution in Global Perspective. Cambridge University
  Press.
Andres, H. P. (2012). Technology-Mediated Collaboration, Shared Mental Model and Task Per-
  formance. Journal of Organizational and End User Computing 24, 64–81.
Bick, A., A. Blandin, and K. Mertens (2020). Work from Home After the COVID-19 Outbreak.
  Working paper.
Bloom, N., S. J. Davis, and Y. Zhestkova (2020). COVID-19 Shifted Patent Applications Toward
  Technologies that Support Working from Home.
Bloom, N., J. Liang, J. Roberts, and Z. J. Ying (2015). Does Working From Home Work? Evidence
  from a Chinese Experiment. Quarterly Journal of Economics 130(1), 165–218.
Cairncross, F. (1997). The Death of Distance: How the Communications Revolution is Changing
  Our Lives. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Chapman, S. (1974). The Textile Factory Before Arkwright: A Typology of Factory Development.
  Business History Review 48(4), 451–478.
Clark, G. (1994). Factory Discipline. The Journal of Economic History 54(1), 128–163.
Dingel, J. I. and B. Neiman (2020). How Many Jobs Can be Done at Home? Journal of Public
  Economics 189, 104235.
Friedman, T. (2005). The World is Flat: A Brief History of the 21st Century. London: Penguin.
Huberman, M. (1996). Escape from the Market. Cambridge University Press.
Juhász, R., M. Squicciarini, and N. Voigtländer (2020). Technology Adoption and Productivity
  Growth: Evidence from Industrialization in France. NBER working paper 27503.
Mokyr, J. (2010). The Enlightened Economy: An Economic History of Britain 1700-1850. Yale
 University Press.
Pollard, S. (1965). The Genesis of Modern Management: A Study of the Industrial Revolution in


                                               10
  Great Britain. Harvard University Press.
Siebradt, F., M. Hoegl, and H. Ernst (2009). How To Manage Virtual Teams. MIT Sloan Manage-
  ment Review 50(4), 63–68.
Spreitzer, G. M., L. Cameron, and L. Garrett (2017). Alternative Work Arrangements: Two Images
  of The New World of Work. Annual Review of Organizational Psychology and Organizational
  Behavior 4, 473–499.




                                             11
