                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      PUBLIC AND PRIVATE OPTIONS IN PRACTICE:
                           THE MILITARY HEALTH SYSTEM

                                        Michael D. Frakes
                                        Jonathan Gruber
                                         Timothy Justicz

                                       Working Paper 28256
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28256


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020




The views expressed in this paper are our own and do not reflect the official policy or position of
the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, U.S. Government, or the National Bureau
of Economic Research. We are extremely grateful to Mike Dinneen and Daryl Crowe at the
Military Health System and to Wendy Funk and Keith Hofmann at Kennell Inc. for making the
MHS data available to us and for fielding endless questions. We acknowledge funding from NIA
grant R01AG049898.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Michael D. Frakes, Jonathan Gruber, and Timothy Justicz. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Public and Private Options in Practice: The Military Health System
Michael D. Frakes, Jonathan Gruber, and Timothy Justicz
NBER Working Paper No. 28256
December 2020
JEL No. H1,H51,I18

                                           ABSTRACT

Recent debates over health care reform, including in the context of the Military Health System
(MHS) and Veterans Health Administration, highlight the dispute between public and private
provision of health care services. Using novel data on childbirth claims from the MHS and
drawing on the combination of plausibly exogenous patient moves and heterogeneity across bases
in the availability of base hospitals, we identify the impact of receiving obstetrical care on versus
off military bases. We find evidence that off-base care is associated with slightly greater resource
intensity, but also notably better outcomes, suggesting marginal efficiency gains from care
privatization.

Michael D. Frakes                                 Timothy Justicz
Duke University                                   United States Military Academy at West Point
School of Law                                     606 Thayer Road
210 Science Drive                                 West Point, NY 10996
Box 90362                                         timothy.justicz@westpoint.edu
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
Michael.frakes@law.duke.edu

Jonathan Gruber
Department of Economics, E52-434
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
gruberj@mit.edu
                                                           2




          Health systems throughout the world typically consist of some mix of public and private health

care delivery. In the U.S., most health care is delivered privately, albeit sometimes under contract with

public payers, but health care for the U.S. military and veterans has historically been delivered largely

through public systems. In many European nations, health care is typically delivered by public systems,

while individuals can often “top up” their care using private arrangements with (often the same)

providers. But one thing that appears common to all systems is a constant sense of dissatisfaction with

the mix. For example, in the UK, the Prime Minister faces pressure to undo the increased tendering of

private contracts that began in 2012 (Hussain 2020). On the other hand, in the United States, President

Trump recently signed the Veterans Affairs’ Mission Act, intended to allow some veterans to receive care

from community providers outside of public VA Medical Centers – and this is opposed by many

stakeholders, including the former head of the Veteran Affairs Department David Shulkin, who has

argued that the VA has special expertise in treating certain issues (Shulkin 2018).

          Therefore, understanding the implications of shifting care from public to private health systems,

and vice versa, is a key issue worldwide. But this has been a difficult issue to study because the

populations using these different systems are quite heterogeneous – and when individuals have a

choice between systems, they may do so in a way which is correlated with unobserved determinants of

health.

          Perhaps for this reason, there is little work of which we are aware comparing delivery between

public and private systems of care (particularly in the U.S). 2 There is a large literature that compares




2
 The one exception is a new working paper by Chan et al. (2020) which compares those who receive care inside or outside
of the VA health care system. We discuss the comparison between our results and theirs in the conclusion.
                                                             3




public versus private financing of care, such as through the Medicare Advantage program versus

traditional Medicare (e.g. Duggan, Gruber and Vabson, 2018; Curto et al., 2019), or through private

Medicaid HMOs versus government direct contracting with physicians (e.g. Geruso et al., 2019). But the

actual care delivered through these different financing mechanisms are often at similar sets of

providers, so that these differences primarily reflect contracting and care management differences

across the public and private sectors.

        Closer in spirit are a number of papers that compare delivery of care at publicly owned versus

privately owned hospitals; for example, Villa and Kane (2012) find that privatizing public hospitals in the

United States results in increased occupancy, shorter stays, and the loss of unprofitable services.

Various related studies in the international context use survey instruments to compare outcomes at

public and private hospitals, finding that private facilities have both higher prices and higher quality. 3

But these international investigations are often subject to selection bias, with papers using propensity

matching (Bjorvatn, 2018) and instrumental variables strategies (Pérotin et al., 2013) finding substantial

patient differences across the types of providers and little causal difference in quality. 4 Methodological

challenges aside, inquiries into public-versus-private ownership of a particular hospital are unable to

speak to the impact of an entirely public-versus-private system of care, which includes a comparison of

the full provision of all of a patient’s care—both inpatient and outpatient—and which includes a

comparison of the care management differences across the public and private sectors.




3
  See for example Andaleeb (2000), Camilleri and O’Callaghan (1998), Taner and Antony (2006), and Yesilada and Direktor
(2010).
4
  Systematic reviews by Tiemann et al. (2012) and Eggleston et al. (2008) conclude that existing studies do not demonstrate
a convincing gap between private and public facilities.
                                                             4




        Surprisingly, the best context for studying a mixed public-private system may be in the U.S.: the

Military Health System (MHS). The MHS is a $50.6 billion/year program that provides care to active-

duty military, their dependents, and military retirees, covering over 9 million eligible individuals.

Crucially, MHS beneficiaries have access to government-owned and run facilities on military bases, as

well as private providers that are contracted to the military through an insurance company. Care is split

roughly equally between the two sources; 49 percent of outpatient encounters and more than 67

percent of hospitalizations for MHS beneficiaries take place with private providers (TriCare

Management Activity, 2020).

        The proper division of care on and off military bases is a source of controversy and policy action.

In particular, the MHS announced plans in 2019 to repurpose roughly 17,000 medical providers

(Philpott, 2019)—a development that is likely to push MHS beneficiaries to receive care from civilian

facilities—and the Pentagon’s proposed 2021 budget calls for transitioning roughly 200,000 non-active-

duty beneficiaries to receiving care from civilian providers (Kime, 2020). Yet despite these policy

actions, there is no convincing evidence as to whether moving care to civilian providers raises or lowers

costs, or improves or deteriorates outcomes.

        In this paper, we provide such evidence. This evidence is immediately relevant to the $50.6

billion MHS, one of our nation’s largest health care programs. But it also has important implications for

other systems in the U.S., such as the VA; more broadly, it speaks to the rigorous and ongoing debate

between expanding or contracting the role of the private sector in delivering care in the U.S. 5


5
 For instance, in a recent New York Times commentary, Aaron Carroll makes on argument on the contraction side of this
debate, suggesting that the U.S. can learn “a thing or two” from Singapore’s “largely privately financed public delivery
system,” the “opposite of what we have in the United States (Carroll, 2019).
                                                     5




        A key feature of the military allows us to create a quasi-experimental analysis of the impact of

systems of care on patient treatment and outcomes: exogenous moves. Moves across military bases

are dictated by the needs of the military and are not determined by the choices of individuals which

might be endogenous to their tastes for medical care. Combining beneficiary moves with another key

feature of the military context—i.e., variation across bases in the availability of base hospitals—

provides us with exogenous variation in access to a public system of care. A further advantage of

studying the MHS is that there is a large sample of individuals who themselves receive care both on and

off base for a major medical intervention: childbirth. This allows us to hold patient characteristics

constant in comparing care delivered from different sources, as well as to take advantage of a detailed

set of quality measures facilitated by the childbirth setting. During our sample period there are

776,074 births to 590,353 dependents of active-duty military, and 43.63% of children are delivered at

MHS bases.

       To carry out this study, we turn to an innovative data set that has been little used by

economists, the Military Health System Data Repository data. These data provide complete medical

claims for all military personnel and their dependents over the 2003-2013 period. Critically, they

provide detail on care delivered on and off military bases.

       Our analysis follows the approach of Finkelstein et al. (2016) in a discrete event framework. We

consider every mother in our sample who gives birth at least twice. We then restrict our sample to all

mothers who move to a new base between births, and we compare those mothers who see a change in

the availability of military hospitals. That is, we compare mothers who move but both before and after

the move do (or do not) have a military hospital nearby, to mothers who move and who see a change
                                                       6




in their nearby access to military hospitals. In this way, we control for both underlying mother

characteristics, as well as any effect of moves per se. Following Finkelstein et al. (2016), we can

confirm that our estimates are causal by examining the previous births for all such mothers. We begin

with a transparent presentation of mean birth outcomes among movers. We then move to an

instrumental variables (IV) framework which allows us to carry out overidentification tests to confirm

that the results are similar for mothers moving either closer or further from base hospitals when they

give birth.

        We find that mothers delivering off-base use more resources than those delivering on-base;

total resource utilization appears to be about 1% higher for those using the private- rather than public-

care system, primarily driven by higher Cesarean section rates off-base. At the same time, we find that

the quality of care appears to be significantly higher for mothers delivering and receiving prenatal care

off-base. We find that mothers and babies receiving off-base care have fewer complications and

incidence of maternal or neonatal trauma. Our results suggest that, at current levels, shifting childbirth

from on- to off-base is likely to be cost effective.

        Our paper proceeds as follows. Section I provides background on the MHS. Section II discusses

our data, while Section III describes our empirical strategy. Section IV shows results, and Section V

concludes.



                                      Part I: Institutional Background

        The Military Health System (MHS) is the primary insurer for all active-duty military, their

dependents, and many military retirees through the TriCare program. Of the nearly 9 million patients
                                                              7




covered by TriCare, only 20% are actively serving in the US military. TriCare is not involved in health

care delivery in combat zones and operates separately from the Department of Veterans Affairs’

Veterans Health Administration (Schoenfeld et al. 2017). For TriCare enrollees, care can be delivered in

one of two ways: either directly at Military Treatment Facilities (MTFs) on military bases (direct care),

or purchased from private providers (purchased care).

         The 42 MTF hospitals in the U.S. provide both outpatient and inpatient care to TriCare

enrollees. 6 MTF care represents the classic public delivery mechanism. All resources are owned by one

of the branches of the U.S. military. Individual MTFs are managed by active-duty military officers who

draw a salary that is not tied to the performance of their MTF. Their incentives to perform well come

from a sense of duty as service-members and physicians, and from a desire to advance their careers

and attain positions of greater responsibility. Medical departments or services, such as OB-GYN, are led

by physicians or other providers as appointed by the MTF commander (HQDA, 2004).

         For those treated at MTFs, the care is delivered by a mix of providers including active-duty

military providers (49 percent), federal civilian employee providers (40 percent), and providers hired

using contract mechanisms who work full time at the MTF (11 percent) (Defense Health Program,

2018). Providers are primarily salaried with payment not explicitly tied to either quantity or quality of

care delivered.7 In almost every aspect, care at MTFs approximates the type of publicly provided care

delivered in the UK and other systems with public health care delivery.



6
 An additional 73 locations provide solely outpatient care.
7
 Military providers are on a military pay scale, while civilian providers are on the federal General Schedule (GS); both pay
systems include base pay, and local cost of living adjustments. Contractors are flexibly hired to meet local needs. The
contracting process solicits competitive bids to provide a service for an annual salary—once the contract is awarded the
MTF commander does not have authority to alter its terms or to provide additional awards (DoD, 2019).
                                                    8




       Alternatively, TriCare enrollees can receive “purchased care” outside the MTF. This care is

delivered by a network run by a contracting insurer—United HealthCare, in the case of our sample

period—where patients go to private providers within the insurer’s contracted network. This

purchased care system very much parallels the public purchase of private care, such as through the

Medicare Advantage program. However, contractors for TriCare are not paid a capitated rate per

beneficiary per month. They are instead paid for their services and manage payment to providers on a

per-claim basis. Therefore, by comparing direct to purchased care, we are comparing care provided

directly by the government to care provided by private contractors paid by the government.

       Providers under purchased care are paid Medicare rates, and all inpatient stays are subject to

bundling into a single Diagnosis Related Group (DRG) based on age, sex, diagnoses, procedures, and

discharge status using the Medicare Grouper. Individual discharges may also be further reimbursed for

high cost and length-of-stay outliers. The TriCare Reimbursement Manual notes that, while this system

is functionally identical to Medicare’s prospective payment system, weights and payments may vary

because of the characteristics and needs of the beneficiaries (OASD, 2018).

       In principle, enrollees who live within the “catchment area” of an MTF are supposed to go to

the MTF for care. This area was defined as 40 miles originally, though the military has shifted to time-

based boundaries. Our data show clearly that a mileage boundary rule was not rigorously enforced

during our sample period. Those who live closer to an MTF are much more likely to go there, but with a

more gradual fall off rather than a strong distance discontinuity.

       Importantly, moves are not under the control of active-duty enrollees. Moves within the

military are driven by Department of Defense personnel management strategies, motivated by staffing
                                                      9




needs across units. As personnel leave or are promoted, units must be reorganized so that each

formation has the appropriate composition. Official policy is that these decisions are made according to

“current qualifications and ability to fill a valid requirement,” and this takes priority over all other

considerations, including individual preferences or time at current locations. Furthermore, assignments

“will not be influenced by the employment, school enrollment, volunteer activities, or health of a

Service member’s family member” (DoD 2015). Several papers have demonstrated that the timing and

frequency of relocations is not subject to soldier preferences, including Lyle (2006), Lleras-Muney

(2010), Carter and Skimmyhorn (2017), and Carter and Wozniak (2018). Moves within a catchment area

may be endogenous since they are unlikely to be driven by personnel management needs; we

therefore exclude such moves from our analysis.



                                                Part II: Data

       Our data come from the Military Health System Data Repository, a comprehensive set of health

records collected at MTFs and from civilian providers reimbursed under TriCare. The data are

comprised of several separate repositories, including administrative eligibility files and separate sets of

claims data for direct and purchased care, both inpatient and outpatient. While TriCare does not pay

claims for direct care, “encounter data is captured to indicate the types of care received, who provided

the care, when the care was provided, etc” (OASD, 2012). These data are structured as if they were

claims and include detailed information such as physician identifiers, diagnosis and procedure codes,

length of hospitalization, and measures of treatment intensity. The sample period covers fiscal years

2003 through 2013.
                                                    10




       In our comparison of the care provided at MTF hospitals versus civilian facilities, we focus on

inpatient care for childbirth, for a number of reasons. First, we have a very large sample of births, as

this is the most common type of hospital admission for the MHS population. Second, many women in

the sample period deliver more than once, allowing us to control for unobservable heterogeneity by

focusing on within-mother differences in outcomes across births. Third, the delivery context affords us

the ability to explore both birth-specific measures of treatment intensity, like the prevalence of C-

sections, and detailed health outcomes, such as preventable complications. Finally, admission for birth

is nearly universal among pregnant women, minimizing the potential for selection into the sample on

the dimension of whether to receive care at all.

       We restrict our sample in two further ways to facilitate the comparability of on and off base

care. First, we exclude active-duty service members (who account for 21 percent of births) because, as

Frakes and Gruber (2019, 2020) document, they face different medical malpractice liability

environments which would limit our ability to extrapolate our findings to other settings. Second, we

remove retirees and their dependents (who account for only 3.5 percent of births) since under TriCare

rules they have different cost sharing on- and off-base.

       After restricting to mothers who give birth at least twice in our sample window, and who move

across military installations between births (for reasons discussed below), we have a sample of 87,005

women who are admitted for labor and delivery 182,779 times. Out of these admissions, 55 percent

are off-base, while 45 percent are at MTF hospitals.

       We use several variables to measure treatment intensity. The most important is Relative

Weighted Product (RWP), an encounter-specific metric created by the MHS to compare the intensities
                                                              11




of inpatient resource use across the direct- and purchased-care systems. This measure is a function of

both the DRG weight associated with the admission and the length of the inpatient stay. A RAND study

found an 80 percent correlation between RWP and cost for surgical cases (Farley et al. 1999). The use

of this RWP measure is necessary because, while the MHS records cost allocations to each inpatient

stay both on and off the base, they only record charges for stays off the base. 8 In addition to RWP, we

consider separately the rate of C-sections, the number of additional (non-C-section) procedures, the

length of stay for mothers (bed days) and newborns (bassinet days), and the number of diagnostic

procedures. 9

         In addition to treatment intensity, we consider several measures of care quality and patient

outcomes. First, we consider measures indicating delivery complications. Complications are very

common during childbirth, occurring in more than two-thirds of admissions in our sample. For example,

the single most common is trauma or lacerations of the perineum, occurring in 40 percent of

admissions.10 In addition to the presence of any complication, we consider severe and preventable

complications. Severe complications are a set of dangerous complications identified by the World

Health Organization, including for example severe preeclampsia, a potentially life-threatening

condition. Preventable complications include bleeding problems, such as post-partum hemorrhage and

post-partum coagulopathy, and several conditions of labor such as unusually fast delivery, called


8
  We winsorize RWP at the 99th percentile to reduce the influence of outliers.
9
  Specifically, we follow the list of diagnostic procedures coded in Frakes and Gruber’s (2019) analysis of diagnostic testing
during MHS inpatient stays. As explained in Frakes and Gruber (2019), some form of continuous electronic fetal heart
monitoring has become so common during labor and delivery now that the accessible CPT codes in the MDR database do
not allow us to distinguish deliveries with and without this particular diagnostic tool. Accordingly, our diagnostic analysis
can best be seen as capturing diagnostic tools other than continuous electronic fetal heart monitoring.
10
   We therefore exclude the least serious perineal lacerations from our measure. Nevertheless, nearly half of admissions
experience some other form of complication.
                                                            12




precipitate delivery, or unusually long labor. Note that these categories are not mutually exclusive—

bleeding problems are considered both severe and preventable.

        Second, we measure neonatal mortality, or infant deaths during the first 28 days after birth. 11

Third, we look at unplanned readmissions of the mother within 30 days of discharge. Unplanned

readmissions are inpatient admissions to short-term acute care hospitals within 30 days of discharge

from an “index admission” (CMS 2016). 12



                                                  Part III: Empirical Strategy

        The objective of this paper is to determine whether treatment intensity and quality differ

between the “direct” (public) and “purchased-care” (private) systems—i.e., between MTF-based care /

management and private-based care / management. We frame this empirical comparison by

considering off-base private care the treatment, making those who give birth at MTFs the untreated

group. The key inferential challenge for this exercise is that selection to purchased care is non-random.

Simply comparing outcomes of direct and purchased-care encounters will be confounded by

observable and non-observable differences between patients.




11
  Maternal mortality outcomes were, fortunately, too rare to offer precise estimates.
12
  We use a slightly modified version of the CMS “Planned Readmission Algorithm (Version 5.0).” We consider all admissions
for birth to be index admissions. We exclude readmissions on the same day, where CMS would include these if the primary
diagnosis was different. If there is more than one readmission within 30 days, only the first is considered a readmission.
Therefore we have a dummy variable for each birth admission that indicates whether the mother has an unplanned
readmission. A planned readmission is “defined as a non-acute readmission for a scheduled procedure,” and a few
procedures are always classified as planned, including organ transplants, chemotherapy, and rehabilitation. It is important
to note that admissions for either acute conditions or for complications are never categorized as planned.
                                                              13




         Finkelstein et al. (2016) develop an approach to address this concern in the context of Medicare

spending. They face a similar challenge: they are interested in determining the extent to which

geographic area differences in spending are due to true differences in area characteristics as opposed

to the selection of patients who choose to live in those areas. Their approach is to create a sample of

Medicare movers and to compare the change in movers spending based on the differences in average

area spending in their ex-ante and ex-post locations. In their context, the concern is that such moves

are endogenous – e.g. that unobservably sicker people will move to high spending areas, for example.

To address this, Finkelstein et al. (2016) study the outcomes of movers before they move – showing

that those who move to more and less expensive areas are quite similar before the move, but differ

thereafter in ways correlated with area expense.

         We can apply this same approach to the context of discrete medical events - with the further

advantage that military moves are exogenous.

         In particular, let i denote the mother’s initial location and j denote her final location, so that for

any outcome variable Yij is the outcome for those who initially deliver at location i and subsequently at

location j. Location (i or j) itself is specified so as to capture the availability of an MTF hospital at the

base where the individual is stationed. Specifically, location (i or j) takes on a value of 1 if individuals

live more than 40 miles away from an MTF hospital, and 0 if they live within 40 miles of an MTF

hospital. 13 So, for any outcome Y, we can measure the impact of losing access to an MTF hospital as

Y0,0 – Y0,1. Likewise, we can define the impact of gaining access to an MTF hospital as Y1,1 – Y1,0.


13
  We utilize this 40-mile specification as the baseline to account for situations in which mothers live close to two bases. If
the closest base does not have an MTF hospital but the second closest-base does, and the mother still lives within 40 miles
of the MTF hospital on this second-closest base, we treat this scenario as one in which the mother has access to an MTF
                                                              14




         There are two fundamental threats to identification in this context. The first is that movers and

non-movers are not comparable. As we argued above, moves are assigned by the military and should

not be endogenous to individual characteristics. But it is conceivable that pregnancy could impact the

timing of moves. Moreover, it is possible that moving itself impacts birth outcomes. We can readily

address both of these concerns by restricting our analysis only to mothers who move between births.

         The second is the potential endogeneity of move location, despite the institutional factors that

suggest exogenous moves. To assess this possibility, we pursue the discrete analogy to the approach of

Finkelstein et al. (2016) and examine the previous birth of movers. That is, if those movers who are high

risk are systematically moved to a base with an available base hospital, then this should show up in

those same mothers having higher risk first births.

         On a final note regarding potential endogeneity of moves, we restrict our inquiry to mothers

with multiple births who move between births to a new base location. That is, the variation we capture

in whether patients live within 40 miles of a base hospital derives from moves across bases that differ

in their availability of a base hospital, rather than from internal moves within bases that cross this 40-

mile threshold. Such within-base moves are more likely to be endogenous with respect to treatment

decisions.

         To transparently illustrate the power of this approach, we begin by showing simple comparisons

of our key measures for the four sets of possible move combinations. We start with the sample of

mothers whose first birth occurs when they live within 40 miles of an MTF hospital; within this sample,




hospital. Alternatively, as discussed below, we specify location as taking on a value of 1 if the base closest to where the
mother lives has an MTF. We find similar results across both approaches.
                                                       15




we then compare those whose second birth takes place after they move within 40 miles of a different

MTF hospital (Y0,0), to those whose second birth takes place after they move more than 40 miles away

from any MTF hospital (Y0,1). Likewise, we consider a sample of mothers whose first birth occurs when

they live more than 40 miles from an MTF hospital; within this sample, we then compare those whose

second birth takes place after they move more than 40 miles from a different MTF hospital (Y1,1), to

those whose second birth takes place after they move to within 40 miles of an MTF hospital (Y1,0).

        Of course, our approach has one other key difference from Finkelstein et al. (2016), which is

that we are only measuring an intent to treat effect, since some of our movers will be close to military

hospitals but still use non-military providers. To address this, we can implement an instrumental

variables strategy. In particular, we can estimate second stage estimates of the form:

        ΔYi,j = α + β*{I(0,1) – I(1,0)} + δ*I(i=0) + μX + ε                        (1)

Where ΔYi,j is the change in outcomes for a mother whose birth locations are i,j

I(0,1) is an indicator variable for delivering off-base and then on-base

I(1,0) is an indicator variable for delivering on-base and then off-base

I(i=0) is an indicator for initial birth on the base

        We control for certain observable birth characteristics (as of the second-birth) in X: dummies

for calendar year, age group, sponsor’s pay-grade and sponsor’s race; in a specification check, as

discussed below, X also includes dummies for various maternal risk-factors. To address the fact that

choice of delivery location is endogenous, we instrument the endogenous regressors in the equation

above. To identify the coefficient β, we use two instruments:
                                                               16




I(0,1) is an indicator variable for moving from within 40 miles of an MTF to a new location more than 40

miles from an MTF

I(1,0) is an indicator variable for moving more than 40 miles from an MTF to a new location within 40

miles of an MTF

           These instruments use the exogenous variation in MTF access from move location as an

instrument for the actual location of the birth. Moreover, the restriction of our model to incorporate

symmetric responses to moves both away from and towards military facilities allows us to implement

an overidentification test of our estimates.

           The first stage for this IV model is shown in Table A1. Both instruments are highly significant

with nearly equal and opposite signs. The F-statistic for the set of instruments is 557, well above the

standard suggested by Lee et al. (2020).

           One disadvantage of limiting our analysis to birth admissions is that pre-hospitalization care—

prenatal care—affects birth outcomes. This is potentially problematic to the extent women may receive

on-base prenatal care and deliver off-base, or vice versa. Indeed, there is a sizeable share of such

“mixed care”. Of women who live within 40 miles of an MTF and who deliver on-base and for whom

we can clearly identify pre-natal care, 22% get at least some of their pre-natal care off-base;

conversely, of women who live more than 40 miles from an MTF and deliver off-base, 20% get at least

some of their pre-natal care on-base. 14 We do not have a separate instrument for receipt of pre-natal

versus delivery care, so we are treating these as a package test of public-versus-private delivery. Below,

we attempt to assess the relative role of these two factors by looking at outcomes mostly determined


14
     This is partly because there are a number of military bases that don’t have an MTF but do have some medical services.
                                                    17




by pre-hospital care (low birthweight and premature births) and by looking at mothers who move

during pregnancy.




                                             Part IV: Results


Mean Outcomes

       As discussed above, we restrict the analysis to mothers with only two births who move between

births to a new base location. Table 2 illustrates balance for our sample at the first birth before

moving. This table has rows for each first-birth outcome, broken into sections for utilization and health

outcomes. The first four columns focus on those whose first birth occurs when they live within 40

miles of an MTF hospital. In the first two columns, we compare first-birth means of the indicated

measures for mothers whose second birth takes place after they move within 40 miles of a different

MTF hospital (Y0,0) with those for mothers whose second birth takes place after they move more than

40 miles away from any MTF hospital (Y0,1); the third and fourth columns shows the difference in the

relevant first-birth outcome between the two groups and its p-value. Likewise, in the second set of

four columns, we consider the sample of mothers whose first birth occurs when they live more than 40

miles from an MTF hospital, and compare first-birth outcomes of those whose second birth takes place

after they move more than 40 miles from a different MTF hospital (Y1,1) , to those whose second birth

takes place after they move within 40 miles of any MTF hospital (Y1,0). Finally, the last column shows

the p-value on a test of the difference between the two estimates in the third and seventh columns.
                                                    18




       This table is generally consistent with balance between our treatment and comparison groups

in the first birth before moving. Consider for example a key measure of outcomes, Cesarean section

deliveries. The C-section rate for first births is almost equal for those who live near an MTF hospital for

that first birth and then move, regardless of whether that moves takes them to a new location near an

MTF hospital (23.6%) or to one not near an MTF hospital (23.2%); the difference of 0.4% has a p-value

of only 0.275. Likewise, the C-section rate is nearly equal for those whose first birth occurs when they

live in a location that is far from an MTF and then move, regardless of whether that move takes them

to a new location far from an MTF hospital (25.1%) or to one that is near to an MTF hospital (25.4%);

the difference of 0.3% has a p-value of 0.472. And these two estimates are very similar, with the p-

value on the difference between the estimates of 0.772. It is notable that the estimates are higher for

the first birth for those whose first birth is not near an MTF, but this cannot be interpreted causally

since initial location is potentially endogenous.

       The evidence of balance is consistent for all measures of utilization in the case of the first

comparison, where we focus on those who live near an MTF for the first birth and then move. In the

case of the second comparison, we do find significant first-birth differences for several measures (bed

days, other procedures and diagnostics); however, in two of these measures, the differences in first-

birth means are opposite in direction to the corresponding differences in second births, suggesting that

any selection bias arising in who moves may bias against our ultimate findings.

       The next panel focuses on outcomes. We find that there is modest imbalance for the any-

complication measure (in the second comparison), although the impact is small and of the opposite
                                                       19




sign to what we find for the second birth comparison. Otherwise, outcomes are balanced for the first

birth.

         Table 3 carries out a parallel analysis, but now focused on second births to provide our,

arguably, causal estimates of delivering off-base. The results here are highly significant for most

measures of utilization and outcomes, suggesting higher rates of utilization when deliveries are off-

base. For example, for C-section delivery, we estimate that among those who live near an MTF hospital

for that first birth and then move, if they move to another location near an MTF hospital, their C-

section rate for the second birth is 27.7%, but if they move to a new location that is not near an MTF

hospital, their C-section rate is a much higher 29.5%; the difference of 1.9% is highly significant.

Likewise, for those whose first birth occurs when they live in a location that is far from an MTF hospital,

we find that if they move to a new location that is also far from an MTF hospital, their C-section rate is

29.8%, whereas if they move to a new location that is near an MTF hospital, their C-section rate is a

much lower 28.4%; the difference of 1.4% is also highly significant.

         For utilization, where there was either no significant differences in first births or differences in

the opposite direction, there is now significance in every single case for second births, other than for

bassinet days in the second comparison. This provides clear evidence that when mothers give birth

without access to an MTF hospital, their utilization is significantly higher.

         For outcomes, we find highly significant outcomes for both comparisons for all measures of

complications suggesting lower rates of complications when deliveries are off-base. The impacts are

sizeable, with the rate of severe complication being less than two-thirds as large for those who move

away from an MTF hospital rather than staying near an MTF hospital, and almost one-third higher for
                                                     20




those who stay away from an MTF hospital rather than moving close to one. We do not find any

significant impact on infant mortality, although this is partly due to imprecision; the estimates imply a

large reduction in infant mortality for those moving away from an MTF hospital or staying away from

an MTF hospital. And we see a large and significant reduction in unplanned readmissions for those

who move away from an MTF hospital or those who stay away from an MTF hospital.

       Overall, this clear and transparent presentation of the data yields two lessons. First, for those

mothers who move, an observation of first-birth characteristics poses few concerns over selection bias

compromising our investigation into the effects of off-base care. Second, there is strong evidence that

living far from an MTF hospital leads to higher rates of utilization and better outcomes.

       If moves to and from bases indeed provide an exogenous source of variation in MTF hospital

access, then one would tend to expect estimates of similar size but opposite magnitude when drawing

separately on moves away from MTF hospitals and on moves towards MTF hospitals. In Column 9 of

Table 3, we offer a preliminary test of this prediction. With respect to various measures—e.g., C-

sections—we cannot reject a symmetrical response (in absolute value terms) between a move that

provides MTF hospital access and a move that removes it. However, in other cases—e.g., severe

complications—we can reject same absolute effect sizes between these two types, generally finding

slightly larger absolute effect sizes when drawing on moves that bring patients farther away from MTF

hospitals. In the regression analysis and full IV analysis set forth below, we will formalize this

overidentification test, allowing for the inclusion of both covariates and for different first-stage

magnitudes across move types.
                                                    21




Regression Analysis

       Table 4 presents the results of estimating equation (1) above. We first show OLS estimates,

using the endogenous choice of delivering on versus off base. To the extent that this decision is driven

solely by location, then the OLS estimates can be interpreted causally; but to the extent that individuals

choose their delivery location based on underlying factors correlated with maternal or infant health,

these estimates may be biased. We then show IV estimates, along with the over-identification statistic

from the two instruments that arise from our two types of comparisons.

       The OLS estimates indicate highly significant impacts of delivering off-base on utilization and

outcomes, consistent with the findings from Tables 2 and 3. There are sizeable and significant

increases in all utilization measures other than additional (non-C-section) procedures. There are also

sizeable and significant reductions in complications, unplanned readmission, and infant mortality. The

results are generally consistent with the conclusions from Tables 2 and 3: receiving care off-base leads

to higher utilization but better outcomes.

       The second column of Table 4 shows IV results. The utilization results are once again generally

positive, albeit somewhat weaker than with OLS. We find that the total resource measure rises by

0.011, which is roughly 2% of the sample mean; that is, overall treatment intensity rises by 2%. There is

a highly significant rise of 0.14 bed days, which is about 6% of the sample mean. Bassinet days rise as

well, but the coefficient is much lower than under OLS and is not significant. As with OLS, there is a

positive but insignificant impact on other procedures, while diagnostic tests rise by 0.059, which is an

effect more than 50% of the sample mean.
                                                    22




       Our results are consistent with much of the impacts we see being driven by higher rates of

Cesarean delivery off-base. The rate of Cesarean section delivery is 2.9% higher off-base, which is more

than 10% of the sample mean. The average admission with a C-section has a RWP 57% higher than that

with no C-section. Therefore, our observed change in Cesarean delivery alone implies a 1.7% increase

in RWP. The remaining increase in treatment intensity can be attributed to increased length of stay.

       The outcome results are also generally sizeable and significant, indicating across the board

reductions in bad outcomes. The probability of any birth complication is reduced by 0.092, which is

roughly 20% of the sample mean. The reductions in severe complications of 2% and preventable

complications of 9% are even relatively larger, amounting to almost 50% of the sample mean for each.

Unplanned readmissions fall by 5 per 1000, which is about 40% of the sample mean. Infant mortality

falls substantially as well, and by even more than indicated by OLS, but the coefficient is smaller than

its standard error.

       These sizeable outcome results strongly imply that the delivery of care off-base is cost effective.

For example, the average amount allowed for C-section versus non-C-section deliveries off-base is

$2,422.39 (in 2020 dollars). Multiplied by the increased rate of C-sections, this is $70.25 per admission.

At the same time, the average readmission cost for our sample is $15,563. A 0.5% reduction in

readmissions therefore saves $78.26 per delivery – larger than the costs of increased utilization. This

ignores any additional health benefits from fewer complications.

       The next column shows the p-value of the overidentification test for this IV estimation. In

essence, the null hypothesis for this test is that we find similar effects when using moves away from

MTF hospitals as an instrument and when using moves towards an MTF hospital as an instrument.
                                                    23




Encouragingly, in every case but one, the overidentification test passes; there is a marginal rejection for

severe complications.



Specification Checks

       We consider three specification checks of these results in Table 5. First, in column 1, we assess

the impact of including potentially endogenous controls for diagnoses. These are all conditions that

would generally necessitate a C-section, including the following: previous C-section, breech

presentation, multiple birth, umbilical cord prolapse, placenta previa, and placental abruption. This

allows us to capture any observable health differences across the comparison groups, but at the same

time the coding of these conditions is done by the treating physician and may itself be endogenous to

source of care. In any case, including these controls has virtually no impact on the results.

       Second, in column 2, we parallel the analysis from Table 2 by looking at prior births. That is, we

estimate equation (1), but change the outcome to a level, rather than a first difference, and we use the

level of the outcome from the previous birth admission. Strikingly, we find no significant coefficients for

previous births, and almost all of these tests pass their associated overidentification tests. These

findings demonstrate sample balance at first births among movers, regardless of their ultimate moving

destination. Consistent with the conclusions we drew from Table 2, these findings ease concerns over

selection bias in the composition of moves associated with changes in MTF access.

       Finally, we consider an alternative way of assessing “closeness”. A strong finding in the health

economics literature is that individuals are much more likely to go to the hospital nearest to them (e.g.

McClellan et al, 1994). We therefore recreate our instrument not based on whether there is an MTF
                                                     24




hospital within 40 miles, but rather whether the nearest base has an MTF hospital. While correlated

with our primary instrument, it is not collinear, with a correlation coefficient of 0.79. Yet, as the last

two columns show, the results are quite similar.



Mechanisms

        The results so far demonstrate quite strongly that delivering at an off-base hospital leads to

higher utilization but better outcomes. In this section, we explore some mechanisms that might be

driving this result.

        As noted earlier, one open question is whether this result is driven by changes in prenatal care

or by changes in hospital care. We attempt to separate these mechanisms in two ways in Table 6.

First, we look at measures of infant outcomes that should be driven primarily by prenatal care: low

birth weight and premature births. For both of these outcomes, the primary medical determinants are

prenatal care, with hospital decisions having little impact. In the first two columns of Table 6, we show

the results of estimating equation (1) for these alternative measures. Despite finding strong impacts on

a variety of outcome measures in Tables 4 and 5, we find no effect on these measures, suggesting that

the impacts documented in Tables 4 and 5 are not arising from changes in prenatal care. At the same

time, even if some of the impact is arising through prenatal care, we may simply not have enough

power to detect effects on these outcomes.

        We therefore complement this approach with a second approach in Columns 3—6 of Table 6:

examining separately outcomes for mothers who move before versus during pregnancy. Just as the

location of moving is exogenous, the timing of moving should be exogenous as well. Therefore, if the
                                                     25




impacts we estimate are determined by prenatal care differences, we should see weaker impacts for

those who move during pregnancy. In fact, the results are quite comparable, and not statistically

distinguishable for any of our key outcomes. This suggests once again that it is hospital care

differences, not prenatal care differences, that are driving our results.

       A second question is what makes on-base hospital care different. There are a wide variety of

differences between MTF hospitals and non-MTF hospitals, ranging from the types of doctors that

practice there to the management to the compensation structure. We cannot decompose all these

alternatives; however, we do attempt to shed light on whether our findings arise due to one obvious

difference between on-base and off-base doctors: the fact that much of the on-base physician

workforce are active-duty military. Active-duty doctors may differ from civilian providers—whether

civilian providers working on-base or off—for various reasons, including their career progression

concerns, the chance that they may be deployed to combat zones, the frequency by which they may be

reassigned locations and their general professional dispositions.

       To explore this matter, we exploit the fact that care at MTF hospitals is provided by a mix of

active-duty physicians and contracted private sector physicians. We then test for differential off-base

effects (estimating our main model) depending on the share of on-base birth admissions in a given year

and a given MTF that have an attending provider who is active-duty military; specifically, we split the

on-base sample by above- and below-median active-duty OGBYN share. This share ranges from zero to

one in our data, with a median of 0.55. Overall, the results from this exercise are inconsistent with any

suggestion that the findings from Tables 4 and 5 are driven by the active-duty nature of the on-base
                                                    26




physician workforce. As demonstrated by Table 7, we do not find systematically different results when

focusing on bases with above- or below-median active-duty OBGYN shares.



                                           Part V: Conclusions


       Health care in all developed nations is delivered by a mix of public and private systems. A

central question for health care reform around the world is therefore the proper mix of public-versus-

private delivery. But addressing this question is challenging since it requires comparing individuals

across different health care systems who choose their location of care and therefore may differ in

unobservable ways.

       By studying the treatment of childbirth within the MHS, we can potentially address this

shortcoming. The MHS is the largest broadly-mixed health care delivery system in the U.S., providing us

with a large sample of births and excellent data with which to study treatments and outcomes.

Drawing on births from the same mother before and after exogenous military moves, along with

heterogeneity across bases in the availability of base hospitals, we are able to provide convincing

estimates of the impact of private-versus-public delivery systems. We find that delivering off-base leads

to higher treatment intensity – but better outcomes. The magnitudes of our findings imply that the

better off-base care is cost effective.

       This is a particularly timely finding given policy debates in the U.S. around the proper role of

public-versus-private systems. In the near term, the MHS is planning to greatly reduce manpower at

public facilities, while the Veterans Administration is considering allowing much broader use of private

providers to deliver care. More broadly, discussions of moving from a mixed public-private system to a
                                                    27




purely public system have become much more prominent in the U.S. Our findings provide some initial

evidence that can help inform these debates.

       A new working paper by Chan et al. (2020) undertakes similar analysis to ours within the VA.

They consider a different population, patients receiving emergency care, and follow Doyle et al. (2015)

in using exogenous variation in the propensity of ambulance companies to bring patients to VA versus

private hospitals. Their findings are quite different than ours: they find that VA hospitals have

significantly lower resource utilization and significantly better outcomes. Future work could usefully

decompose the sources of difference in these estimates.

       There are a variety of important next steps to further understand public-versus-private delivery

of health care in the U.S. and around the world. Extending this work to other types of treatments is an

obvious extension, although this likely requires alternative identification strategies given the

infrequency of multiple comparable treatments for the same patient. Addressing this issue in an

international context may be particularly important given the strong role played by public-versus-

private health care systems in other nations.
                                                  28




                                             Works Cited

Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. 2017. “Patient Safety Indicators Technical Specifications.”

       AHRQ Quality Indicators™. July. Retrieved from www.qualityindicators.ahrq.gov.

Almond, Douglas, Janet Currie, and Valentina Duque. 2018. "Childhood Circumstances and Adult

       Outcomes: Act II." Journal of Economic Literature, 56 (4): 1360-1446.

Andaleeb, Syed Saad. 2000. “Public and Private Hospitals in Bangladesh: Service Quality and Predictors

       of Hospital Choice.” Health Policy and Planning 15 (1): 95-102.

Bjorvatn, Afsaneh. 2018. “Private or Public Hospital Ownership: Does it Really Matter?” Social Science &

       Medicine 196: 166-174.

Camilleri, David, and Mark O’Callaghan. 1998. “Comparing Public and Private Hospital Care Service

       Quality.” International Journal of Health Care Quality Assurance 11(4): 127-133.

Carroll, Aaron. 2019. “What Can the U.S. Health System Learn from Singapore?” New York Times April

       22. Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/22/upshot/singapore-health-system-

       lessons.html.

Carter, Susan and William Skimmyhorn. 2017. “Much Ado about Nothing? New Evidence on the Effects

       of Payday Lending on Military Members.” Review of Economics and Statistics 99 (4): 606-21.

Carter, Susan and Abigail Wozniak. 2018. “Making Big Changes: The Impact of Moves on Marriage

       among U.S. Army Personnel.” NBER Working Paper 24300.

Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS). 2016. “All-Cause Hospital-Wide Measure Updates

       and Specifications Report: Hospital-Level 30-Day Risk-Standardized Readmission Measure—

       Version 5.0.”
                                                   29




Chan, David C., David Card, and Lowell Taylor. 2020. “Is There a VA Advantage? Evidence from Dually

       Eligible Veterans.” Working Paper.

Chandra, Amitabh and Douglas O. Staiger. 2007. “Productivity spillovers in health care: Evidence from

       the treatment of heart attacks,” Journal of Political Economy 115 (1): 103-40.

Curto, Vilsa, Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, Jonathan Levin, and Jay Bhattacharya. 2019. "Health Care

       Spending and Utilization in Public and Private Medicare." American Economic Journal: Applied

       Economics, 11 (2): 302-32.

Cutler, David. 2007. “The lifetime costs and benefits of medical technology.” Journal of Health

       Economics 26 (6): 1081-100.

Cutler, David, Jonathan S. Skinner, Ariel Dora Stern and David Wennberg. 2019. “Physician Beliefs and

       Patient Preferences: A New Look at Regional Variation in Health Care Spending.” American

       Economic Journal: Economic Policy 11 (1): 192-221.

Daysal, N. Meltem, Mircea Trandafir and Reyn van Ewijk. 2015. “Saving Lives at Birth: The Impact of

       Home Births on Infant Outcomes.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 7 (3): 28-50.

Defense Health Program. 2018. Fiscal Year 2019 Budget Estimates. January 23.

       https://comptroller.defense.gov/Portals/45/Documents/defbudget/fy2019/budget_justification

       /pdfs/09_Defense_Health_Program/Defense_Health_Program_FY2019_Budget_Estimates_FIN

       AL_February_2018.pdf

Department of Defense (DoD). 2015. “Procedures for Military Personnel Assignments.” DoD Instruction

       1315.18. October 28. Retrieved from

       https://www.esd.whs.mil/Portals/54/Documents/DD/issuances/dodi/131518p.pdf.
                                                  30




Department of Defense (DoD). 2019. “Civilian Personnel Management.” DoD Instruction 1400.25.

       August 9. Retrieved from

       https://www.esd.whs.mil/Portals/54/Documents/DD/issuances/140025/1400.25_Forward.pdf.

Doyle, Joseph J., John A. Graves, Jonathan Gruber, and Samuel A. Kleiner. 2015. “Measuring Returns to

       Hospital Care: Evidence from Ambulance Referral Patterns.” Journal of Political Economy 123

       (1): 170-214.

Duggan, Mark, Jonathan Gruber, and Boris Vabson. 2018. "The Consequences of Health Care

       Privatization: Evidence from Medicare Advantage Exits." American Economic Journal: Economic

       Policy, 10 (1): 153-86.

Eggleston, Karen, Yu-Chu Shen, Joseph Lau, Christopher H. Schmid, and Jia Chan. 2008. “Hospital

       Ownership and Quality of Care: What Explain the Different Results in the Literature?” Health

       Economics 17: 1345-1362.

Finkelstein, Amy, Matthew Gentzkow and Heidi Williams. 2016. “Sources of Geographic Variation in

       Health Care: Evidence from Patient Migration.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (4): 1681-

       1726.

Farley, Donna O., Dana P. Goldman, Grace M. Carter, Lois M. Davis, John B. Carleton, Geralyn K. Cherry,

       David A. Freund, and Timothy C. Rowe. 1999. Interim Report: Evaluation of the Medicare-DoD

       Subvention Demonstration. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation. Retrieved from

       https://www.rand.org/pubs/monograph_reports/MR1106z0.html.

Finkelstein, Amy, Matthew Gentzkow and Heidi Williams. 2019. “Place-Based Drivers of Mortality:

       Evidence from Migration.” NBER Working Paper 25975.
                                                      31




Fisher, Elliott S., David E. Wennberg, Therese A. Stukel, Daniel J. Gottlieb, and F. L. Lucas Etoile L.

       Pinder. 2003. “The implications of regional variations in Medicare spending: the content,

       quality, and accessibility of care. Part 1.” Annals of Internal Medicine 138 (4): 273-87.

Fisher, Elliott S., David E. Wennberg, Therese A. Stukel, Daniel J. Gottlieb, and F. L. Lucas Etoile L.

       Pinder. 2003. “The implications of regional variations in Medicare spending: the content,

       quality, and accessibility of care. Part 2.” Annals of Internal Medicine 138 (4): 288-89.

Frakes, Michael, and Jonathan Gruber. 2019. "Defensive Medicine: Evidence from Military Immunity."

       American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 11 (3): 197-231.

Frakes, Michael, and Jonathan Gruber. 2020. “Defensive Medicine and Obstetric Practices: Evidence

       from the Military Health System.” Journal of Empirical Legal Studies, 17 (1): 4-37.

Geruso, Michael, Timothy Layton, and Daniel Prinz. 2019. "Screening in Contract Design: Evidence from

       the ACA Health Insurance Exchanges." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 11 (2): 64-

       107.

Geweke, John, Gautam Gowrisankaran, and Robert Town. 2003. “Bayesian Inference for Hospital

       Quality in a Selection Model.” Econometrica 71 (4): 1215-38.

Gowrisankaran, Gautam and Robert Town, 2003. “Competition, payers, and hospital quality.” Health

       Services Research 38(6p1), 1403-22.

Headquarters Department of the Army (HQDA). 2009. “Clinical Quality Management.” Army Regulation

       40-68.
                                                     32




Hussain, Shadim. 2020. “What could privatization do to the NHS?” The Guardian, January 30. Retrieved

       from https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2020/jan/30/privatisation-nhs-childrens-

       services-austerity-private-providers.

Kime, Patricia. 2020. “Pentagon budget calls for ‘civilianizing’ military hospitals,” Military Times,

       February 10. Retrieved from https://www.militarytimes.com/news/your-

       military/2020/02/10/pentagon-budget-calls-for-civilianizing-military-hospitals/.

Lee, David S., Justin McCrary, Marcelo J. Moreira, and Jack Porter. 2020. “Valid t-ratio Inference for IV.”

       arXiv:2010.05058v1 [econ.EM].

Lleras-Muney, Adriana. 2010. “The Needs of the Army: Using Compulsory Relocation in the Military to

       Estimate the Effect of Air Pollutants on Children’s Health.” Journal of Human Resources 45: 549-

       90.

Lyle, David. 2006. “Using Military Deployments and Job Assignments to Estimate the Effect of Parental

       Absences and Household Relocations on Children’s Academic Achievement.” Journal of Labor

       Economics 24 (2): 319-50.

McClellan, Mark, Barbara J. McNeil and Joseph P. Newhouse. 1994. “Does more intensive treatment of

       acute myocardial infarction in the elderly reduce mortality? Analysis using instrumental

       variables.” Journal of the American Medical Association 272 (11): 859-66.

Miller, Douglas L., Na’ama Shenhav and Michel Z. Grosz. 2019. “Selection into Identification in Fixed

       Effects Models, with Application to Head Start.” NBER Working Paper 26174.
                                                    33




Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense (OASD) for Health Affairs. 2012. Guide for DoD Researchers

       on Using MHS Data. October 10. Retrieved from https://health.mil/Reference-

       Center/Publications/2012/10/10/Guide-for-DoD-Researchers-on-Using-MHS-Data.

Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense (OASD) for Health Affairs. 2018. TriCare Reimbursement

       Manual (TRM) Version 6010.61-M. May 24. Retrieved from

       https://manuals.health.mil/pages/DisplayManualHtmlFile/TR15/44/AsOf/TR15/TR15TOC.html.

Pérotin, Virginie, Bernarda Zamora, Rachel Reeves, Will Bartlett, and Pauline Allen. 2013. “Does

       Hospital Ownership Affect Patient Experience? An Investigation Into Public-Private Sector

       Differences in England.” Journal of Health Economics. 32(2013): 633-646.

Philpott, Tom. 2019. “More Than 17,000 Uniformed Medical Jobs Eyed for Elimination.” Military.com,

       January 10. Retrieved from https://www.military.com/daily-news/2019/01/10/more-17000-

       uniformed-medical-jobs-eyed-elimination.html.

Schoenfeld, Andrew J., Wei Jiang, Mitchel B. Harris, Zara Cooper, Tracey Koehlmoos, Peter A. Learn,

       Joel S. Weissman, and Adil H. Haider. 2017 "Association between race and postoperative

       outcomes in a universally insured population versus patients in the state of California." Annals

       of Surgery 266 (2): 267-273.

Shulkin, David. 2018. “Privatizing the V.A. Will Hurt Veterans.” The New York Times, March 28.

       Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/28/opinion/shulkin-veterans-affairs-

       privatization.html.

Taner, Tolga, and Jiju Antony. 2006. “Comparing Public and Private Hospital Care Service Quality in

       Turkey.” Leadership in Health Services 19 (2): i-x.
                                                   34




Tiemann, Oliver, Jonas Screyögg, and Reinhard Busse. 2012. “Hospital Ownership and Efficiency: A

       Review of Studies with Particular Focus on Germany.” Health Policy 104: 163-171.

TriCare Management Activity. 2020. “Evaluation of the TRICARE Program: Access, Cost, and Quality

       Data through Fiscal Year 2019.” Fiscal Year 2020 Report to Congress, June 29. Retrieved from

       https://www.health.mil/Reference-Center/Reports/2020/06/29/Evaluation-of-the-TRICARE-

       Program-Fiscal-Year-2020-Report-to-Congress.

Villa, Stefano, and Nancy Kane. 2013. "Assessing the Impact of Privatizing Public Hospitals in Three

       American States: Implications for Universal Health Coverage." Value in Health 16(1): S24–S33.

Yesilada, Figen, and Ebru Direktor. 2010. “Health Care Service Quality: A Comparison of Public and

       Private Hospitals.” African Journal of Business Management 4(6): 962-971.
                                                         35




                                         Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
                                              Mean                  SD             25th                  75th
                                                                                Percentile            Percentile
 Bed Days                                     2.315             1.890               2                     3
 Bassinet Days                               2.467              4.535                1                    2
 RWP                                         0.499              0.154              0.392                0.695
 Procedures                                  2.256              1.263                1                    3
 Diagnostics                                 0.085              0.748                0                    0
 C-Section                                   0.262              0.440                0                    1
 Any Complication                            0.494              0.500                0                    1
 Severe Complication                         0.041              0.199                0                    0
 Preventable Complication                    0.223              0.416                0                    0
 Infant Mortality (per 1,000)                1.118             33.251                0                    0
 Unplanned Readmission                      12.372            110.540                0                    0
 (per 1,000)
 Low Birth Weight                            0.033              0.178                 0                    0
 Premature                                   0.057              0.232                 0                    0
 Age                                        26.933              4.844                23                   30
 White                                       0.777              0.416                1                    1
 Black                                       0.104              0.305                 0                    0
 Number of Admissions                        182,779
 Number of Mothers                            87,005
Notes: The sample consists of mothers who give birth at least twice, and who move across bases between births.
Bed Days is the mother’s length of stay. Bassinet Days is the child’s length of stay, or the average length of stay
for a multiple birth. RWP is the Relative Weighted Product, a measure designed by the Military Health System
(MHS) to capture relative treatment intensity between on and off-base admissions. Procedures is the count of
procedure codes recorded for the admission. Diagnostics is the number of purely diagnostic procedures,
recorded elsewhere in the claims data. C-Section is a dummy equal to one for mothers who gave birth via
Cesarean section. Any Complication is a dummy equal to one for admissions where at least one complication was
recorded, excluding first- and second-degree perineal laceration. Severe Complication is a dummy equal to one
when an admission includes a diagnosis for any of the following conditions: postpartum hemorrhage, severe pre-
eclampsia, eclampsia, rupture of uterus, sepsis, or septicemia. Preventable Complication is a dummy equal to
one when admission includes a diagnosis for any of the following conditions: fetal distress affecting management
of mother, abnormality in fetal heart rate or rhythm, postpartum hemorrhage, long labor, uterine inertia,
precipitate labor, or shoulder dystocia. Infant Mortality is measured within 28 days of birth. Unplanned
Readmission is categorized according to the CMS algorithm. Low Birth Weight is an indicator for birth weight
below 5 pounds, 8 ounces (2,500 grams). Premature is an indicator for delivery prior to full gestational age. Age
is the age of the mother in years at the time of delivery. White and Black are indicators for the race of the active-
duty sponsor since the mother’s race is not observed.
                                                                              36




                                                            Table 2: First Birth Means
                                             Starting with MTF Access                 Starting Without MTF Access                                 (3)+(7)=0
                                         (1)         (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)         (6)        (7)     (8)                               (9)
                                        MTF/       MTF/                    p-     No MTF/ No MTF/                   p-
                                        MTF       No MTF Difference value         No MTF       MTF     Difference value                           p-value
Panel 1: Utilization
 Bed Days                              2.535           2.530        -0.005      0.792         2.475          2.519       0.045         0.014         0.078
  Bassinet Days                        2.596           2.613         0.017      0.700         2.620          2.622       0.002         0.963         0.711
  RWP                                  0.496           0.496        -0.001      0.630         0.497          0.498       0.001         0.752         0.894
  Procedures                           2.492           2.486        -0.005      0.696         2.316          2.289       -0.027        0.043         0.045
  Diagnostics                          0.062           0.059        -0.003      0.607         0.068          0.088       0.020         0.004         0.022
  C-Section                            0.236           0.232        -0.004      0.275         0.251          0.254       0.003         0.472         0.772
Panel 2: Outcomes
 Any Complication                      0.594           0.585        -0.009      0.056         0.543          0.530       -0.012        0.025         0.000
  Severe Complication                  0.053           0.056         0.004      0.079         0.041          0.040       -0.001        0.755         0.178
  Preventable Complication             0.292           0.286        -0.005      0.220         0.233          0.225       -0.008        0.092         0.012
  Infant Mortality (per 1,000)         1.420           1.462         0.042      0.908         1.286          1.223       -0.063        0.872         0.972
  Unplanned Readmission
  (per 1,000)                         13.876         15.429         1.552       0.167       10.304         11.125         0.820        0.465         0.065
 N                                    31,671         17,582                                  14,967         19,820
Notes: Column 1 shows means for first-birth outcomes for mothers who lived within 40 miles of an MTF hospital, and who moved to within 40 miles of an MTF
hospital at a different base at the time of their second birth. Column 2 shows first-birth means for mothers who also lived within 40 miles of an MTF hospital,
but who moved to a different base and were no longer within 40 miles of an MTF hospital at the time of their second birth. Column 3 lists the difference between
these groups. Column 4 gives the p-value from a t-test where the null hypothesis is that the means in column 1 and column 2 are the same. Columns 5 and 6
show first-birth outcome means for mothers who did not live within 40 miles of an MTF hospital. Mothers in column 5 moved to a different base, but remained
more than 40 miles away from an MTF hospital, while those in column 6 moved to within 40 miles of an MTF hospital at a different base by the time of their
second birth. Column 7 lists the difference between the means in columns 5 and 6, while column 8 reports the p-value for a t-test where the null hypothesis is
that there is no difference. The p-values reported in column 9 are from a t-test where the null hypothesis is that the sum of columns 3 and 7 is zero.
                                                                             37




                                                          Table 3: Second Birth Means
                                                 Starting with MTF Access             Starting Without MTF Access                                 (3)+(7)=0
                                             (1)      (2)        (3)       (4)      (5)        (6)        (7)     (8)                                (9)
                                            MTF/    MTF/                    p-   No MTF/ No MTF/                   p-
                                            MTF No MTF Difference value No MTF                 MTF    Difference value                             p-value
 Panel 1: Utilization
  Bed Days                                  2.132       2.225      0.092          0.000       2.211          2.143        -0.068       0.001         0.122
  Bassinet Days                             2.294       2.433      0.139          0.001       2.443          2.392        -0.051       0.319         0.050
  RWP                                       0.501       0.509      0.008          0.000       0.508          0.504        -0.005       0.011         0.026
  Procedures                                2.122       2.183      0.062          0.000       2.186          2.097        -0.089       0.000         0.187
  Diagnostics                               0.084       0.122      0.038          0.000       0.111          0.088        -0.023       0.008         0.044
  C-Section                                 0.277       0.295      0.019          0.000       0.298          0.284        -0.014       0.004         0.205
 Panel 2: Outcomes
  Any Complication                         0.460        0.398     -0.062          0.000       0.398          0.454         0.056       0.000         0.027
  Severe Complication                      0.041        0.026     -0.015          0.000       0.031          0.039         0.008       0.000         0.000
  Preventable Complication                 0.214        0.151     -0.063          0.000       0.150          0.205         0.055       0.000         0.001
  Infant Mortality (per 1,000)             0.948        0.780     -0.168          0.557       1.056          0.728        -0.327       0.306         0.158
  Unplanned Readmission (per              13.179       10.730     -2.449          0.018       8.246         14.010         5.764       0.000         0.025
  1,000)
 N                                        31,671        17,582                                 14,967        19,820
Notes: Column 1 shows means for second-birth outcomes for mothers who lived within 40 miles of an MTF hospital at the time of first birth, and who moved to
within 40 miles of an MTF hospital at a different base. Column 2 shows second-birth outcome means for mothers who also lived within 40 miles of an MTF hospital
at the time of first birth, but who moved to a different base and were no longer within 40 miles of an MTF hospital. Column 3 lists the difference between
these groups. Column 4 gives the p-value from a t-test where the null hypothesis is that the means in column 1 and column 2 are the same. Columns 5 and 6
show second-birth outcome means for mothers who did not live within 40 miles of an MTF hospital at the time of first birth. Mothers in column 5 moved to a
different base, but remained more than 40 miles away from an MTF hospital, while those in column 6 moved to within 40 miles of an MTF hospital at a different
base. Column 7 lists the difference between the means in columns 5 and 6, while column 8 reports the p-value for a t-test where the null hypothesis is that there
is no difference. The p-values reported in column 9 are from a t-test where the null hypothesis is that the sum of columns 3 and 7 is zero.
                                                     38




                                 Table 4: Differenced Outcomes
                                                       OLS                                 IV
                                                      (1)                          (2)            (3)
                                                       β                           β            p-value
 Bed Days                                          0.226***                    0.141***          0.793
                                                    (0.034)                      (0.044)
 Bassinet Days                                     0.418***                     0.110             0.790
                                                    (0.065)                    (0.086)
 RWP                                                   0.014***                0.011***           0.571
                                                         (0.002)                 (0.002)
 Procedures                                               0.023                 0.096             0.749
                                                        (0.077)                (0.110)
 Diagnostics                                            0.102***               0.059***           0.976
                                                         (0.009)                 (0.014)
 C-Section                                              0.035***               0.029***           0.555
                                                         (0.004)                 (0.005)
 Any Complication                                      -0.090***              -0.092***           0.051
                                                         (0.016)                (0.020)
 Severe Complication                                   -0.019***              -0.020***           0.043
                                                         (0.003)                (0.004)
 Preventable Complication                              -0.082***              -0.089***           0.587
                                                         (0.017)                (0.019)
 Infant Mortality (per 1,000)                             -0.078                -0.248            0.938
                                                         (0.281)               (0.586)
 Unplanned Readmissions (per 1,000)                    -5.937***              -5.032***           0.652
                                                         (1.346)                (1.874)
 N                                                         95,774              95,774
Notes: All outcomes in this table are the first difference between the current and prior birth admission.
All mothers in the sample moved across bases between births. Column 1 shows OLS estimates of the effect
of a change in off-base admission between the current and prior birth. Possible values for the change in
off-base are 1 (for a change from on to off-base), 0 (for no change), and -1 (for a change from off to on
base). This specification includes an indicator for whether the prior birth took place off base. Column 2
shows 2SLS estimates where the change in off-base admission is instrumented with indicators for a move
from MTF hospital to no MTF hospital, or from no MTF hospital to MTF hospital. MTF hospital is defined
as the zip code of residence being within 40 miles of a hospital-level MTF with inpatient services. All moves
are across bases. Column 3 reports the p-value from an overidentification test, where the null hypothesis
is that the instruments are uncorrelated with the error term. The previous birth location indicator is also
instrumented with an indicator for whether the mother lived within 40 miles of an MTF hospital. All
regressions include controls for calendar year, age group, sponsor’s pay grade, and sponsor’s race.
Standard errors are clustered at the base level.
                                                          39




                                     Table 5: Specification Checks
                         Risk Factor Controls       Lagged Outcomes                       Alternate Instrument
                             (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)                         (5)         (6)
                              β        p-value         β        p-value                         β        p-value
 Bed Days               0.147***            0.711          -0.023           0.486          0.143***             0.342
                          (0.045)                          (0.022)                          (0.047)
 Bassinet Days             0.115            0.833           0.081           0.670            0.145              0.657
                          (0.086)                          (0.055)                          (0.099)
 RWP                    0.011***            0.257           0.001           0.091          0.009***             0.046
                          (0.002)                          (0.002)                          (0.003)
 Procedures                0.098            0.788           0.000           0.238            0.052              0.648
                          (0.110)                          (0.022)                          (0.111)
 Diagnostics            0.061***            0.984          -0.007           0.075          0.066***             0.219
                          (0.014)                          (0.007)                          (0.017)
 C-Section              0.030***            0.234           0.002           0.074          0.028***             0.122
                          (0.005)                          (0.006)                          (0.006)
 Any
 Complication            -0.091***          0.079           0.002           0.013          -0.093***            0.298
                           (0.019)                         (0.005)                           (0.021)
 Severe
 Complication            -0.020***          0.041           0.004           0.578          -0.021***            0.173
                           (0.004)                         (0.002)                           (0.004)
 Preventable
 Complication            -0.089***          0.746           0.003           0.148          -0.095***            0.556
                           (0.019)                         (0.004)                           (0.019)
 Infant Mortality           -0.224          0.957           0.049           0.642             0.272             0.337
 (per 1,000)               (0.588)                         (0.440)                           (0.556)
 Unplanned
 Readmissions            -5.029***          0.680           0.488           0.643          -5.539***            0.899
 (per 1,000)               (1.870)                         (1.059)                           (2.090)
 N                          95,774                         95,774                               95,774
Notes: The outcomes considered in columns 1-2 and 5-6 are the first difference between the current and prior birth
admission. Columns 1 and 2 show results from a model that is similar to the main specification, with the addition of
risk factors controls. These are indicators for conditions that increase utilization, primarily through necessitating C-
sections: previous C-section, breech presentation, multiple birth, umbilical cord prolapse, placenta previa, and
placental abruption. Outcomes in columns 3-4 are the level from the previous birth. This model does not include risk
factor controls. Columns 5-6 report results from a model with an alternate set of instruments constructed using an
indicator for whether the nearest base has an MTF hospital. All regressions include controls for calendar year, age
group, sponsor’s pay grade, and sponsor’s race. Standard errors are clustered at the base level.
                                                            40




                                         Table 6: Prenatal Care Tests
                                     All                    Moved                            Moved Before
                                                            During                            Pregnancy
                                                          Pregnancy
                                (1)         (2)        (3)          (4)                         (5)           (6)
                                 β        p-value       β        p-value                         β         p-value
 Low Birth Weight              0.000       0.941      -0.004       0.553                       0.003        0.506
                              (0.003)                (0.004)                                  (0.004)
 Premature                    -0.001       0.857      -0.005       0.756                       0.003         0.545
                              (0.003)                (0.006)                                  (0.005)
 Bed Days                                                  0.135***         0.857            0.143***        0.628
                                                             (0.050)                          (0.052)
 RWP                                                       0.010***         0.756            0.011***        0.639
                                                             (0.003)                          (0.003)
 Procedures                                                   0.089         0.630              0.100         0.959
                                                            (0.113)                           (0.110)
 Diagnostics                                               0.061***         0.724            0.058***        0.715
                                                             (0.016)                          (0.022)
 Bassinet Days                                               -0.113         0.740            0.268**         0.729
                                                            (0.100)                           (0.121)
 C-Section                                                 0.026***         0.274            0.031***        0.918
                                                             (0.005)                          (0.006)
 Any Complication                                         -0.090***         0.279           -0.093***        0.149
                                                             (0.023)                          (0.020)
 Severe                                                   -0.023***         0.411           -0.018***        0.075
 Complication                                                (0.005)                          (0.005)
 Preventable                                              -0.094***         0.750           -0.085***        0.617
 Complication                                                (0.021)                          (0.020)
 Infant Mortality                                            -0.100         0.987              -0.355        0.886
 (per 1,000)                                                (0.798)                           (0.798)
 Unplanned                                                 -6.770**         0.792             -3.720*        0.296
 Readmissions (per                                           (2.716)                          (2.024)
 1,000)
 N                            95,774                         40,332                            55,442
Notes: All outcomes considered in this table are the first difference between the current and prior birth admission.
Columns 1 and 2 estimate the effect of off-base admission on the probability of low birth weight or premature birth
using our main specification. The remaining columns split the sample into women who moved during their
pregnancy, and women who moved prior to their pregnancy. Moves are defined as changes in the nearest base
measured using zip code. All regressions include controls for calendar year, age group, sponsor’s pay grade, and
sponsor’s race. Standard errors are clustered at the base level.
                                                    41




                     Table 7: Proportion Active-Duty OBGYNs
                                   Below Median                                 Above Median
                                      (1)         (2)                             (3)        (4)
                                       β        p-value                            β       p-value
 Bed Days                         0.150**        0.074                          0.137**     0.296
                                   (0.064)                                       (0.055)
 Bassinet Days                      0.078        0.953                         0.205**      0.884
                                  (0.131)                                       (0.098)
 RWP                             0.010***        0.174                         0.013***     0.979
                                   (0.003)                                       (0.003)
 Procedures                         0.167        0.169                            0.051     0.035
                                  (0.128)                                       (0.124)
 Diagnostics                     0.050***        0.037                         0.070***     0.178
                                   (0.019)                                       (0.019)
 C-Section                       0.027***        0.192                         0.035***     0.697
                                   (0.006)                                       (0.007)
 Any Complication                -0.072**        0.087                        -0.107***     0.180
                                  (0.031)                                       (0.020)
 Severe Complication            -0.017***        0.165                        -0.021***     0.152
                                  (0.006)                                       (0.005)
 Preventable Complication        -0.077**        0.590                        -0.097***     0.975
                                  (0.031)                                       (0.016)
 Infant Mortality                  -0.273        0.597                           -0.217     0.338
 (per 1,000)                      (0.870)                                       (0.730)
 Unplanned Readmissions            -1.860        0.767                        -8.285***     0.324
 (per 1,000)                      (3.331)                                       (2.303)
 N                                        41,348                                 50,282
Notes: All outcomes considered in this table are the first difference between the current and prior birth
admission. The sample is split by the prevalence of active-duty military OBGYNs at the nearest MTF hospital.
The prevalence of active-duty military OBGYNs is measured as the proportion of birth admissions where the
attending physician is on active-duty. The median is 55%. All regressions include controls for calendar year,
age group, sponsor’s pay grade, and sponsor’s race. Standard errors are clustered at the base level.
                                     42




                          Table A1: First Stage
                                                      ΔOff-Base
                                                          (1)
                                                           β
MTF Hospital to No MTF Hospital                       0.674***
                                                        (0.019)
No MTF Hospital to MTF Hospital                       -0.638***
                                                        (0.013)
F-Statistic                                            556.836
p-value                                                  0.184
Outcome Mean                                             0.013
R2                                                       0.437
N                                                       17,003
Notes: Column 1 shows coefficients from an OLS regression where the
outcome is the change in off-base status from the previous to the current
birth. The p-value is for an F-test where the null hypothesis is that the two
instruments are opposite and equal. The model includes controls for
calendar year, age group, sponsor’s pay grade, and sponsor’s race. Standard
errors are clustered at the base level.
