                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                LEAD EXPOSURE REDUCES ACADEMIC PERFORMANCE:
                  INTENSITY, DURATION, AND NUTRITION MATTER

                                       Alex Hollingsworth
                                           Mike Huang
                                          Ivan J. Rudik
                                       Nicholas J. Sanders

                                       Working Paper 28250
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28250


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020




Hollingsworth: O'Neill School of Public and Environmental Affairs, Indiana University. Huang:
Charles H. Dyson School of Applied Economics and Management, Cornell University. Rudik:
Charles H. Dyson School of Applied Economics and Management, Cornell University. Sanders:
Department of Policy Analysis and Management, Cornell University, and National Bureau of
Economic Research. We thank Ludovica Gazze, Kevin Schnepel, Barton Willage, and seminar
participants at Indiana University and the University of Tennessee for comments. Disclaimer:
Researcher(s) own analyses calculated (or derived) based in part on data from The Nielsen
Company (US), LLC and marketing databases provided through the Nielsen Datasets at the Kilts
Center for Marketing Data Center at The University of Chicago Booth School of Business. The
conclusions drawn from the Nielsen data are those of the researcher(s) and do not reflect the
views of Nielsen. Nielsen is not responsible for, had no role in, and was not involved in analyzing
and preparing the results reported herein. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Alex Hollingsworth, Mike Huang, Ivan J. Rudik, and Nicholas J. Sanders. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Lead Exposure Reduces Academic Performance: Intensity, Duration, and Nutrition Matter
Alex Hollingsworth, Mike Huang, Ivan J. Rudik, and Nicholas J. Sanders
NBER Working Paper No. 28250
December 2020
JEL No. I14,I21,Q51,Q53

                                          ABSTRACT

We leverage a natural experiment, where a large national automotive racing organization
switched from leaded to unleaded fuel, to study how ambient lead exposure and nutrition impact
learning in elementary school. The average race emitted more than 10 kilograms of lead -- a
quantity similar to the annual emissions of an airport or a median lead-emitting industrial facility
in the United States. Increased levels and duration of exposure to lead negatively affect academic
performance, shift the entire academic performance distribution, and negatively impact both
younger and older children. We provide quasi-experimental evidence linking measured quantities
of lead emissions to decreased test scores, information essential for policies addressing ambient
lead and emission sources. Exposure to 10 additional kilograms of lead emissions reduces
standardized test scores by 0.07 standard deviations. This corresponds to an average income
reduction of $9,000 per treated student in present value terms, an effect of similar magnitude as
improving teacher value added by one standard deviation, reducing class size by 10 students, or
increasing school spending per pupil by $2,500. The marginal impacts of lead are larger in
impoverished, non-white counties, and among students with greater duration of exposure, even
after controlling for total exposure. Factors correlated with better nutrition -- most notably
consumption of calcium-rich foods like milk -- help mitigate the link between lead exposure and
reduced educational outcomes. These results show that improved child nutrition can help combat
the negative effects of lead, addressing several prominent social issues including racial test gaps,
human capital formation across income groups, and disparities in regional environmental justice.

Alex Hollingsworth                               Ivan J. Rudik
Indiana University                               Cornell University
Rm 329                                           Dyson School of Applied Economics
1315 E. Tenth St.                                and Management
Bloomington, IN 47405                            Ithaca, NY 14853
hollinal@indiana.edu                             irudik@cornell.edu

Mike Huang                                       Nicholas J. Sanders
Warren Hall                                      Cornell University
Cornell University                               Kennedy Hall, Room 422
Ithaca, NY 14850                                 Ithaca, NY 14853
United States                                    and NBER
jh2737@cornell.edu                               njsanders@cornell.edu
    Education drives future income, productivity, and upward mobility. The United States
devotes a large and growing share of resources to the promotion of education through formal
schooling, with public school spending in the United States exceeding $12,000 per student in
2017, and accounting for 30% of state and 8% of national expenditures (U.S. Census Bureau,
2017). A large body of work examines the education production function, showing how a
wide range of inputs drive student achievement (Hanushek, 2020). Some inputs directly
relate to formal schooling, such as teaching quality, pedagogy, and class size (Krueger, 1999;
Chetty et al., 2011, 2014b); while others are primarily determined outside the bounds of
school, such as socioeconomic status, sleep, the environment, and nutrition (Ladd, 2012;
Frisvold, 2015; Ebenstein et al., 2016; Anderson et al., 2018; Jagnani, 2020; Park et al.,
2020; Park, 2020).
    Using a unique natural experiment in lead exposure, we identify the role of two impor-
tant and interacting education inputs: environmental quality and nutrition. We show that
exposure to airborne lead--which causes neurological damage, increases impulsiveness, and
hinders learning--has a negative and cumulative effect on student performance. In accor-
dance with the public health literature (e.g., Goyer, 1995), we find that proper nutrition
weakens the link between lead exposure and educational outcomes, and that the negative
effects of lead are greatest in areas with larger shares of minority and impoverished students.
Taken jointly, these results indicate that improved child nutrition can help address several
prominent social issues, including racial test gaps, human capital formation across income
groups, and environmental justice.
    Separately identifying the role of lead--or any education input--is challenging, as many
inputs are co-determined or endogenous. Education inputs also display complementarities
where changes in one affect the marginal benefit of others. For example, improvements in
teacher quality and reductions in class size have differential effects across income groups and
race (Krueger, 1999; Chetty et al., 2014b), and socioeconomically disadvantaged students are
generally more costly to educate (Duncombe and Yinger, 2005).1 These interdependencies
provide a rationale for policies that improve life outside of the classroom, enabling the argu-
ment that that educational outcomes cannot be meaningfully improved until core disparities
are addressed (Ladd, 2012).
    We estimate the causal effect of lead on test scores by taking advantage of a natural ex-
periment: in 2007 the National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing (NASCAR) switched
from leaded to unleaded fuel, generating an exogenous decrease in lead exposure for areas
  1
    There are substantial gaps in educational attainment by race and income (Fryer and Levitt, 2004;
Reardon, 2018), which persist even when comparing students within the same school (Fryer and Levitt,
2006).



                                                 1
near racetracks.2 The sudden deleading generated a permanent drop in the annual flow of
lead emissions in areas near racetracks and left lead exposure unaffected in farther locations.
Hollingsworth and Rudik (Forthcoming) (hereafter HR) show how NASCAR's deleading re-
duced ambient lead concentrations, children's lead poisoning rates, and elderly mortality.
After 2007, each cohort at exposed schools experienced less lifetime lead exposure than the
preceding cohort, allowing us to compare test scores within schools and cohorts with dif-
ferential exposure to lead emissions. Our identification uses data on the location, timing,
and quantity of emissions. This allows us to disentangle the effects of lead from persistent
socioeconomic confounders (e.g., household income) and time-varying confounders (e.g., co-
emitted pollutants).
    We document several new and important facts. First, we provide quasi-experimental
evidence linking lead emissions, rather than blood lead levels, to decreased test scores.3 Most
research focuses on the latter, and while blood lead is a direct measure of current health
conditions, it is net of several other factors -- including any mitigating behavior taken in
response to blood lead information (e.g., hiring tutors, increasing parental attention) and
selection into screening.4 Our measure of exposure does not suffer from such mitigating
factors or selection since it was a largely unknown source of exposure. Unlike prior work,
which often does not document the amount or source of exposure, this paper directly links
quantities of lead emissions to outcomes, which can better inform policies addressing ambient
lead and lead emission sources. Moreover, previous work examines the link between elevated
blood lead in early life and future school outcomes (Reyes, 2015; Aizer et al., 2018; Aizer
and Currie, 2019; Gazze et al., 2020). By studying an abrupt change in lead emissions, we
avoid concerns that early-life blood lead correlates with unobservable socioeconomic factors
that also affect student achievement.5
    Second, we study a modern setting where average lead exposure is low. Our analysis is
on children in Florida, which--unlike many of the other populous U.S. states--has compar-
   2
      Despite a Clean Air Act ban for on-road leaded fuel, both automotive racing and aviation have exemp-
tions allowing its use. Prior to the unleaded fuel switch, NASCAR was one of the largest lead emitters in
the US (Hollingsworth and Rudik, Forthcoming), providing ample power for statistical analyses.
    3
      The economics literature has found that lead negatively impacts many outcomes including lifetime
earnings (Gr¨  onqvist et al., Forthcoming), fertility (Grossman and Slusky, 2019; Clay et al., 2014), and adult
IQ test performance (Ferrie et al., 2012). There is an extensive public health literature on lead impacts, but
these studies tend to be associational (e.g Canfield et al., 2003; Lanphear et al., 2005, 2018).
    4
      Blood lead testing and associated regulations are typically targeted at those at the highest risk for lead
exposure. Thus, blood lead data -- even when using the universe of blood lead tests -- is often from a
selected population. See Gazze (2020) for more information regarding selection and screening in blood lead
tests for children.
    5
      Identifying the causal effects of lead exposure is timely, as the US EPA is currently reviewing the lead
National Ambient Air Quality Standards and is interested in causal effects on cognitive outcomes in children
(U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2020).



                                                       2
atively low lead contamination. Florida has the lowest soil lead concentrations of any state
in the contiguous U.S. (Smith et al., 2014), and one of the lowest lead poisoning rates (U.S.
Centers for Disease Control, 2019). Given that lead exposure continues to decline, future
lead policy must be informed by research on impacts when ambient levels are low.
    Third, we document new evidence on the timing, quantity, and distributional impacts
of lead exposure. The variation in our data is such that we can compare students exposed
to the same lifetime total quantity of lead, spread across varying numbers of years. Our
results indicate that exposure up to at least age 8 has negative effects, and that the same
quantity of exposure causes more harm when spread over a longer timeframe; "death by a
thousand cuts" may be worse than a single large exposure dose. We also find no evidence
that the marginal effects of additional lead exposure change with total exposure, suggesting
that effects are largely linear. Lead exposure also has negative effects on students across the
entire achievement distribution, but disproportionately affects school districts with larger
Black and low-income populations.
    Finally, we provide new population-level evidence that nutrition--as proxied by milk
consumption--plays a role in mitigating the effects of lead. Areas with above-median levels of
milk consumption have no statistically or economically significant link between lead exposure
and test scores. We further support this result with nationwide cross-sectional evidence of
higher milk and calcium intake correlating with lower blood lead levels, and evidence of
heterogeneous effects across other variables proxying for calcium intake such as purchases of
vitamins and other dairy products. This pathway is physiologically plausible because lead
affects the brain by displacing calcium (B¨ usselberg, 1995; Peraza et al., 1998), an essential
               6
micronutrient. While milk consumption is not quasi-randomly assigned in our setting, it
does not appear to correlate with other observed potential confounders. Many programs
designed to reduce blood lead specifically address nutrition, but this is bundled with other
components (e.g., Billings and Schnepel (2018)), which complicates the nutritional link.
Families were also likely unaware of the presence of NASCAR-caused lead exposure, so
differences in nutrition do not result from interventions.7
    The effects we find are large. An additional 10kg of lead emissions by the third grade --
equivalent to growing up near the average airport or a 42nd percentile lead-emitting Toxics
Release Inventory (TRI) facility -- decreases standardized test scores by 0.07 standard devi-
ations.8 Removing this exposure would generate returns similar in magnitude to decreasing
   6
     Bolstering milk consumption is a common recommendation for mitigating the effects of lead exposure
(U.S. Centers for Disease Control, 1991) because evidence from experimental animal studies and associational
human studies shows that higher calcium intake is associated with less lead absorption and lower blood lead
levels for a given quantity of exposure (Six and Goyer, 1970; Ziegler et al., 1978; Mahaffey et al., 1986).
   7
     HR perform a survey and find no evidence that the average person is aware of the fuel used by NASCAR.
   8
     10kg of lead emissions is approximately one-third of the emissions caused by a 500 mile race, such as

                                                     3
class size by 10 students, having an experienced teacher, or having a one standard deviation
better teacher in terms of value added (Jepsen and Rivkin, 2009; Chetty et al., 2014a). The
estimate is also of a similar magnitude as the concerning gender and racial gaps observed in
test scores (Fryer and Levitt, 2006, 2010).
    Combining our results with estimates of how test scores affect future income (Chetty
et al., 2014b), we calculate the present value of lost future income for the average exposed
3rd grader in our sample is approximately $9,000 in 2020 dollars. Lead exposure for the
average third grader in our sample is approximately equivalent to growing up near a 47th
percentile lead-emitting TRI facility. For a 90th percentile exposure student in our data--
equivalent to growing up near a lead-emitting TRI site in the 54th percentile--discounted
lifetime income losses are closer to $17,000. This suggests that the effects of living near a
lead-intensive emissions source has drastic effects on lifetime earnings.
    While many education inputs are often effectively fixed or extremely costly to change,
lead may be simpler to target.9 Legacy lead can be mitigated by one-time expenditures such
as home remediation, and other sources of lead emissions can be reduced by the removal of
the exemptions from the Clean Air Act leaded fuel ban for off-road racing and aviation.10 Our
findings also point to improved nutrition and increased calcium intake as possible protection
against some of the negative effects of both known and unknown lead exposure. Some of
the previously observed benefits of improved nutrition may be due in part to avoided lead
absorption, which highlights the role that simple child nutrition can play in addressing issues
of health, education, and environmental justice.


1     The Education Production Function, Identification,
      and Complementarities
To frame our contribution and model the relationship between lead and test scores, consider
a stylized static education production function:

                                  test scores = f (S, C, N, E, b(P b)),
the Daytona 500. This amount of lead emissions within a county in a single year would increase county-level
lead poisoning rates that year by approximately 1 percent (Hollingsworth and Rudik, Forthcoming).
   9
     For example, parental income or education is nearly impossible to change, and meaningfully decreasing
class size requires regular salary payments to newly hired teachers. Hiring more teachers may also decrease
average teaching quality, offsetting some of the gains from smaller class size.
  10
     Prior research has found that remediation of lead-contaminated homes improves test scores (Billings and
Schnepel, 2018; Sorensen et al., 2019).




                                                     4
where test scores--averaged at the school-grade-year level--are a function of vectors of so-
cioeconomic characteristics S , school/classroom characteristics C , nutrition variables N ,
environmental characteristics E , and blood lead concentrations b(P b), which are a function
of lead exposure P b. P b = x + l is the sum of exposure from NASCAR x, and from other
lead sources l. We are interested in the marginal effect of P b on test scores, holding other
factors constant:
                            f (S, C, N, E, b(P b)) b(P b)
                                                          = fb b .
                                    b(P b)         P b
    In non-randomized settings, other inputs may also be a function of P b. For example, due
to residential sorting or pollutant co-emission, changes in P b may correlate with changes in
other inputs into f , yielding direct and indirect effects of lead on test scores. The total effect
of lead on test scores is:

                    d test scores             dS       dC        dN        dE
                                  =fb b + fC      + fS      + fN      + fE      .                        (1)
                         dP b                dP b      dP b      dP b      dP b

The first term on the right hand side, fb b , is the direct effect of lead on test scores, holding
other inputs fixed. Our goal is to estimate this direct effect.
    The last three terms capture common potential confounders for fb b due to indirect effects
of lead. For example, large, persistent changes in ambient lead--like those induced by
deleading standard on-road gasoline in the 1970s or the opening or closing of a TRI plant
(Currie et al., 2015)--may induce residential sorting, which will affect inputs in S , altering
test scores by changing the student composition. Changes in S subsequently may affect the
school tax base and alter classroom characteristics in C , such as classroom size. Changes
in lead emissions from industrial sources may also cause changes in other pollutants in E if
they are complements or substitutes in the industrial production process.11
    Equation (1) illustrates two of our key contributions. First, research focuses largely on
the relationship between outcomes and blood lead at a point in time, fb , instead of the
relationship between outcomes and exposure to emissions fb b . This is often due to a lack of
data or a lack of quasi-experimental variation in measurable exposure. We can measure lead
emissions using observed leaded race miles and the lead content of the fuel used. This helps
identify the effect of lead exposure across distance, as well as the role of length of exposure
conditional on total exposure.
    Second, regressing learning outcomes on measures of total lead exposure will confound its
impact through correlated inputs. To identify fb b , we need to isolate independent variation in
  11
    This is a particular concern for historical catalytic converter mandates. The devices reduce emissions of
non-lead pollutants through chemical reactions and prohibit leaded fuel since lead renders them ineffective.
This co-emission creates challenges in separately identifying the effects of lead from co-emitted pollutants.



                                                     5
P b. The deleading of NASCAR satisfies this requirement. HR show deleading did not change
ambient concentrations of other automotive pollutants captured by E , thus dE   dx
                                                                                   = 0. There
is no evidence that the deleading of NASCAR fuel associates with trends in socioeconomic
variables S , nutrition choices N , or school characteristics C , indicating that dS
                                                                                   dx
                                                                                      = dN
                                                                                        dx
                                                                                           =
dC
 dx
    = 0. The robustness of our estimates to a wide range of fixed effects and socioeconomic
controls supports this as well. This gives us:

                                     d test scores
                                                   = fb b ,
                                          dx

and variation in lead exposure from NASCAR identifies the effect of gasoline lead on test
scores.
    The cross-partial derivatives of the production function give insight into heterogeneous
effects. The nutrition and medical literature both emphasize the physiological mechanisms
behind the role of calcium in mitigating the negative effects of lead exposure; lead displaces
calcium in the body and additional calcium intake limits this displacement (Ahamed and
Siddiqui, 2007). Taking the cross-partials of our production function with respect to lead
and calcium n  N gives:
                                     d2 test scores
                                                    = fbN b .
                                          dxdn
Nutrition science suggests that this cross partial is positive and that the corresponding in-
teraction term in a regression should be positive, reflecting that additional calcium dampens
the negative effects of lead.
    Finally, the cross partial derivatives show how lead matters for educational policy. Con-
sider some policy that affects a variable c  C . The policy's marginal effect depends on lead
exposure P b if the cross-derivative is non-zero:

                                    d2 test scores
                                                   = fbC b .
                                         dxdc

If lead-poisoned students obtain smaller marginal benefits from better teachers or smaller
classrooms, lead mitigation is complementary and increases returns to educational invest-
ments. We leave this question for future research.




                                               6
2      Data
2.1     Test scores
We obtain data on educational achievement from the Florida Department of Education. Each
year, the Florida Department of Education records school-level outcomes from the Florida
Comprehensive Assessment Test (FCAT), the standardized test used in Florida public schools
in grades 3­10. The FCAT data we use span 2003­2014.12
    FCAT data report test score averages at the school-grade-subject-year level. We stan-
dardize school-grade-subject-year average scores within each grade, year, and subject to be
mean zero and standard deviation one. The z-score gives us how many standard deviations
a group is above the state-wide test average in that year.
    The data also report the percentage of students in each of five achievement levels. Level 5
contains the highest-achieving students, while level 1 contains the lowest-achieving students.
Achievement levels proxy for the distribution of scores within a school. We define students
in level 3 and above to be proficient, as level 3 is the threshold for "passing" the test. For
example, a level 3 score in grade 10 reading is required for graduation.
    In this paper we focus on mathematics and reading tests for grades 3­5. Focusing on the
earliest grades provides the most variation in lead exposure. These grades also correspond to
elementary schools, which have smaller catchment areas than middle or high schools. Since
we lack data on where students live, we assign lead exposure based on school location, and
smaller catchment areas reduce measurement error. Our estimates will be biased toward zero
from any remaining measurement error in exposure from this source or if students move to
different districts. We weight observations by the number of students in each school-grade-
year.


2.2     Lead, NASCAR, and the TRI
Race data come from Racing-Reference, an archive maintained by NASCAR.13 The data
detail the number of drivers, the number of laps completed by each driver, track length, and
day and time for each race. HR describe the leaded fuel status of each NASCAR race and
its evolution over time. Section 3 describes our main treatment variable, which we base on
our NASCAR lead measure. Because several schools are very close to racetracks and due to
our use of inverse distance-weighting to calculate exposure, exposure for the 100th percentile
  12
     After 2014 Florida changed its standardized test to the Florida Standards Assessment. Prior to 2003
FCATs were not taken in each grade.
  13
     The data also include races from the Automobile Racing Club of America, a related organization that
deleaded at the same time as NASCAR; we refer to both as NASCAR.


                                                   7
of observations is an extreme outlier and is more than 10 times the 99th percentile. We
truncate the top 1% of observations in terms of inverse distance-weighted lead emissions.
    Data on industrial lead emissions come from the Toxics Release Inventory, which reports
emissions from facilities that use, manufacture, or process more than 100 pounds of lead and
have 10 or more employees.


2.3       Income, demographics, and nutrition
Data on county median income come from the U.S. Census Small Area Income Poverty
Estimates, and data on county unemployment rates come from the Bureau of Labor Statistics
Local Area Unemployment Statistics. Data on the percent of individuals in a county who
are Black or Hispanic, and the percent of homes built before 1940, come from the American
Community Survey. County median household income and poverty rates come from the U.S.
Census Small Area Income Poverty Estimates. Fast food establishments per capita come
from the USDA Food Atlas. We proxy for school district average home milk consumption
using data from Nielsen Homescan, calculating the average ounces of milk purchased per
Homescan scanner household in each district. As a demonstration of the link between calcium
intake and blood lead, we use information on daily food dairies and blood lead measures from
the 2005-2006 wave of the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES).


3       Summary Data and Methods
We begin with an overview of the cross-sectional and longitudinal variation in our data. Our
data contain variation across space, time, age of exposure, and intensity of exposure. This
enables use to include a rich set of fixed effects, reducing concerns of omitted confounders.
Figure 1 Panel A shows racetracks featuring leaded races, the location of schools, and the
number of leaded races at each racetrack over the lifetime of all children in our sample.
Shaded red areas depict the 50-mile treatment radius around each track we use in most
specifications. We use schools outside these areas as controls and assign them zero lead
exposure from NASCAR. Panel B shows the time series of average lifetime NASCAR lead
exposure for each treated cohort. We inverse distance-weight exposure by school-racetrack
distance.14 Prior to deleading, average lifetime lead exposure at age nine increases from 13
kilograms in 2003 to 15 kilograms in 2006. After deleading, exposure steadily declines to 5
kilograms at end of our sample in 2014.
    Panel C shows the range of years exposed to leaded races for the treatment group of
 14
      The weighting does not affect the magnitude or significance of our estimates.


                                                      8
Figure 1: Locations of tracks, schools, and number of races at each track, time series of
lifetime inverse distance-weighted lead exposure by year, and timeline of years of life exposed
to leaded races.

 A. Track and School Locations                                                                   B. Time Series of Lead Exposure from NASCAR




                                               Average Lifetime Inverse Distance-Weighted
                                                Lead Exposure from NASCAR (kilograms)
    4                                                                                       15


                                     72
                                                                                            10
                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                      Grade 5
                                                                                                                                                                      Grade 4
                                                                                             5
                                                                                                                                                                      Grade 3

                                          31
                                                                                             0
                                                                                                  2003      2005          2007      2009       2011          2013

 C. Range of Total Years Exposed to NASCAR Lead By Grade and Year
                                                                                                  NASCAR Deleads After 2007 Daytona 500

       Grade 5   2-8     2-8          2-8            1-8                                           2-8    1-8      8-8       7-8    6-7    5-6        4-5       3-4


       Grade 4   2-8     2-8          1-8            2-8                                           1-8    8-8      7-8       6-7    5-6    4-5        3-4       2-3


       Grade 3   2-8     1-8          2-8            1-8                                           8-8    7-8      6-7       5-6    4-5    3-4        2-3       1-2


                 2003   2004          2005     2006                                               2007    2008     2009      2010   2011   2012       2013     2014


Panel A: We plot schools in our dataset as blue points. The shaded red area shows all places within 50 miles
of a racetrack. The number in the center of the red circle is the location and number of leaded races that
occurred at that racetrack between the birth year of the oldest students in our sample and the final year of
our sample.
Panel B: The inverse distance-weighted lead exposure in kilograms for each grade's cohort, averaged across
all schools within 50 miles of a racetrack. Lead exposure is estimated assuming an average race fuel efficiency
of 3.2 race miles per gallon and 5.2 grams of tetraethyl lead per gallon.
Panel C: For each year's cohort, the minimum and maximum years of life exposed to leaded NASCAR races,
ignoring exposure during the year of the cohort's test, for those schools within 50 miles of a racetrack. The
2007 Daytona 500 was leaded, so maximum exposure for 2008 does not drop despite the fact that NASCAR
deleaded in 2007.


schools by grade and cohort.15 Cohorts within 50 miles of a racetrack that took the test in
2008 or before could be exposed for the maximum number of years if nearby racetracks had
races annually.16 Races generally occur annually, so maximum exposure of each subsequent
  15
     We ignore exposure during the year of the test to avoid capturing short-term effects. Our results are
robust to including this year.
  16
     The 2007 Daytona 500 was leaded; thus the 2008 and 2007 cohorts were exposed each year of life before
the test year.



                                                                                                           9
cohort declines by 1 as they phase out of leaded exposure years, until the end of our sample.
The most exposed third grade cohorts have 8 cumulative years of leaded-race exposure.
   We estimate the effect of lead emissions on test scores using the following general esti-
mating equation:

          Ysgty = f (cumulative lead emittedsgy ; lead ) + Xsyt X + sgt + tgy + sgty .              (2)

Ysgty is the school z-score, proficiency rate, or percent of students at a specific achievement
level for school s, grade g , year y , and subject t. f (cumulative lead emissionssgy ; lead ) is a
function f of cumulative lead emitted from NASCAR races near the school during a student's
lifetime. For example, for a 9-year old third grader, cumulative lead emissions are the sum
of all lead emissions within some distance d of the school in the 8 years before year y . We
compute lead emitted using the observed miles driven during each race, the known lead
content of the fuel, and the average of two estimates of gasoline used per mile driven in the
race.17 We omit current year emissions to avoid potential particulate matter effects from
races in the current year.
    In our simplest specifications, f will sum cumulative lead emissions within 50 miles of
each school s. We choose 50 miles as a distance cutoff because HR find lead travels up
to 50 miles from a race. Our spline regression estimates in Figure 2B similarly show that
50 miles is the distance where test score effects approximately reach zero. In our preferred
specifications, we inverse distance-weight emissions using the distance between the school
and the lead-emitting racetrack, recognizing that schools closer to racetracks have greater
exposure than those farther away. We also test specifications where f is a flexible binned
function of inverse distance-weighted emissions, or where f is a cubic spline in distance,
instead of assuming a distance-weighting scheme. Finally, to better understand how timing
of lead exposure matters, we use a specification where treatment is a set of indicator variables
corresponding to how many years of life a cohort experienced leaded race emissions, while
conditioning on the total quantity of emissions.
    Xsyt is our set of controls to address potential observable confounders. It includes county
median income, county unemployment rate, and cumulative TRI facility lead emissions
within 50 miles of each school over the same set of years described above. Controlling
for income and unemployment addresses potential differential trends in socioeconomic sta-
tus that influence school average test scores and are spuriously correlated with declining
NASCAR lead exposure for schools near racetracks. Controlling for cumulative TRI lead
emissions addresses potential differential trends in industrial lead exposure for schools near
  17
   Using the estimated quantity of lead emitted rather than miles driven also helps clarify when we mean
quantities of exposure versus distances.

                                                  10
racetracks versus those farther away. TRI facilities represent another possible source of vari-
ation in lead exposure (Currie et al., 2015), but other economic and demographic factors
that correlate with plant emissions complicate using such variation for identification.
    sgt is a set of school-grade-subject fixed effects that control for time-invariant school
characteristics, allowing for within-school differences across grades and subjects. tgy is a
set of subject-grade-year fixed effects addressing common annual shocks across all schools
specific to each grade and subject, such as subject-specific test difficulty and state-level
education policy. sgty is the error term. We cluster standard errors at the school district
level, which in Florida aligns with county borders.
    Our estimates of the effect of lead emissions on test scores are well-identified if--conditional
on our controls--there remain no omitted variables varying within a school, within a grade,
for a specific subject, or over time that correlate with both test scores and cumulative lead
emissions. The exogenous nature of the fuel switch circumvents many such concerns, since
deleading did not affect other pollutants and is unrelated to changes in socioeconomic con-
founders for those who live nearby. Moreover, the estimates will capture the total effect
of lead exposure within each class, including any peer effects where more exposed students
could disrupt their classmates, negatively affecting learning (Gazze et al., 2020).


4     Results
Table 1 presents estimates using our preferred specification across various outcomes and
subsets of the data. Panels A and B show the effect of lead emissions on school z-scores;
Panels C and D show the effect on proficiency rates. Panels A and C inverse distance-weight
lead emissions, while Panels B and D leave them unweighted. Panel A contains our preferred
combination: z-scores and inverse distance-weighted emissions.
    Our preferred estimates in column 1 correspond to equation (2) and indicate that 10
additional inverse distance-weighted kilograms of lifetime lead emissions decrease average
test scores by 0.074 standard deviations and the proficiency rate by 1.177 percentage points.
To get a better sense of how large 10 inverse distance-weighted kilograms is, we compare
it to emissions of TRI facilities: an additional 10 inverse distance-weighted kilograms is
equivalent to locating a 42nd percentile lead-emitting facility 1 mile away from a school for
the life of the 3rd-graders. The mean exposure to inverse distance-weighted lead emissions
from NASCAR for school cohorts within the 50 mile treatment radius is 15 kilograms.
    Panel B shows that 10 unweighted kilograms of lead decrease test scores by 0.004 stan-
dard deviations and the proficiency rate by 0.058 percentage points. The mean exposure in
unweighted terms is 390 kilograms. Thus depending on weighting, the effect for the mean

                                                11
treated school cohort is a z-score decrease of between 0.11­0.14 standard deviations, and a
proficiency rate decrease of between 1.7­2.3 percentage points.
    Columns 2­6 show estimates when our sample consists of only a specific grade or subject.
All estimates are economically significant in size, but are 0­30% larger for math than for
reading, and tend to be larger for grades 3 and 4 compared to grade 5.

  Table 1: Effect of lead emissions from NASCAR on school z-score and proficiency rate.


                                       (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)         (6)

Panel A: Outcome: Z-Score, Treatment: Inverse-Distance Weighted
Lifetime Lead Emissions (10 kg)    -0.074       -0.082       -0.065       -0.076       -0.077       -0.065
                                    (0.027)     (0.034)       (0.024)      (0.028)      (0.026)     (0.029)


Panel B: Outcome: Z-Score, Treatment: Unweighted
Lifetime Lead Emissions (10 kg)     -0.004       -0.004      -0.004       -0.004        -0.003       -0.003
                                    (0.001)      (0.002)      (0.001)     (0.002)       (0.001)      (0.001)


Panel C: Outcome: Proficiency Rate, Treatment: Inverse-Distance Weighted
Lifetime Lead Emissions (10 kg)     -1.177      -1.376       -0.978       -1.232        -1.250       -1.003
                                    (0.481)     (0.609)      (0.414)      (0.474)       (0.483)      (0.530)


Panel D: Outcome: Proficiency Rate, Treatment: Unweighted
Lifetime Lead Emissions (10 kg)     -0.058       -0.061      -0.055       -0.071        -0.056       -0.043
                                    (0.026)      (0.036)     (0.022)      (0.029)       (0.025)      (0.025)

Grades Included                       All          All         All            3             4            5
Subjects Included                     All         Math       Reading         All          All          All
Observations                        136,240       68,098      68,142        45,662       45,316       45,262

 Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Robust standard errors are clustered at the school district level.
  School-subject-grade-year observations are weighted by number of students. Panels A and B contain esti-
  mates where the outcome is the z-score of the school's average test score. Z-scores are calculated by stan-
  dardizing within a grade-year-subject across all schools. Panels C and D contain estimates where the out-
  come is the proficiency rate and the proficiency rate spans from 0 to 100. Panels A and C inverse distance-
  weight the lead emissions, while Panels B and D leave them unweighted. The control variables included
  in all regressions are cumulative TRI facility emissions within 50 miles, county unemployment rate, and
  county median income. All regressions include school-grade-subject and grade-subject-year fixed effects.


   Figure 2 displays estimates of heterogeneous marginal effects in terms of quantity, prox-
imity, and length of exposure. Panel A plots the estimated flexible dose-response function
in black. The figure comes from estimating equation (2), where the function f is eleven
indicator variables corresponding to lifetime inverse distance-weighted lead exposure in 3


                                                     12
kilogram bins up to 30 kilograms, and an additional bin for greater than 30 kilograms. The
estimated effects are relative to 0 kilograms of exposure. Increased lead emissions decrease
z-scores, but the effect levels off around 20 kilograms, suggesting that the negative marginal
effects of lead may decrease once lifetime exposure reaches a sufficiently high level.
    In red, Panel A also plots results from a permutation test in which we permute the full
time series of lead exposure--only amongst schools within the 50 mile treatment distance
in Figure 1--and then re-estimate the dose-response function 50 times. This is equivalent
to permuting the location of treated schools, or randomly assigning treatment levels across
treated schools. The permuted dose-response functions are all flat and close to zero, indi-
cating that our estimated effect is not a spurious correlation.
    Panel B shows how the estimated effect changes with distance from the lead source.
The panel plots result from equation (2), where the function f is a cubic spline showing the
marginal effect of 10 unweighted kilograms of lead up to 100 miles away from the school. The
estimated effect is highest for schools closest to racetracks; it declines with distance and levels
off close to zero at around 50 miles, which drives our choice of cutoff for treatment versus
control. Given the average treated exposure of about 390 unweighted kilograms, schools very
close to racetracks experienced test score reductions of over 0.3 standard deviations for the
average cohort.
    Panel C shows the role of length of exposure. The figure plots estimates of the effect
of each additional year of exposure during a student's lifetime relative to zero years of
exposure, conditional on a given lifetime quantity of exposure. These estimates are similar
to equation (2), where treatment is a set of indicator variables for whether a particular
student cohort was exposed to 1, 2, . . . , 8 years of leaded races, and now controlling for
total exposure to separate the effects of duration and levels. Since races happen annually
in Daytona and Homestead, the estimate for X years of exposure maps almost perfectly
into the cumulative effect of being exposed every year until a particular age. The figure
depicts an escalating negative effect of additional exposure length, holding quantity of total
exposure fixed. The effect of one, five, and eight years of exposure are -0.03, -0.08, and -0.26
standard deviations, respectively. Appendix Figure A3 shows the distribution of quantity of
lifetime exposure by duration of exposure and provides evidence we can separately identify
effects of duration from effects of total lifetime quantity, given the substantial overlap in
total exposure across years of exposure.
    There are several possible reasons that length of exposure might matter for a given
intensity. For example, lead exposure can have differential long-term effects depending on
the stage of an child's development, so lasting exposure could increase the probability of
being affected at a given fundamental moment. Our later results suggest nutrition plays a


                                                13
large role in reducing the impacts of lead; if children cycle through periods of poor nutrition,
lasting exposure may increase the probability of hitting a low-nutrition cycle. Regardless of
the reason, our results support that "death by a thousand cuts" may be more illustrative of
how the lasting damages of lead accumulate.

Robustness checks: Appendix Figure A1 shows the stability of our main estimates to
combinations of controls, fixed effects, and subsets of the data. Similarly, Appendix Ta-
bles A2 and A3 demonstrate the robustness of our estimates to alternative treatment vari-
ables, clustering, observation weights, placebo tests, and sets of fixed effects.




                                              14
                                                                                Figure 2: Effect of lifetime lead emissions by quantity, distance, and duration of exposure.
                                                      A. Test Score Response Function and Permutation Test                                                                      B. Effect of Lifetime Unweighted Lead Emissions (10 kg) by Distance                                                          C. Effect of Years of Exposure Conditional on Lifetime Lead Emissions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.1

                                                                                                                                                                         0.00
     Change in Z-Score (standard deviations)




                                                                                                                              Change in Z-Score (standard deviations)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Change in Z-Score (standard deviations)
                                                0.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -0.1


                                               -0.2                                                                                                                     -0.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -0.2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -0.3

                                               -0.4                                                                                                                     -0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -0.4
15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                 0                25               50                75               100                                                      1         2        3         4        5         6        7        8+
                                                       3

                                                              6

                                                                    9
                                                                          12

                                                                                  5

                                                                                          8

                                                                                                1

                                                                                                      4

                                                                                                               7

                                                                                                                     0

                                                                                                                          +
                                                  0-

                                                            3-

                                                                  6-



                                                                                -1

                                                                                      -1

                                                                                              -2

                                                                                                    -2

                                                                                                             -2

                                                                                                                   -3

                                                                                                                         30
                                                                        9-
                                                                             12

                                                                                     15

                                                                                           18

                                                                                                 21

                                                                                                        24

                                                                                                               27




                                                       Lifetime Inverse Distance-Weighted Lead Emissions (kg)                                                                             Distance from School to Racetrack (miles)                                                                                Cumulative Years Exposed to Lead from NASCAR


     Panel A: The treatment variables are a set of indicators equal to 1 if a school's inverse distance-weighted lead exposure was in a particular range.
     Bins are open on the left and closed on the right so the first bin does not contain zero kilograms. We assign treatment only if the school was within
     50 miles of the track where the leaded race occurred. The red points are the point estimates for 50 alternative dose response functions when lead
     exposure is permuted across schools within the treatment group.
     Panel B: The cubic spline is constructed with knots at the 33rd and 67th percentiles of the data. The treatment variable is now unweighted lead
     emissions.
     Panel C: The treatment variables are a set of indicators equal to 1 if the school cohort was exposed to positive amounts of lead from NASCAR for
     the past 1, 2, 3,...,8 years. We assign treatment only if the school was within 50 miles of the track where the leaded race occurred. The estimates
     are conditional on the lifetime quantity of lead exposure, the treatment variable in Panels A and C of Table 1. Appendix Figure A3 shows common
     support of lifetime exposure totals by years of cumulative exposure.
     Note: For all panels, the black points or lines are the point estimates and the blue shaded area is the 95% confidence interval computed from robust
     standard errors clustered at the school district level. School-subject-grade-year observations are weighted by number of students. The estimates are
     conditioned on the set of controls and fixed effects in equation (2).




                                                                                                                                                                                                              15
4.1    Distributional Effects and Heterogeneity
Figure 3 depicts how lead exposure affects the share of students in different parts of the
achievement distribution. It plots the marginal effect of 10 inverse distance-weighted kilo-
grams of lead on the fraction of students that fall in each achievement level. Exposure to
lead emissions decreases the percentage of students in the highest achievement levels. 10
kilograms of exposure reduces the number of students in achievement levels 4 and 5 by 0.5
percentage points each. The shares of the lowest two achievement levels increase by about
0.5 percentage points each. The effect on the share of students in the middle achievement
level is approximately zero. This does not mean lead does not impact students in that
portion of the distribution; rather, the number of students transitioning out into the lower
achievement levels is approximately equal to the number of students transitioning in from
higher achievement levels.
    Figure A4 shows how changes in the share of students at each achievement level are
affected by cumulative years of exposure. Similar to Figure 3, additional years of exposure
decrease the share of students at the highest two achievement levels and increase the share in
the lowest levels. The effect is approximately linear in years of exposure. Lead exposure shifts
the entire distribution of achievement and does not just harm low-achievement students.
    Figure 4 plots estimates of heterogeneous effects by proxies for nutrition, race, age of
home (related to lead exposure from leaded paint), and socioeconomic status. It shows the
estimated effects of 10 inverse distance-weighted kilograms of lead for counties below and
above the median value for a set of seven variables. In each case, we take the average value
of the separating variable across all years, and assign rank using this stationary value. We
do not include the interacted variable alone in our regression, as it is a linear combination
of county fixed effects.
    Red corresponds to below median counties, while blue corresponds to above. The first
two sets of estimates show the effect by county level measures of nutrition. The medical
literature establishes a psychological basis for the idea that improved nutrition--particularly
consumption of high calcium foods like milk--can mitigate the health effects of lead expo-
sure. Lead competes with and displaces calcium in the body and additional calcium intake
limits this displacement (Ahamed and Siddiqui, 2007). Appendix Figure A5 and Table A4
show correlational support for this link. Using data from the 2005-2006 wave of the National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), we show that higher daily calcium
intake and greater milk consumption are both associated with lower blood lead levels. We
find evidence for this in a population-level, quasi-experimental setting: we observe negative
effects for counties with below-median household levels of milk consumption in the Nielsen
Homescan data, but test scores in areas with above-median milk purchasing are economi-

                                              16
Figure 3: Effect of 10 kilograms of inverse distance-weighted lead on percent of students in
each achievement level.

                                                                    Effect of Lifetime Inverse Distance-Weighted Lead Emissions (10 kg)
Change in Percent at Achievement Level (percentage points)




                                                              1.0




                                                              0.5




                                                              0.0




                                                             -0.5




                                                             -1.0




                                                                        1               2              3                4                 5
                                                                                                Achievement Level

The blue bars indicate the estimated effect of 10 inverse distance-weighted kilograms of lead emissions on
the fraction of students in each achievement level. The black bars indicate the 95% confidence interval of
the estimates computed from robust standard errors clustered at the school district level.
Note: The outcome variable is in terms of percentage points and ranges from 0 to 100. We assign treatment
only if the school was within 50 miles of the track where the leaded race occurred. School-subject-grade-year
observations are weighted by the number of students. The estimates are conditioned on the set of controls
and fixed effects in equation (2).




                                                                                                    17
cally and statistically unaffected by additional leaded miles. Appendix Figure A6 shows the
difference by regional milk purchases are not due to drastically different treatment inten-
sities correlated with milk consumption patterns--the above- and below-median treatment
schools share a large common support in lead exposure. We also find negative effects of
lead exposure for counties with higher penetration of fast food establishments, indicating a
greater prevalence of low-nutrition foods, though fast food exposure appears correlated with
a number of possible confounders and has a much smaller shared exposure support across
groups. The second two sets of estimates show effects by race. We find noisy zero effects
for counties that are below median in terms of percent Black or Hispanic residents, and
negative effects of around 0.1 standard deviations for counties above median. The estimates
are statistically distinguishable for percent Black, but not Hispanic.
    The fifth set of estimates shows the effect by percent of homes built before 1940. Homes
built before 1940 likely have lead-based paint, potentially raising the baseline level of ex-
posure for children in these homes, and putting them on a different part of the lead dose-
response curve. We find little difference in the estimated effects between counties with above
or below median fractions of homes built before 1940.
    The last two sets of estimates show the effect by measures of socioeconomic status (SES).
Lower SES families may have less ability to counteract the negative effects of lead exposure
with remediation efforts or by adjusting other education inputs like tutoring. Here we find
mixed results: there is little difference in terms of median income, but larger and statistically
different effects in counties with higher poverty rates relative to those with lower poverty
rates. The lower tail of the income distribution may matter the most in terms of ability to
mitigate exposure.
    An important consideration in interpreting these heterogeneous estimates is that some
characteristics may be proxying for other, highly correlated characteristics. For example,
percent Black and percent older homes are highly correlated with measures of socioeconomic
status in Florida. Appendix Figure A7 shows pairwise correlations of the heterogeneous
effects variables to determine whether one variable is likely to be picking up the effect of
another. While income presents a potential confounder in identifying nutrition effects, milk
consumption is not strongly correlated with any variable in the set.
    The purchase of calcium-rich foods could be a proxy for nutrition programs, which carry
other health benefits unrelated to lead. If program take-up correlates with proximity to race
tracks, this creates a potential confounder. Appendix Table A5 considers the correlation
between nutrition and public programs. We add a control for the log of dollar benefits per
person paid out by the Supplemental Nutrition Assistant Program (SNAP) at the county



                                               18
level.18 Ideally, we would have quasi-random variation in SNAP take-up to best identify the
effects. However, since data are limited to participation levels across counties, we draw no
causal conclusions from the coefficient estimates on SNAP payouts. Columns 1 and 4 show
our baseline results with and without median milk consumption splits. Columns 2 and 5
repeats 1 and 4, but restrict to county-years for which we have SNAP data. Columns 3 and
6 repeat 2 and 5, but now directly control for log of benefits per person. While including the
SNAP data increases our standard errors and reduces our point estimate by changing our
sample, it has little effect on the magnitude of our estimates holding the sample fixed when
comparing column 2 to column 3 and column 5 to column 6.
    Appendix Table A6 shows the correlation between milk purchases and lead is robust
to controlling for purchases of other products generally classified as unhealthy, healthy, or
calcium-rich. While some have a statistically significant correlation with our outcome of
interest, controlling for each does nothing to change our main estimates. Appendix Figure
A2 repeats our sample splits across calcium containing foods in a manner similar to our milk
results. We find heterogeneous effects are also present across products containing calcium,
like vitamin supplements and non-milk dairy products, though the effects are not statistically
different from each other at conventional levels.
    Tables A5, A6, and Figure A2 in the Appendix show that our results are robust to con-
trolling for Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program variables, consumption of unhealthy
or calcium-rich products, and that there are similar heterogeneous effects of lead depending
on the level of consumption of calcium-rich foods.


5      Valuation of Test Score Effects
Here we present two valuations of the effect of lead on academic achievement. First, we
estimate the effect on future earnings by linking estimated reductions in test scores to changes
in future income. Second, we make non-monetary comparisons to test score improvements
found from manipulating other in-school inputs to the education production function.

Test scores and future income: We use results from Chetty et al. (2014b) to translate
changes in test scores into changes in lifetime earnings. For the average treated third grader
in 2005, we find that lead exposure from racing results in a 1.43% reduction in earnings.
Using a 3% real discount rate, we estimate that the present value of total lost future income
  18
    Given the use of logs, our inclusion of year fixed effects adjusts for any inflationary factors across time,
as they are common to all counties.




                                                      19
Figure 4: Heterogeneous effects of 10 inverse distance-weighted kilograms of lead by above
or below median in socioeconomic or nutrition variables.
                                                 Treatment effect heterogeneity
                                           0.2         Below Median
                                                       Above Median
Change in Z-Score (standard deviations)




                                           0.1




                                           0.0




                                          -0.1




                                          -0.2         p = 0.41          p = 0.01         p = 0.19         p = 0.01        p = 0.86         p = 0.88         p = 0.01
                                                      Fast Food            Milk        % Hispanic           % Black       % Old Homes       Income         Poverty Rate
                                                                  Below and Above Median Effect of Lifetime Inverse Distance-Weighted Lead Emissions (10 kg)

The treatment variables are 10 inverse distance-weighted kilograms of lead interacted with dummy variables
for whether a school is in a county that is above or below the median for the variable on the x-axis. We
estimate the regressions separately for each variable on the x-axis. We assign treatment only if the school
was within 50 miles of the track where the leaded race occurred. The bars are the point estimates, and the
error bars denote the 95% confidence interval computed from robust standard errors clustered at the school
district level. School-subject-grade-year observations are weighted by number of students. The estimates
are conditioned on the set of controls and fixed effects in equation (2). The p-values at the bottom of the
figure are for testing the null hypothesis that the two coefficient estimates are equal.




                                                                                                         20
per average student is over $9,000.19 As a point of comparison, Isen et al. (2017) find
that reduced fetal particulate exposure under the Clean Air Act raised lifetime earnings for
relevant cohorts by approximately $4,300 (discounted similarly).

Comparison to school-based inputs: To provide additional context for our test score
effects, we compare them to the value of other school-based inputs. For exposed students,
test scores are reduced by around 0.07 standard deviations per 10 kilograms of lead emitted.
Removing that exposure would generate returns similar to: half the magnitude of improving
instructor value added by one standard deviation for one year--around a 0.15 standard de-
viation improvement (Chetty et al., 2014a; Hanushek and Rivkin, 2010; Bau and Das, 2020);
reducing class size by 10 students--around a .08 standard deviation increase (Jepsen and
Rivkin, 2009); increasing school spending per pupil by $2500--around a .10 standard devia-
tion improvement (Jackson et al., Forthcoming); or avoiding an instructor with no previous
teaching experience--around a .085 standard deviation reduction (Jepsen and Rivkin, 2009).
Using estimates on the average increases in test scores grade over grade, our estimated effect
of 10 kilograms of lead is equivalent to 16% of the expected annual increase for the third
grade, which is roughly 6 weeks of lost learning (Hill et al., 2008).


6      Discussion and Conclusion
Using a natural experiment in intense leaded fuel use, we estimate the causal effects of ex-
posure to lead emissions on student achievement. We demonstrate that lead emissions have
economically significant effects for elementary students living near emission sources, and
show that exposure to airborne lead correlates with reduced standardized test performance
across the student achievement distribution. Our results bolster prior work suggesting that
environmental quality is a key input in the education production function. Importantly,
our findings are for students in Florida, a state with some of the lowest levels of lead con-
tamination and measured blood lead in the United States. This suggests that there remain
significant returns to further reductions in lead exposure even at lower modern levels. A
basic model of interacting educational inputs suggests mitigating lead exposure may also
increase the returns of other educational programs.
    Our findings also point to another promising avenue for dealing with lead exposure at the
population level: improved childhood nutrition and consumption of milk and other calcium-
rich foods. Our results show that students living in areas with above-median consumption
  19
    On a per-kilogram basis, this equates to 24 dollars per student per kilogram of lead emitted within 50
miles. A more detailed exposition of this calculation can be found in Appendix section A.3.


                                                   21
of milk, which we take as a proxy for calcium intake and nutrition, face no economically or
statistically significant reductions in test scores despite similar lead exposure. This aligns
with the prior medical and public health literature on the importance of calcium in miti-
gating lead's harmful effects. We also find that lead exposure effects are most dramatic in
school districts with higher shares of Black and low-socioeconomic status students. These
two factors jointly indicate that childhood nutrition programs could play a pivotal role in
addressing racial and socioeconomic test score gaps and issues of environmental justice.
    This result is promising but requires additional investigation. Although we do not find
any evidence that our estimates are confounded by other factors, more sophisticated research
designs exploiting quasi-experimental variation in calcium intake--for example, through dif-
ferences in the nutritional content of school lunch vendors (Anderson et al., 2018)--would
bolster claims of causality.




                                             22
References
Ahamed, Maqusood and Mohd Kaleem Javed Siddiqui (2007) "Environmental lead toxicity
 and nutritional factors," Clinical Nutrition, Vol. 26, No. 4, pp. 400­408.

Aizer, Anna and Janet Currie (2019) "Lead and juvenile delinquency: new evidence from
  linked birth, school, and juvenile detention records," Review of Economics and Statistics,
  Vol. 101, No. 4, pp. 575­587.

Aizer, Anna, Janet Currie, Peter Simon, and Patrick Vivier (2018) "Do low levels of blood
  lead reduce children's future test scores?" American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
  nomics, Vol. 10, No. 1, pp. 307­41.

Anderson, Michael L., Justin Gallagher, and Elizabeth Ramirez Ritchie (2018) "School meal
 quality and academic performance," Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 168, pp. 81­93.

Bau, Natalie and Jishnu Das (2020) "Teacher Value Added in a Low-Income Country,"
  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, Vol. 12, No. 1, pp. 62­96.

Belson, Ken (2011) "Gentlemen, Start Conserving."

Billings, Stephen B. and Kevin T. Schnepel (2018) "Life after lead: Effects of early inter-
  ventions for children exposed to lead," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
  Vol. 10, No. 3, pp. 315­44.

B¨
 usselberg, Dietrich (1995) "Calcium channels as target sites of heavy metals," Toxicology
  letters, Vol. 82, pp. 255­261.

Canfield, Richard L., Charles R. Henderson Jr, Deborah A. Cory-Slechta, Christopher Cox,
  Todd A. Jusko, and Bruce P. Lanphear (2003) "Intellectual impairment in children with
  blood lead concentrations below 10 µg per deciliter," New England journal of medicine,
  Vol. 348, No. 16, pp. 1517­1526.

Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Nathaniel Hilger, Emmanuel Saez, Diane Whitmore
 Schanzenbach, and Danny Yagan (2011) "How does your kindergarten classroom affect
 your earnings? Evidence from Project STAR," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.
 126, No. 4, pp. 1593­1660.

Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, and Jonah E. Rockoff (2014a) "Measuring the Impacts
 of Teachers I: Evaluating Bias in Teacher Value-Added Estimates," American Economic
 Review, Vol. 104, No. 9, pp. 2593­2632.

       (2014b) "Measuring the Impacts of Teachers II: Teacher Value-Added and Student
  Outcomes in Adulthood," American Economic Review, Vol. 104, No. 9, pp. 2633­2679.

Clay, Karen, Werner Troesken, and Michael Haines (2014) "Lead and Mortality," The Review
  of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 96, No. 3, pp. 458­470.



                                            23
Currie, Janet, Lucas Davis, Michael Greenstone, and Reed Walker (2015) "Environmen-
 tal Health Risks and Housing Values: Evidence from 1,600 Toxic Plant Openings and
 Closings," The American Economic Review, Vol. 105, No. 2, pp. 678­709.

Duncombe, William and John Yinger (2005) "How Much More Does a Disadvantaged Stu-
 dent Cost?" Economics of Education Review, Vol. 24, No. 5, pp. 513­532.

Ebenstein, Avraham, Victor Lavy, and Sefi Roth (2016) "The long-run economic conse-
  quences of high-stakes examinations: Evidence from transitory variation in pollution,"
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, Vol. 8, No. 4, pp. 36­65.

Ferrie, Joseph P., Karen Rolf, and Werner Troesken (2012) "Cognitive disparities, lead
  plumbing, and water chemistry: Prior exposure to water-borne lead and intelligence test
  scores among World War Two US Army enlistees," Economics & Human Biology, Vol. 10,
  No. 1, pp. 98­111.

Frisvold, David E. (2015) "Nutrition and cognitive achievement: An evaluation of the School
  Breakfast Program," Journal of public economics, Vol. 124, pp. 91­104.

Fryer, Jenna (2008) "Lower levels get hit a lot harder by skyrocketing fuel prices."

Fryer, Roland G. and Steven D. Levitt (2004) "Understanding the Black-White Test Score
  Gap in the First Two Years of School," Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 86, No.
  2, pp. 447­464.

       (2006) "The Black-White Test Score Gap Through Third Grade," American Law
  and Economics Review, Vol. 8, No. 2, pp. 249­281.

       (2010) "An empirical analysis of the gender gap in mathematics," American Eco-
  nomic Journal: Applied Economics, Vol. 2, No. 2, pp. 210­40.

Gazze, Ludovica (2020) "Hassles and Environmental Health Screenings: Evidence from Lead
 Tests in Illinois."

Gazze, Ludovica, Claudia Persico, and Sandra Spirovska (2020) "The Spillover Effects of
 Pollution: How Exposure to Lead Affects Everyone in the Classroom."

Goyer, Robert A (1995) "Nutrition and metal toxicity," The American journal of clinical
 nutrition, Vol. 61, No. 3, pp. 646S­650S.

Gr¨
  onqvist, Hans, J. Peter Nilsson, and Per-Olof Robling (Forthcoming) "Understanding How
  Early Lead Exposure Affect Children's Life-Trajectories," Journal of Political Economy.

Grossman, Daniel S. and David J.G. Slusky (2019) "The impact of the Flint water crisis on
  fertility," Demography, Vol. 56, No. 6, pp. 2005­2031.

Hanushek, Eric A. (2020) "Education Production Functions," in The Economics of Educa-
  tion: Elsevier, pp. 161­170.



                                             24
Hanushek, Eric A. and Steven G. Rivkin (2010) "Generalizations about Using Value-Added
  Measures of Teacher Quality," American Economic Review, Papers & Proceedings, Vol.
  100, No. 2, pp. 267­271.

Hill, Carolyn J., Howard S. Bloom, Alison Rebeck Black, and Mark W. Lipsey (2008) "Em-
  pirical benchmarks for interpreting effect sizes in research," Child development perspectives,
  Vol. 2, No. 3, pp. 172­177.

Hollingsworth, Alex and Ivan Rudik (Forthcoming) "The effect of leaded gasoline on el-
  derly mortality: Evidence from regulatory exemptions," American Economic Journal:
  Economic Policy.

Isen, Adam, Maya Rossin-Slater, and W Reed Walker (2017) "Every breath you take--every
   dollar you'll make: The long-term consequences of the clean air act of 1970," Journal of
   Political Economy, Vol. 125, No. 3, pp. 848­902.

Jackson, C. Kirabo, Cora Wigger, and Heyu Xiong (Forthcoming) "Do School Spending Cuts
  Matter? Evidence from The Great Recession," American Economic Journal: Economic
  Policy, p. w24203.

Jagnani, Maulik (2020) "Children's sleep and human capital production."

Jepsen, Christopher and Steven Rivkin (2009) "Class Size Reduction and Student Achieve-
  ment: The Potential Tradeoff between Teacher Quality and Class Size," Journal of Human
  Resources, Vol. 44, No. 1, pp. 223­250.

Krueger, Alan B (1999) "Experimental estimates of education production functions," The
  quarterly journal of economics, Vol. 114, No. 2, pp. 497­532.

Ladd, Helen F. (2012) "Education and Poverty: Confronting the Evidence," Journal of
  Policy Analysis and Management, Vol. 31, No. 2, pp. 203­227.

Lanphear, Bruce P., Richard Hornung, Jane Khoury, Kimberly Yolton, Peter Baghurst,
  David C. Bellinger, Richard L. Canfield, Kim N. Dietrich, Robert Bornschein, Tom Greene,
  Stephen J. Rothenberg, Herbert L. Needleman, Lourdes Schnaas, Gail Wasserman, Joseph
  Graziano, and Russell Roberts (2005) "Low-level environmental lead exposure and chil-
  dren's intellectual function: An international pooled analysis," Environmental Health Per-
  spectives, Vol. 113, No. 7, pp. 894­899.

Lanphear, Bruce P., Stephen Rauch, Peggy Auinger, Ryan W. Allen, and Richard W. Hor-
  nung (2018) "Low-level lead exposure and mortality in US adults: a population-based
  cohort study," The Lancet Public Health, Vol. 3, No. 4, pp. e177­e184.

Mahaffey, Kathyrn R, Peter S Gartside, and Charles J Glueck (1986) "Blood lead levels
 and dietary calcium intake in 1-to 11-year-old children: the Second National Health and
 Nutrition Examination Survey, 1976 to 1980," Pediatrics, Vol. 78, No. 2, pp. 257­262.

Park, R. Jisung (2020) "Hot Temperature and High Stakes Performance," Journal of Human
  Resources.

                                              25
Park, R. Jisung, Joshua Goodman, Michael Hurwitz, and Jonathan Smith (2020) "Heat and
  Learning," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, Vol. 12, No. 2, pp. 306­39.

Peraza, Marjorie A, Felix Ayala-Fierro, David S Barber, Elizabeth Casarez, and Leonard T
  Rael (1998) "Effects of micronutrients on metal toxicity," Environmental Health Perspec-
  tives, Vol. 106, pp. 203­216.

Reardon, Sean F. (2018) The Widening Academic Achievement Gap Between the Rich and
  the Poor, 1st edition, pp. 177­189: Routledge.

Reyes, Jessica Wolpaw (2015) "Lead exposure and behavior: effects on antisocial and risky
  behavior among children and adolescents," Economic Inquiry, Vol. 53, No. 3, pp. 1580­
  1605.

Six, Kathryn M. and Robert A. Goyer (1970) "Experimental enhancement of lead toxicity
  by low dietary calcium," The Journal of laboratory and clinical medicine, Vol. 76, No. 6,
  pp. 933­942.

Smith, David B., William F. Woodruff, Laurel G. Solano, Federico Ellefsen, and J. Karl
  (2014) "Geochemical and mineralogical maps for soils of the conterminous United States."

Sorensen, Lucy C., Ashley M. Fox, Heyjie Jung, and Erika G. Martin (2019) "Lead exposure
  and academic achievement: evidence from childhood lead poisoning prevention efforts,"
  Journal of Population Economics, Vol. 32, No. 1, pp. 179­218.

U.S. Census Bureau (2017) "2017 Public Elementary-Secondary Education Finance Data."

U.S. Centers for Disease Control (1991) Preventing lead poisoning in young children: a
  statement: The Centers.

        (2019) "Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention: Data and Statistics."

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (2020) "Federal Register: Call for Information on
  the Integrated Science Assessment for Lead."

Ziegler, Ekhard E., Barbara B. Edwards, Robert L. Jensen, Kathryn R. Mahaffey, and
  Samuel J. Fomon (1978) "Absorption and retention of lead by infants," Pediatric research,
  Vol. 12, No. 1, pp. 29­34.




                                            26
A      Appendix
A.1     Summary Statistics
Table A1 displays the summary statistics for the 2,326 schools in our dataset. The data are
almost evenly balanced across grades 3­5. The average cohort of about 100 students has a
proficiency rate of 63%, with students mostly falling in achievement levels 3 and 4. Nearly
40% of students have limited success on the FCAT and fall into achievement levels 1 or 2.
School average proficiency rates span the full range from 0 to 100 percent, and z-scores span
from over 6 standard deviations below average to almost 5 standard deviations above average.
On average across both control and treated schools, cohorts are exposed to 126 unweighted
kilograms, or 5 inverse distance-weighted kilograms, of lead. The average lifetime exposure
to TRI lead emissions is over 500 metric tons, but with a substantial amount of variation.


A.2     Robustness Tests
Specification chart Figure A1 presents a specification chart and shows the robustness of
our main estimates of the effect of inverse distance-weighted lead emissions on test z-scores to
different combinations of controls, fixed effects, and subsets of the data. The filled in circles
in the bottom panel show which controls, fixed effects, grades, and tests were included. Our
preferred specification in red produces a point estimate of -0.074, near the middle of the set
of estimates, which range from -0.05 to -0.1. Larger effects are generally found for math and
grades 3 and 4, while smaller effects are found for reading and grade 5.

Weighting, placebos, building up FEs Table A2 demonstrates the robustness of our
regressions to alternative choices of treatment variable, clustering, and observation weight-
ing. It also shows estimates from several placebo tests. Column 1 is our base specification
corresponding to Table 1 Panel A Column 7. Column 2 is the same as column 1 but does not
weight the observations by number of students. Column 3 corresponds to our unweighted
results in Table 1 Panel B Column 7, while Column 4 is identical but does not weight the
observations by number of students. Weighting by number of students has little effect on our
estimates. Column 5 replaces lead emissions with just a count of the number of leaded races,
indicating that each leaded race is associated with a 0.007 standard deviation reduction in
test scores. Columns 6-8 perform three placebo tests where we assign all races after 1997,
1998, and 1999 to be unleaded. We estimate these specifications solely for the cohorts in
our data that took tests during leaded years: 2003­2006. If our results were simply picking
up on differential improvements in test scores for schools near racetracks that started even


                                               27
before deleading, then these placebos should show negative effects of lead exposure in the
pre-period versus the placebo (unleaded) post-period. All three estimates have a positive
sign and are statistically indistinguishable from zero, but the placebo tests reduce our sample
size by about two thirds.
    Table A3 shows how our estimates change as we build up to our main regression from just
a simple correlation. The top two panels show that our z-score outcomes are robust to adding
more granular fixed effects once we control for school and year fixed effects. The bottom two
panels show a similar story for the proficiency rate, however they are also sensitive to the
inclusion of subject and grade fixed effects.

Controlling for Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program Table A5 shows our
estimated effects when controlling for county-level log total benefits in the Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) which likely matters for test score outcomes and may
be correlated with NASCAR lead exposure or milk consumption. The first two columns
correspond to our preferred specification in Table 1. The first column is the same as our
preferred specification but where we use the same sample for which we have SNAP data --
until 2011. This cuts our sample by over a quarter and drops the years for which the treated
group had the least amount of exposure. This attenuates our estimates, but the inclusion of
controls for the log SNAP benefits does not affect our estimates.
    The last two columns replicate the specification for our milk result in Figure 4. Again,
the estimates are attenuated but above median milk consumption school districts have signif-
icantly different effects than below median milk consumption school districts as in the main
text, regardless of the smaller sample size and whether we control for log SNAP benefits per
person.

Other foods and products, and robustness of the milk result Table A6 further tests
the robustness of our finding that better nutrition and greater milk consumption mitigates
the effect of lead exposure on test scores. Column 1 replicates our specification in Figure 4 in
the main text. Column 2 is the same as column 1, but using the same sample as columns 3­5
where we include additional Nielsen variables. Column 3 includes controls for "unhealthy"
products. Column 4 controls for healthy products, other dairy sources, and vitamins --
things that are likely to have substantial quantities of calcium. Column 5 controls for both.
We find that these additional controls have virtually no effect on our results.
   Figure A2 does the same analysis as Figure 4 but for other healthy products or products
that should contain high quantities of calcium. We find that above median consumption of
these products is always associated with smaller effects of lead exposure on test scores, but


                                              28
is only statistically significant for areas with above median consumption of vitamins. The
estimated effects of produce are likely to be attenuated since produce generally does not
come with easily scannable bar codes. This supports our main finding that consumption of
milk mitigates the effects of lead.


A.3      Detailed welfare calculations
Here we use associated estimates linking test scores to future earnings to construct an es-
timate of how lead exposure may affect future earnings. For this exercise we estimate lost
earnings for the average 2005 treated third grader in Florida as a result of their cumulative
lifetime exposure. Conditional on being exposed to at least one leaded race within the 50
mile treatment radius, the average third grader in 2005 was exposed to 15.7 inverse distance-
weighted kilograms of lead. Column 4 of Table 1 indicates that this amount of lead exposure
decreases test scores for third graders by 0.119 standard deviations.
    We translate these effects on test scores into lost lifetime earnings using results from
Chetty et al. (2014b), who report that a 1 standard deviation improvement in standardized
test scores is associated with 12% higher lifetime earnings.20 Combining this with the 0.118
standard deviation reduction estimate, the average 2005 third grader experienced an 1.43%
decrease in lifetime earnings. Chetty et al. (2014b) also report that the present value of
expected future earnings at age 12 is $618,705 in 2020 dollars using a 3% real discount rate
(5% discount minus 2% wage growth). At grade 3 (age 9), the present value is $566,203. A
1.43% lifetime earnings loss is $8,097 in 2020 dollars. When using the unweighted leaded
miles estimate in the appendix we obtain an average income loss of $9,417 for an average
treated exposure of 385 unweighted kilograms.
    We use the unweighted leaded miles estimate to provide a back of the envelope approxi-
mation of the external cost of a gram of lead from gasoline. We put the external cost in per
student per kilogram terms so that our estimate is not a function of Florida's population
distribution around racetracks. The external cost of a kilogram of lead per exposed student
within 50 miles is the income loss per student divided by the total exposure:

                           $9, 417        $385
                                                 = $24/student/kilogram.
                           student      kilogram

Being exposed to 10 kilograms of lead emitted within 50 miles by the third grade results in
  20
    While this estimated relationship should not be interpreted to be causal, it represents the best estimate
we can find between standardized test scores and future earnings. The estimate is conditional on teacher
fixed effects as well as student and class-level controls. Chetty et al. (2014b) also report the unconditional
relationship, which is 36%.


                                                     29
a present value income loss of $24 dollars. Next we aggregate to the total loss to the entire
Florida 2005 third grade cohort. There were 104,302 third graders in Florida in 2005, which
amounts to a total income loss of almost 1 billion dollars from NASCAR lead exposure.
Note that this is only for students in a single cohort in a single state. One limitation to our
approach is that our test score outcome is a school average, not an individual student's. The
average treatment effect at the school-grade-test level may not be the same as the average
treatment for the treated student.


A.4      Lead emissions and miles traveled
Our quantity estimates are based on two unique data elements and an estimate of average
race fuel economy. First, we observe the actual distance driven by each racecar in each
race.21 Second, we observe the lead content of the race fuel.22 The fuel for every race is
provided by NASCAR and Sunoco, ruling out any potential cheating by using leaded fuel
in the unleaded period. We combine miles driven and fuel lead content with an estimate of
the average fuel economy of the racecars, derived from reported fuel usage over a full racing
season. Fryer (2008) reports that the top series in NASCAR used 175,000 gallons of fuel in
2008. Our race data show that 566,130 in-race miles were run in the 2008 season, indicating
that roughly 3.24 in-race miles awere traveled per gallon of race fuel used. This provides our
estimate of the total quantity of lead emitted per race.
    Note that we find a similar estimate when considering additional information from a
single race. In-race miles per gallon have been estimated to be between four and five miles
per gallon (Belson, 2011). This does not account for out-of-race miles traveled in qualifying
and practice rounds and we want to account for fuel used for these purposes. Following
HR, we obtain estimates of the share of miles that come from these portions of the race
using data from the 2019 Ticket Guardian 500. This race had 10,766 race miles and 3,053
practice miles.23 Assuming that 330 miles were driven as a part of qualifying (see HR for
more detail on this estimate), the 10,766 in-race miles are 76% of the total miles driven
as a part of the whole event. Accounting for these additional non-race miles would mean
adjusting in-race fuel economy estimates to be between 3 and 3.8. This is consistent with
  21
      Actual distance driven may vary due to crashes or weather, so inferring distance from the maximum
potential distance driven, for example 500 miles per racer for the Daytona 500, would overstate the amount
of lead emitted and bias our estimates toward zero.
   22
      NASCAR rules mandated the use of Sunoco Supreme, a 112 octane fuel with 5.2 grams of tetraethyl
lead per gallon. The exact fuel can be found here: https://www.sunocoracefuels.com/fuel/supreme. It
is still available to be purchased by the public as of 2020, and is continued to be used in a number of racing
series such as TransAm Racing and the National Hot Rod Association.
   23
      https://www.nascar.com/results/race_center/2019/monster-energy-nascar-cup-series/tic
ketguardian-500/stn/practice1/


                                                     30
the 3.24 mpg estimate provided from the first approach.


A.5     Supplementary figures
Quantity of exposure by duration of exposure Figure A3 shows the distribution of
quantity of lifetime exposure by duration of exposure. The densities shows total exposure
for students with specific years of exposure. For a given level of cumulative exposure, years
of exposure range widely, making for substantial overlap across densities. The dash-dotted
line indicates 10 kg of lifetime exposure, approximately the mean level for treated children
in our data. The dotted line, about 32 kilograms of lifetime exposure, corresponds to the
90th percentile of exposure for treated children. The significant amount of overlap across
densities indicates that there is variation in duration for a given intensity, and variation in
intensity for a given duration.

Achievement effects by duration Figure A4 shows the effect of duration of exposure on
achievement levels, effectively a combination of Figure 2 Panel C and Figure 3. Greater du-
ration of exposure decreases the share of students in the top achievement levels and increases
the share of students in the lowest achievement levels.

Correlation between calcium intake and measured blood lead from the National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) Figure A5 shows ventiles of
average daily calcium intake from food diaries reported in the NHANES data set 2005-2006
wave, along with a linear fit estimate of the relationship Higher calcium intake is strongly
associated with lower blood lead levels.

Distribution of exposure by above and below median milk consumption Fig-
ure A6 shows the support of lifetime inverse distance-weighted lead exposure for all treated
cohorts, split by above and below median milk consumption. There is significant overlap
across the distributions ruling out that high versus low levels of milk consumption is simply
picking up on differential exposure to lead.

Pairwise correlations for heterogeneous effects Figure A7 shows the pairwise corre-
lations between the heterogeneous effect variables in Figure 4 to better understand whether
one variable is simply proxying for another. For our main nutrition variable of interest, milk
consumption, we find that it is not strongly correlated with any other variable.




                                              31
                                        Table A1: Summary statistics.

Statistic                                                          Mean       St. Dev.    Min      Max         N
Z-Score                                                             0.001        1.00    -6.77      4.88     136,240
Proficiency Rate                                                    63.20       18.01       0       100      136,240
Grade                                                                4.00       0.82        3         5      136,240
% Achievement Level 1                                               17.36       12.28       0       100      136,240
% Achievement Level 2                                               19.46        9.24       0        80      136,240
% Achievement Level 3                                               31.10        8.38       0        94      136,240
% Achievement Level 4                                               23.82       11.03       0        94      136,240
% Achievement Level 5                                                8.27       7.61        0        87      136,240
Number of Students                                                 102.51       46.52      10       448      136,240
Lifetime Unweighted Lead Emissions (10 kg)                          12.63      24.17      0.00     102.44    136,240
Lifetime Inverse Distance-Weighted Lead Emissions (10 kg)            0.49       1.07      0.00      9.53     136,240
Lifetime Leaded Years                                                1.80       2.97        0         8      136,240
Median Income ($)                                                 44,764.61   5,887.69   25,201    67,238    136,240
Unemployment Rate                                                    6.36       2.78        2        14      136,240
Lifetime Industrial Lead Emissions (metric tons)                   545.69      559.42     0.00    2,927.36   136,240

  Note:     An observation is a school-grade-subject-year.




                                                             32
            Table A2: Robustness checks for the effect of lead emissions on school z-score.

                                                                                 (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)            (7)            (8)
Lifetime Inverse Distance-Weighted Lead Emissions (10 kg)                     -0.074        -0.080
                                                                               (0.027)      (0.031)

Lifetime Unweighted Lead Emissions (10 kg)                                                                -0.004       -0.004
                                                                                                          (0.001)      (0.002)

Lifetime Leaded Races                                                                                                                -0.007
                                                                                                                                     (0.003)

Lifetime Inverse Distance-Weighted Lead Emissions (10 kg): 1997 Placebo                                                                              0.017
                                                                                                                                                    (0.011)

Lifetime Inverse Distance-Weighted Lead Emissions (10 kg): 1998 Placebo                                                                                             0.012
                                                                                                                                                                   (0.012)

Lifetime Inverse Distance-Weighted Lead Emissions (10 kg): 1999 Placebo                                                                                                            0.012
                                                                                                                                                                                  (0.012)

Base Controls                                                                   Yes            Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
School-Subject-Grade FE                                                         Yes            Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
Subject-Grade-Year FE                                                           Yes            Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
Observation Weights                                                          # Students       None      # Students       None      # Students     # Students     # Students     # Students
Observations                                                                  136,240        136,240     136,240        136,240     136,240         42,028         42,028         42,028

 Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Robust standard errors are clustered at the school district level. The control variables included in all regressions are cumulative TRI facility
  emissions within 50 miles, county unemployment rate, and county median income. All regressions include school-grade-subject and grade-subject-year fixed effects.




                                                                                           33
Table A3: Effect of lead emissions from NASCAR on school z-score and proficiency rate with
different fixed effects.

                                            (1)           (2)             (3)           (4)           (5)             (6)            (7)

Panel A: Outcome: Z-Score, Treatment: Inverse-Distance Weighted
Lifetime Lead Emissions (10 kg)           -0.024       -0.063         -0.062        -0.065         -0.073         -0.074         -0.074
                                          (0.044)      (0.026)        (0.024)       (0.025)         (0.027)        (0.027)        (0.027)


Panel B: Outcome: Z-Score, Treatment: Unweighted
Lifetime Lead Emissions (10 kg)            0.000       -0.003         -0.003        -0.003         -0.004         -0.004         -0.004
                                          (0.002)      (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)


Panel C: Outcome: Proficiency Rate, Treatment: Inverse-Distance Weighted
Lifetime Lead Emissions (10 kg)           -0.068      -2.058         -1.889         -0.898         -1.060         -1.177         -1.177
                                          (0.664)      (0.487)        (0.471)       (0.441)        (0.460)        (0.481)        (0.481)


Panel D: Outcome: Proficiency Rate, Treatment: Unweighted
Lifetime Lead Emissions (10 kg)            0.020      -0.111         -0.098          -0.041        -0.050         -0.058         -0.058
                                          (0.035)      (0.030)        (0.029)        (0.021)       (0.024)        (0.026)        (0.026)

Controls                                   No            No             Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
School FE                                  No            Yes            Yes            Yes            No             No             No
Year FE                                    No            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            No             No
School-Subject-Grade FE                    No            No             No             No             Yes            Yes            Yes
Subject FE                                 No            No             No             Yes            No             No             No
Grade FE                                   No            No             No             Yes            No             No             No
Grade-Year FE                              No            No             No             No             No             Yes            No
Subject-Grade-Year FE                      No            No             No             No             No             No             Yes
Observations                             136,240       136,240        136,240        136,240        136,240        136,240        136,240

Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Robust standard errors are clustered at the school district level. School-subject-grade-year
observations are weighted by the number of students. Outcome is the z-score of the school's average test score. Z-scores are calculated by
standardizing within a grade-year-subject across all schools. Control variables include cumulative TRI facility emissions within 50 miles, the
county unemployment rate, and county median income.




                                                                     34
                 Table A4: Greater milk consumption is related to lower blood lead levels.

                                              Milk consumption Mean BLL S.D.     N
                                              Never                 2.00 1.84 932
                                              Rarely                1.71 1.51 987
                                              Sometimes             1.68 1.90 2117
                                              Often                 1.61 1.56 5735
                                            Note: Note: Data come from the 2005-2006 wave of
                                            the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
                                            (NHANES). Milk consumption refers to past 30 day
                                            milk consumption. The halflife of lead in the blood
                                            stream is also approximately 30 days. We omit two
                                            categories, Varied and Refused. Data come from 9,771
                                            observations.




Table A5: Effect of lead emissions from NASCAR on school z-score controlling for SNAP
benefits.

                                                                      (1)           (2)                 (3)                   (4)            (5)                   (6)
Lifetime Lead Emissions (10 kg)                                   -0.074          -0.040              -0.039
                                                                   (0.027)        (0.037)             (0.038)

Lifetime Lead Emissions (10kg) × Below Median Milk                                                                        -0.119         -0.087                -0.087
                                                                                                                           (0.016)        (0.032)               (0.032)

Lifetime Lead Emissions (10kg) × Above Median Milk                                                                           0.006         -0.009                -0.007
                                                                                                                            (0.037)        (0.040)               (0.039)

Controls                                                             Base         Base        Base + Snap Benefits           Base           Base        Base + Snap Benefits
School-Subject-Grade FE                                               Yes          Yes                Yes                     Yes            Yes                Yes
Subject-Grade-Year FE                                                 Yes          Yes                Yes                     Yes            Yes                Yes
Observations                                                        136,240      119,234            119,234                 136,240        119,234            119,234

Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Robust standard errors are clustered at the school district level. School-subject-grade-year observations are weighted by the number of
students. Control variables include cumulative TRI facility emissions within 50 miles, the county unemployment rate, county median income, and log SNAP benefits.




                                                                                       35
Table A6: Effects of lead emissions from NASCAR controlling for consumption of unhealthy
products and calcium-containing products.

                                                                                 (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)
Lifetime Lead Emissions (10kg) × Below Median Milk                            -0.107        -0.111         -0.110         -0.109         -0.108
                                                                               (0.015)       (0.015)        (0.015)        (0.014)        (0.014)

Lifetime Lead Emissions (10kg) × Above Median Milk                             -0.001        -0.007         -0.010         -0.007         -0.011
                                                                               (0.039)       (0.038)        (0.039)        (0.038)        (0.039)

Alcohol Sales ($1,000)                                                                                      -0.195                       -0.233
                                                                                                            (0.103)                      (0.105)

Tobacco Sales ($1,000)                                                                                      -0.002                         0.016
                                                                                                            (0.083)                       (0.085)

Non-Diet Soda Sales ($1,000)                                                                                 0.375                         0.413
                                                                                                            (0.350)                       (0.344)

Dairy Sales (Excluding Milk) ($1,000)                                                                                       0.007         -0.051
                                                                                                                           (0.271)        (0.265)

Vitamin Supplement Sales ($1,000)                                                                                          0.454          0.577
                                                                                                                           (0.264)        (0.259)

Fresh Produce Sales ($1,000)                                                                                                0.025          0.077
                                                                                                                           (0.351)        (0.320)

Canned and Dried Vegetable Sales (Including Grains) ($1,000)                                                               -0.049         -0.013
                                                                                                                           (0.454)        (0.438)

Grades Included                                                                 All            All            All            All            All
Subjects Included                                                               All            All            All            All            All
Base Controls                                                                   Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
School-Subject-Grade FE                                                         Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
Subject-Grade-Year FE                                                           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
Observations                                                                  136,240        125,359        125,359        125,359        125,359

Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Robust standard errors are clustered at the school district level. School-subject-grade-year observations
are weighted by the number of students. The first column uses all available data, while the second column restricts the sample to be the same data as
is used in columns three through five. Z-scores are calculated by standardizing within a grade-year-subject across all schools. Base control variables
include cumulative TRI facility emissions within 50 miles, the county unemployment rate, and county median income.




                                                                         36
                                                              Figure A1: Sample and fixed effects subsets for the effect of 10 kg of lead emissions on school z-scores.
           Effect of Lifetime Inverse Distance-Weighted
             Lead Emissions (10 kg) on Test Z-Score

                                                           0.00



                                                          -0.05



                                                          -0.10



                                                          -0.15




                Controls/FEs
                     Controls
                    School FE
37




                   Subject FE
                    Grade FE
     School-Subject-Grade FE
                      Year FE
              Year-Grade FE
       Year-Subject-Grade FE
                       Grade
                            3
                            4
                            5
                      Subject
                        Math
                     Reading


     Note: We highlight our main specification in red and mark included coefficients with squares. All other models are in black and mark coefficients
     with circles. Top panel: The points are the point estimates from separate specifications. The bars are the 95% confidence interval computed from
     robust standard errors clustered at the school district level. School-subject-grade-year observations are weighted by number of students. Estimates
     are ordered by their magnitude.
     Bottom panel: The filled-in circles indicate which combinations of controls and fixed effects are included in the regression used to estimate the
     coefficients in the top panel. The filled-in circles also indicate the subset of grades and subjects in the data used to produce the estimates in the top
     panel.




                                                                                                                 37
Figure A2: Heterogeneous effects of 10 inverse distance-weighted kilograms of lead by above
or below median across other calcium-containing foods.
                                                 Treatment effect heterogeneity
                                           0.1         Below Median
                                                       Above Median
Change in Z-Score (standard deviations)




                                           0.0




                                          -0.1




                                          -0.2


                                                               p = 0.11                   p = 0.07                   p = 0.85                    p = 0.21
                                                           Non-Milk Dairy        Vitamin Supplements                 Fresh Produce        Canned/Dried Vegetables
                                                               Below and Above Median Effect of Lifetime Inverse Distance-Weighted Lead Emissions (10 kg)

Note: The treatment variables are 10 inverse distance-weighted kilograms of lead interacted with dummy
variables for whether a school is in a county that is above or below the median for the variable on the x-axis.
We estimate the regressions separately for each variable on the x-axis. We assign treatment only if the school
was within 50 miles of the track where the leaded race occurred. The bars are the point estimates, and the
error bars denote the 95% confidence interval computed from robust standard errors clustered at the school
district level. School-subject-grade-year observations are weighted by number of students. The estimates
are conditioned on the set of controls and fixed effects in equation (2). The p-values at the bottom of the
figure are for testing the null hypothesis that the two coefficient estimates are equal.




                                                                                                      38
                                                         Figure A3: Lifetime inverse distance-weighted exposure quantity by years of exposure.

                                                         40
Lifetime Inverse Distance-Weighted Lead Emissions (kg)




                                                         30




                                                         20




                                                         10




                                                          0
                                                              1         2          3                4             5             6     7   8+
                                                                                       Cumulative Years Exposed to Lead from NASCAR


Note: Histograms are zoomed in to 0­40 inverse distance-weighted lifetime kilograms. Each density shows
the distribution of inverse distance-weighted lifetime lead exposure (vertical axis) for a cohort with a given
number of exposure years (horizontal axis). The dash-dotted line corresponds to 10kg of exposure, the
amount reflected in our inverse distance-weighted estimates of marginal effects throughout the paper. The
dotted line corresponds to the 90th percentile of exposure amongst treated schools. See Section 4 for
discussion. Cumulative years of exposure align with estimates provided in Panel C of Figure 2.




                                                                                                         39
Figure A4: Effect of 10 kilograms of lead on percent of students in each achievement level.

                                                                             Effect of Cumulative Years Exposed to Lead from NASCAR
                                                                             Achievement Level 5
                                                                         6
                                                                         3
                                                                         0
                                                                        -3
           Change in Percent at Achievement Level (percentage points)




                                                                        -6               2            4              6                8




                                                                             Achievement Level 4
                                                                         6
                                                                         3
                                                                         0
                                                                        -3
                                                                        -6               2            4              6                8




                                                                             Achievement Level 3
                                                                         6
                                                                         3
                                                                         0
                                                                        -3
                                                                        -6               2            4              6                8




                                                                             Achievement Level 2
                                                                         6
                                                                         3
                                                                         0
                                                                        -3
                                                                        -6               2            4              6                8




                                                                             Achievement Level 1
                                                                         6
                                                                         3
                                                                         0
                                                                        -3
                                                                        -6
                                                                               1      2        3       4      5        6     7        8
                                                                                    Cumulative Years Exposed to Lead from NASCAR

          Note: The treatment variables are a set of indicators equal to 1 if the school
          was exposed to positive amounts of lead from NASCAR for 1, 2, 3,...,8 years.
          The black points are the point estimates, and the blue shaded area is the 95%
          confidence interval computed from robust standard errors clustered at the school
          district level. The outcome variable is in terms of percentage points and ranges
          from 0 to 100. We assign treatment only if the school was within 50 miles of the
          track where the leaded race occurred. School-subject-grade-year observations are
          weighted by the number of students. The estimates are conditioned on the set of
          controls and fixed effects in equation (2).




                                                                                                          40
                                Figure A5: Correlation of calcium intake and blood lead




                          1.8
Blood lead level, µg/dl




                          1.6




                          1.4




                                      500            1000                    1500   2000
                                                    Average calcium intake, mg


Note: This figure presents the non-parametric conditional expectation of blood
level across twenty ventiles of average daily calculated calcium intake. Data come
from the 2005-2006 wave of the National Health and Nutrition Examination Sur-
vey (NHANES). Mean average daily calcium intake from 7,255 observations is
920. Mean blood lead level from 7,255 observations is 1.68.




                                                             41
Figure A6: Lead exposure density by above and below median milk consumption.

               Lifetime Exposure By Level of Milk Consumption

                                                                        Below Median
                                                                        Above Median
        0.05



        0.04



        0.03



        0.02



        0.01



        0.00
                0             25          50           75           100
                Lifetime Inverse Distance-Weighted Lead Emissions (kg)
     Note: Distribution shows lead exposure by above and below median milk con-
     sumption. Densities only include data from treated schools. "Lead exposure"
     refers to estimated total lifetime exposure to inverse-distance weighted lead emis-
     sions. See Section 4.1 for discussion of effects by milk consumption.




                                             42
Figure A7: Ventile binscatter plot showing the pairwise correlations between each pair of
variables interacted with treatment in Panel A.
 Fast Food




                3600




                3200




                2800




                2400




                                                 0.3                              0.5                                 0.7                                  0.9
 Poverty Rate




                                                                                                                                                                 0.55




                3300




                                                                                                                                                                 0.50




                3200




                                                                                                                                                                 0.45




                3100




                                                                                                                                                                 0.40




                3000




                                                                                                                                                                                       10                 15                        20                     25                        30




                                      10                       15                              20                           25                        30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20.0
                                                                                                                                                                 0.65




                                                                                                                                                                 0.60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              17.5



                3300
 Income




                                                                                                                                                                 0.55


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15.0
                3200




                                                                                                                                                                 0.50



                3100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              12.5




                                                                                                                                                                 0.45



                3000



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10.0




                                                                                                                                                                 0.40                                                                                                                                       30000                40000                         50000                       60000


                2900




                                                                                                                                                                               30000                           40000                               50000                              60000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   55000




                              30000                                 40000                                     50000                                    60000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   50000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20




                                                                                                                                                                  0.7




                3600




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               18
 % Black




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   45000
                                                                                                                                                                  0.6




                3300




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               16




                                                                                                                                                                  0.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   40000




                3000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               14



                                                                                                                                                                  0.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   35000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               12



                                                                                                                                                                  0.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.1           0.2                  0.3                  0.4
                2700




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.1                  0.2          0.3                     0.4




                                                                                                                                                                                            0.1                        0.2                   0.3                               0.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.30


                                           0.1                              0.2                         0.3                                     0.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              22.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   50000                                                                        0.25
                                                                                                                                                                  0.7
 % Hispanic




                4000



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20.0



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.20



                                                                                                                                                                  0.6



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   45000




                3500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              17.5




                                                                                                                                                                  0.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   40000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.10




                3000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15.0

                                                                                                                                                                  0.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   35000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.00     0.03   0.06           0.09




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.00          0.03         0.06                 0.09


                                                                                                                                                                  0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.00                        0.05                                  0.10
                2500



                                                                                                                                                                        0.00                       0.03                      0.06                               0.09




                       0.00                             0.03                            0.06                                     0.09




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.06




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               25
                                                                                                                                                                  0.7
 Old Homes




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   45000


                3500




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.04
                                                                                                                                                                  0.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.20


                3000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   40000




                                                                                                                                                                  0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.15
                2500




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   35000



                2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.10




                                                                                                                                                                  0.4




                1500




                                                       0.025                                    0.050                                   0.075                                                     0.025                              0.050                             0.075                                              0.02                 0.04         0.06                    0.08                                0.025                0.050                0.075                        0.025          0.050          0.075            0.025   0.050   0.075




                                                               Milk                                                                                                            Fast Food                                                                                                      Poverty Rate                                                                                                        Income                                                                      % Black                                       % Hispanic

Note: The data correspond to the actual levels of the variables, not simply indicators for above or below
median. Data sources are outlined in Section 2.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           43
