                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         AGGREGATE-DEMAND AMPLIFICATION OF SUPPLY DISRUPTIONS:
                      THE ENTRY-EXIT MULTIPLIER

                                         Florin O. Bilbiie
                                          Marc J. Melitz

                                       Working Paper 28258
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28258


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020




We thank Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Basile Grassi, Paolo Surico, and Mathias Thoenig for useful
comments and discussions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Florin O. Bilbiie and Marc J. Melitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Aggregate-Demand Amplification of Supply Disruptions: The Entry-Exit Multiplier
Florin O. Bilbiie and Marc J. Melitz
NBER Working Paper No. 28258
December 2020
JEL No. E31,E32,E40,E60

                                          ABSTRACT

The response of entry and exit to adverse supply shocks, such as COVID-19, is amplified by
nominal rigidities. This leads to further amplification in the response of aggregate demand.
Firms’ inability to adjust their prices induces further changes in profitability that engender
additional entry-exit dynamics. These changes in net entry, in turn, amplify the initial response to
the shock by generating additional curvature in the relationship between the shock and aggregate
demand. Even in our baseline model with efficient equilibrium entry, this entry-exit multiplier
triggers a substantial magnification of the welfare losses due to a negative shock through these
second-order effects. Nominal rigidities may also induce a first-order effect when entry is no
longer efficient. Our model highlights how the addition of endogenous entry to a benchmark New
Keynesian model radically changes the consequences of nominal rigidities. We focus on the
amplification of aggregate demand to supply shocks, but also highlight other key divergences that
can potentially resolve some empirical discrepancies associated with the workhorse New-
Keynesian model.


Florin O. Bilbiie
University of Lausanne
florin.bilbiie@gmail.com

Marc J. Melitz
Department of Economics
Harvard University
215 Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
mmelitz@harvard.edu
1    Introduction

The economic recession following the recent COVID-19 crisis has been associated with very sharp

increases in the response of business entry and exit. The fall in entry and increase in exit has

reached hitherto unseen magnitudes. The exit rate doubled, as early evidence for SMEs from

Kalemli-Ozcan, Gourinchas, Penciakova, and Sander (2020) shows. Business formation statistics

from the Census Bureau shows that entry fell by 40% in the second quarter of 2020, even though

it recovered after. Data on job flows from Business Employment Dynamics also shows a sharp in-

crease in exit and decrease in entry in the first quarter of 2020, similar to the trends in the aftermath

of the 2008 financial crisis.1 These supply-side developments are mirrored on the demand-side:

many of the varieties customarily consumed by households have simply become unavailable, be

it because of the fear of contagion or policy measures such as lockdowns. What does a business-

cycle, macroeconomic model consistent with these features imply about the propagation of supply

shocks to macroeconomic aggregates?

     The negative supply impulse we consider as a metaphor for the COVID-19 crisis is a classic

negative productivity shock: a downward shift in the production function associated with severe

restrictions on the availability of inputs. The classic question we revisit is: can this supply disrup-

tion lead to a demand-recession, understood as a fall in activity, output and income, when output

is demand-determined, e.g. with nominal rigidities as in New Keynesian (hereinafter NK) mod-

els? We find that it does and that the endogenous responses of entry-exit—combined with those

nominal rigidities—plays a key role.

     We first show that the response of entry-exit to supply shocks is amplified in a model with

sticky prices: a supply-side phenomenon we dub the entry-exit multiplier. The response of the

number of firms is amplified when firms cannot adjust prices in response to productivity shocks.

Those distortions induce changes in profits that trigger entry-exit dynamics, setting off a feedback

loop to (endogenous) productivity. Consider a negative shock. Firms wish to increase their price to

reflect their increased marginal cost. With sticky prices they cannot, so they are "stuck" with their

suboptimal price. This induces further losses and triggers further exit, engendering an additional
    1 Duringthe first quarter of 2020, gross job gains from opening and expanding private-sector establishments de-
creased by 13% from the previous quarter, while gross job losses from closing and contracting establishments increased
by 9%.



                                                          1
(endogenous) aggregate productivity decrease that amplifies the initial impulse. The endogenous

fall in aggregate productivity is due to the standard variety effect in models with entry and exit.

    This mechanism captures an intuition that is more general and not necessarily linked to the

inability to reset prices—but to any feature by which firms are stuck with inputs that are fixed (in

the short run) or sunk, and exit because they cannot profitably downsize. Thus, this is a reduced

form for frictions that impinge upon intensive-margin adjustments, with negative consequences

for profitability. Kalemli-Ozcan, Gourinchas, Penciakova, and Sander (2020) present an example

of such an alternative model. They use to explain exit in the aftermath of COVID-19 but focus

on direct, first-round effects—whereas our complementary focus is on general-equilibrium effects

propagated through endogenous entry-exit.

    In our benchmark economy with constant elasticity of substitution preferences, henceforth

CES, the sticky-price multiplier of the supply shock on the number of firms (its elasticity with

respect to the productivity shock) is equal to the elasticity of substitution between differentiated

goods θ > 1 (we assume logarithmic utility in aggregate consumption as a benchmark but relax

this assumption later). On the other hand, that elasticity is 1 under flexible prices—the well-known

market size effect of CES monopolistic competitive models in general equilibrium going back to

Krugman (1980). There is thus an entry-exit "multiplier" under sticky prices. While this channel is

present and operates in any model with entry and nominal rigidities studying monetary policies

(see i.a. Bilbiie Ghironi Melitz 2007; Bergin Corsetti 2008; Bilbiie Fujiwara Ghironi 2014; Bilbiie

2019), it has not been identified, isolated, and analytically characterized before. This is our paper’s

first contribution.2 This amplification is important not only in and of itself but especially due to

its consequences for the further transmission to output and the occurrence of demand-determined

recessions, which have not been previously analyzed.

    We characterize the conditions under which aggregate-demand amplification of supply shocks (a

magnified response of the welfare-relevant consumption aggregator under sticky prices) occurs—

relative to the flexible-price benchmark. It is well-known that such a negative supply shock cannot

drive a demand recession in a standard NK model, wherein a temporary negative productivity
   2 Ourresults generalize to models of entry with sunk costs where the number of firms acts as a state variable pro-
viding propagation and matching profits’ dynamics, such as Bilbiie Ghironi, and Melitz (2007, 2012). We nevertheless
focus on the free-entry, zero-profits model of entry with a fixed per-period cost for analytical tractability (as in e.g.
Jaimovich and Floetotto (2008) for flexible prices and Bilbiie (2019) for sticky prices).



                                                           2
shock implies an increase in the output gap: a smaller fall in output under sticky prices than under

flexible prices. Our second contribution is thus to analyze the entry-exit multiplier’s ensuing

impact on aggregate demand.

    We first show that in our benchmark CES economy with sticky prices, amplification of negative

shocks always occurs. Indeed, we identify an asymmetry in the effects of shocks on the "output

gap": negative shocks make sticky-price output over-react and positive shocks make it under-

react. In this benchmark case, the responses to shocks under either sticky or flexible prices are

identical to the first order, thus isolating the contribution of higher-order nonlinear terms. This ef-

fect is driven by the curvature of welfare in the number of varieties; it is increasing in the elasticity

of substitution between goods under sticky prices. Throughout, we focus on a nonlinear solu-

tion of the model that captures higher-order effects. The latter are especially important with large

shocks like the COVID-19 crisis, which is associated with unprecedented changes in aggregate

variables rendering first-order perturbation methods insufficient and potentially misleading.3

    We then show that this amplification of aggregate demand through our entry-exit multiplier

can have a first-order impact when the equilibrium level of entry is inefficient. To highlight this,

we explore deviations from CES preferences that feature such an inefficiency. Our main takeaway

is that the entry-exit multiplier then yields first-order aggregate-demand amplification when the

benefit of variety to consumers is larger than the net markup (the profit incentive for entrants):

supply-driven demand recessions occur when “demand” forces exceed “supply” forces for the

creation and destruction of new varieties.

    With no (or exogenous) entry and exit—such as the standard NK model—the response of aggre-

gate activity is proportional to the adverse supply shock when prices are flexible: if productivity

falls by 1%, consumption and output fall by 1%. In this case, the response is at most proportional,

and generally smaller than 1% under sticky prices. In other words, there is aggregate-demand

dampening of supply shocks, an issue well-known in NK models.4

    With endogenous entry and exit, there is amplification of the aggregate response relative to this

no-entry model, even under flexible prices. This is due to the variety effect that acts as a form of
   3 We  use first-order appropximations only for illustrative purposes, to elucidate some key mechanisms that survive
to first-order, even if other key mechanisms do not.
    4 The response ou output with sticky prices itself can be positive (if prices are not entirely fixed, etc.) – but the key

point is that it is always less than one. That is, the output gap (the key summary statistic) is positive in response to
negative supply shocks (the response under sticky is smaller than under flexible prices).


                                                             3
"increasing returns" magnifying the effect of productivity shocks.5 This is the welfare gain of trade

and market size in the "new trade theory" with monopolistic competition, e.g. Melitz (2003). But

there is further amplification under sticky prices. Thus, endogenous entry-exit radically changes

the consequences of sticky prices for supply disruptions: price stickiness dampens the aggregate

response without entry, but it amplifies that aggregate response with entry-exit. Furthermore, the

sticky-price amplification of recessions under entry-exit is an increasing function of the size of the

exogenous disruption: the amplification works in part through higher-order, nonlinear terms due

to the concavity of welfare in the number of varieties. This is particularly relevant for large shocks

like those associated with the COVID-19 crisis, where such nonlinearities are likely to be especially

important.

   Nevertheless, aggregate-demand amplification can also occur though first-order, linear terms

as soon as we depart from the efficient-entry CES benchmark. In a nutshell, supply-driven de-

mand recessions can occur when the benefit of variety exceeds the markup, making entry-exit

inefficiently low in the market equilibrium relative to what a planner would choose. Under sticky

prices the response of entry-exit is magnified through the multiplier effect that we identified. This

immediately translates into first-order magnification of the welfare-relevant consumption too.

   Our result can also be viewed through the lens of the intertemporal logic that is the backbone

of business-cycle models, including NK models. With no entry and fixed prices, there is no change

in the real interest rate, so consumption is fixed by the Euler equation. Whereas with endogenous

entry, the real interest rate does change even when prices are fixed. Consumption falls if there is

exit because this creates expected deflation in the welfare-relevant CPI, and an increase in the real

interest rate, generating intertemporal substitution towards future consumption.

   An important additional implication of our framework for business-cycle analysis is that entry-

exit brings the response of hours worked in our sticky-price model in line with the response of its

flexible-price counterpart (akin to the workhorse RBC model). This resolves a long-standing issue

with NK models that has been the subject of a spirited debate. In particular, while RBC models

focus on and embed at their core procyclical hours worked, standard NK models customarily

imply countercyclical hours in response to productivity shocks. Since this is driven by income

effects on labor due to profit variations, the entry-exit channel endogenously eliminates those
  5 This   is studied in detail i.a. in Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz (2012)


                                                                4
income effects and can thus generate procyclical hours—just like in the flexible-price model.

    Finally, we extend our analysis to the case of arbitrary intertemporal substitution in consump-

tion. The requirement for the entry-exit multiplier and for aggregate-demand amplification of

aggregate supply shocks is then that the elasticity of substitution between goods be higher than the

elasticity of intertemporal substitution in consumption. Virtually all empirical estimates for those

two elasticities satisfy this ranking. We compare and contrast our analysis with a recent paper

by Guerrieri et al (2002). In their model with exogenous variation in the number of varieties and

sector-specific shocks, the condition for aggregate-demand amplification requires a reversal in the

ranking of those two elasticities (higher intertemporal than across goods). We highlight these key

differences in further detail in Section 4.

    Although we initially focus on the non-linear implications of our basic NK model, we also

develop a loglinearized framework of a substantially more general model (in terms of functional

forms). We highlight the connections with the textbook treatments of the NK model such as Wood-

ford (2003) and Gali (2008).


Related literature

A large and growing literature emphasizes the role of endogenous entry and variety with flex-

ible prices for business cycles, studying macro fluctuations and normative properties i.a. Bilbiie

Ghironi Melitz (2012, 2019), Colciago and Etro (2010), Jaimovich and Floetotto (2008), Lewis and

Poilly (2014), Hamano and Zanetti (2017), Cacciatore and Fiori (2016), Dixon and Savagar (2020),

Edmond, Midrigan, and Xu (2020), Michelacci, Paciello, and Pozzi (2019). A few papers have an-

alyzed these models with nominal rigidities, focusing on monetary policy (Bilbiie Ghironi Melitz,

2007; Bergin and Corsetti, 2008; Bilbiie, Fujiwara, and Ghironi, 2014).6

    Our model’s implications for the response of hours worked, the sign of which becomes invari-

ant to price stickiness, is related to the literature studying both the empirical response and the

ensuing controversy between RBC and NK models, e.g. Gali (1999), Christiano et al (2003), and

Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2008). A different recent literature studies the response of the labor
   6 Earlier pioneering contributions on RBC-like models with entry include Chatterjee and Cooper (1993), Devereux,

Head, and Lapham (1996), and Cook (2001). More recently, Bilbiie, (2019), Colciago and Silvestrini (2020) and Hamano
and Zanetti (2020) used models with entry and nominal rigidities to study departures from monetary neutality, the
effects of market concentration, and selection with firm heterogeneity, respectively.



                                                         5
share to demand shocks under nominal rigidities, e.g. Kaplan and Zoch (2020) and Cantore et al

(2019).7

    The standard NK model’s failure to produce demand-recessions in response to negative supply

shocks is the starting point of a recent important contribution, Guerrieri et al (2020), that is com-

plementary to ours. The authors call such occurrences “Keynesian supply shocks”. They build a

2-sector model that predicts those responses to sector-specific shocks. In a benchmark CES econ-

omy (across goods and over time), the necessary condition is that the elasticity of intertemporal

substitution be larger than the elasticity of substitution between sectors/goods. This parameter

restriction is at odds with most of the empirical literature measuring these key elasticities: the

intertemporal elasticity is at most two (and most often estimated to be below one), while the elas-

ticity of substitution is estimated to be substantially higher, somewhere in the range between four

and eight. In other words, the requirement is that in response to exogenous variations in varieties,

goods be Edgeworth complements: that households be more willing to substitute intertemporally

in the same good than they are to substitute between two goods. The authors explore extensions

that allow relaxing this restriction, most notably the interaction with liquidity constrained, high

marginal propensity to consume households.8 We focus on a different, complementary channel:

endogenous entry-exit and variety. We also consider aggregate supply shocks affecting all firms and

products symmetrically. We thus abstract from the important consequences of both sector-specific

exogenous shocks and of household heterogeneity, both essential ingredients in Guerrieri et al’s

analysis.9 Instead, we focus on the role of the endogenous entry-exit response in general equilib-

rium.

    Other contributions emphasize related supply-side mechanisms, such as inter-sectoral link-

ages and complementarities (Woodford (2020)), unmployment and endogenous growth (Fornaro

and Wolf (2020)); and input-output network structures (Baqaee and Farhi (2020)). We abstract

from such features to focus on endogenous entry-exit and product variety and their interaction
   7 For  more recent evidence supporting a positive response of hours worked to a positive transitory productivity
shock, see e.g. Peersman and Straub (2009) and Furlanetto et al (2020).
   8 Guerrieri et al observe that the failure of NK models to generate keynesian supply shocks is robust to the introduc-

tion of incomplete markets; see also Bilbiie (2008) for an illustration of that point in a two-agent TANK model, and for an
alternative mechanism generating aggregate-demand recessions in response to negative productivity shocks (labelled
"inverted aggregate demand logic" therein), through high enough elasticity of income of constrained agents.
   9 Furthermore, the sector-specific shocks in Guerrieri et al are isomorphic to good-specific "demand" shocks, i.e.

disturbances to the utility function.



                                                            6
with price stickiness.


2     The Entry-Exit Multiplier and Aggregate Demand

In this section, we outline the simplest model of endogenous entry-exit with nominal rigidities. In

our benchmark economy, households maximize the expected present value of utility defined over

a consumption basket C and hours worked L. The utility function is logarithmic in consumption
               1+ ϕ
           L
ln Ct       t
         χ 1+ ϕ , where total consumption is the CES aggregate of individual varieties. This provides

an important benchmark distilling our core mechanism. We then show how our key results hold

more generally: with different preferences for variety, a utility function with different income

effects on labor, and with arbitrary elasticity of intertemporal substitution (relaxing log utility in

consumption).


2.1     A Simple New Keynesian Model with Endogenous Entry-Exit

At time t, the household consumes the basket of goods Ct , defined over a continuum of goods of
                     R Nt        θ 1
                                       θ
                                      θ 1
measure Nt : Ct =     0
                          ct (ω ) dω
                                  θ       , where θ > 1 is the symmetric elasticity of substitution
                                                                        RN                    1

across goods. Let pt (ω ) denote the nominal price of good ω and Pt = 0 t pt (ω )1 θ dω
                                                                                            1 θ
                                                                                                the

welfare-based price index. The household’s demand for each individual good ω is then ct (ω ) =
                      θ
( pt (ω ) /Pt )           Ct .

      There is a continuum of monopolistically competitive firms, each producing a different variety

ω 2 [0, Nt ]. Production requires only one factor, labor, whose productivity is scaled exogenously

by a factor At . We model the COVID-19 economic impact of a large negative shock to this pro-

ductivity term. (In our simple framework, this is identical to a downward shift in labor supply).

Output supplied by firm ω is:
                                             8
                                             >
                                             < At lt ( ω )       f , if At lt (ω ) > f
                                 ct (ω ) =
                                             >
                                             :           0, otherwise,


where lt (ω ) is the firm’s labor demand and f a fixed per-period cost (in units of labor). Under

free (endogenous) entry, this fixed cost determines the number of firms in equilibrium, whereas

with no or exogenous entry, it determines the profit share. Cost minimization, taking the wage as

                                                             7
given, implies that the real marginal cost is equal to the real wage deflated by productivity Wt /At ,

with Wt    W̃t /Pt and W̃t the nominal wage.

   We consider a symmetric equilibrium with Nt producing firms and drop the ω qualifier. The

benefit of variety is given by the relative prices:

                                                      pt      1
                                           ρt            = Ntθ 1 .                                 (1)
                                                      Pt

Let µt denote the firms’ markup (potentially time-varying):

                                                            ρt
                                             µt                  .                                 (2)
                                                          Wt /At

Firm ω profit in period t can be written as:

                                                      pt
                                           dt =          ct       Wt lt .
                                                      Pt

   The household’s budget constraint enforces the aggregate accounting identity equating ex-

penditures (consumption plus the fixed cost in labor units for all firms, a form of "investment")

coincide with income (labor income and profits from sales of all firms). That is:

                                     Wt                            pt           Wt
                              Ct +      f Nt = Wt Lt +                                ct Nt .
                                     At                            Pt           At

Combining the above equations and aggregating across goods, anticipating a symmetric equilib-

rium, we obtain:
                                                  θ
                                                      1
                                                               At Lt
                                       Ct = Ntθ                             f    .                 (3)
                                                                Nt

   With endogenous entry-exit, the number of goods (firms) is determined by a zero-profit condi-

tion every period for aggregate profits, and hence individual firm profits dt = 0 in our symmetric

equilibrium. Replacing the individual production function in the expression for profits, equating
                                                                                      µt f
to zero, and solving, we obtain individual labor demand: lt =                        µt 1 At .

   A key equation is the aggregate labor demand, obtained by aggregating lt across producers:

                                                           µt     f Nt
                                           Lt =                        .                           (4)
                                                      µt        1 At

                                                           8
Combined with the markup rule, this yields:

                                                                            1
                                            θ
                                           θ 1
                                                      µt     11            θ 1     1
                                  Wt = At                       Lt                    .                                     (5)
                                                           µt f                    µt

Three important observations are in order: first, endogenous entry implies that the aggregate labor

demand is upward sloping. Its slope is the benefit of product variety. Second, aggregate labor

demand shifts as usual with changes in labor productivity, but that effect is amplified here by the

variety effect; and finally, aggregate labor demand shifts with endogenous changes in markups.

The last effect is also present in sticky-price models with fixed entry, even though the endogenous

change in markups depends on the equilibrium adjustment in the number of varieties.

   Using the zero-profit condition, aggregate accounting (3) can be written:


                                                 Ct = Wt Lt .                                                               (6)


The households’ choice between consumption and hours yields the standard labor supply:


                                                  ϕ            1
                                            χLt =                 Wt .                                                      (7)
                                                               Ct

Logarithmic utility in consumption implies that income and substitution effects cancel out: (7) and
                                                                                                     1
the resource constraint (6) imply fixed equilibrium hours worked Lt = L̄ = χ                        1+ ϕ   . This simplifies

the algebra and allows us to focus on the core novel channel associated with endogenous entry.

We relax this assumption later on.

   An important distinction concerns individual versus welfare-relevant prices, and their corre-

sponding inflation rates. In particular, we refer to the former as producer prices p and to the latter

as consumer prices—the welfare-relevant price index P that incorporates the benefit of product

variety. Denoting by π inflation in producer prices 1 + π t = pt /pt                      1   and 1 + π C = Pt /Pt      1   in

consumer prices, they are related to the growth of the number of varieties through (1):

                                                                          1
                                       1 + πt                   Nt       θ 1
                                                =                              .                                            (8)
                                       1 + π Ct                Nt 1

   This distinction is particularly important with nominal rigidities because these apply at the


                                                           9
individual (product or firm) level price pt . The relevant inflation rate for aggregate demand is con-

sumer inflation π Ct , insofar as it determines the ex-ante real interest rate that governs intertemporal

substitution. Indeed, the solution to the household’s intertemporal problem is the standard Euler

equation for consumption:10                                              !
                                         1               1 + It    1
                                            = βEt            C
                                                                             .                                  (9)
                                         Ct                      C
                                                       1 + π t +1 t +1

The model is closed by specifying the price-setting equation—delivering a Phillips curve for PPI

inflation and a Taylor rule for the nominal interest rate in response to PPI inflation.


2.2    The Entry-Exit Multiplier: Closed-form Solution

In order to highlight the role of nominal rigidities as starkly as possible, we first consider an ex-

treme form of sticky prices that are indefinitely fixed. Later on, we generalize this to a model with

a Phillips curve and Taylor rule and show that our main qualitative results remain unchanged.

Under flexible prices, the equilibrium, denoted by superscript F, is fully determined by combin-

ing (3), (4), (1), and (2). The markup is constant and given by µt = θ/ (θ              1), delivering the lower

left corner of Table 1.

      Under sticky prices, denoted by superscript S, we assume momentarily that rather than a Tay-

lor rule setting the nominal interest rate, the central bank sets the amount of nominal expenditure,

e.g. money supply Mt . This yields the "quantity equation": Mt = Pt Ct . We adopt this for sim-

plicity, but show in Appendix A that this has exactly the same interpretation as a fixed real rate

combined with the Euler equation.11 Since individual prices are fixed, the relative-price equation
                 1
                θ 1
is Pt = p̄Nt          , and the markup µt is now endogenous and given by (4). The equilibrium is

outlined in the lower right corner of Table 1.
  10 The full solution also implies a standard transversality condition.
  11 We later on solve the dynamic version of the model with a Phillips curve and Taylor rule that does not entirely
neutralize PPI inflation.




                                                        10
                                   Table 1: Closed-Form Nonlinear Solution

                                                 Flexible Prices (F)                                 Sticky Prices (S)

                                             CtNF = At L̄                                       demand: CtNS = M
                                                                                                               P̄
                                                                                                                  t

              No Entry-Exit (N)
                                             Mt = PtNF CtNF                                     supply: CtNS = At LtNS
                                                       1 At L̄
                                             NtEF =    θ f                                      NtES =   At L̄
                                                                                                          f
                                                                                                                    Mt
                                                                                                                    f p̄
        Endogenous Entry-Exit (E)                                                       θ                                          1
                                                          θ 1
                                             CtEF =                1       ( At L̄) θ       1
                                                                                                CtES =   Mt      At L̄     Mt     θ 1

                                                      θ (θ f ) θ       1                                 p̄       f        f p̄


Comparing the equilibrium expressions of entry-exit leads to our first, core proposition:


Proposition 1 The Entry-Exit Multiplier. The response of the number of firms (entry-exit) Nt to the

supply shock At under sticky prices is higher relative to flex prices by factor of:


                                                          θ > 1.


    This is a powerful result that operates in models with entry-exit and nominal rigidities; for

example, it certainly is a feature of Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz (2007) and Bergin and Corsetti

(2008), although it has not been identified or discussed as such. The intuition is very simple

and general. With sticky prices, the intensive margin cannot adjust and the extensive margin

inefficiently bears all the adjustment. For a productivity increase, the firm would like to produce

more but cannot (sticky prices). This generates excess demand and entry, whereas with flexible

prices, there would still be entry but each firm would also produces more.12 For a negative shock,

the firm would like to produce less but cannot, which exacerbates the negative effect on profits.

Since this cannot happen along the intensive margin, it happens at the extensive margin. Firms are

bigger than they would be absent price rigidities, and there are fewer of them. This is a distortion

that increases with the demand elasticity θ. In other words, more intensive-margin adjustment

would be desirable, and this is relatively more important when goods are closer substitutes. This

last argument is related to the impact on consumption, that we will study next.

    We note that the equilibrium is determined by two key equations: 1. free (endogenous) entry-

exit, implying zero aggregate profits; and 2. individual profit maximization, implying the pricing
  12 To start with, note that the effect of productivity on entry-exit is symmetric for positive and negative shocks; as we

discuss momentarily, this is no longer true for the effect on consumption.



                                                              11
condition that marginal cost equal marginal revenue.13 When a (say) negative productivity shock

hits (dA < 0), there is a ceteris paribus decrease in profits for each firm (keeping relative prices

ρ fixed), and free entry-exit implies the number of firms N goes down to restore the zero-profit

condition (the first equation).

    To find how much equilibrium entry-exit occurs, we need to consider the pricing condition.

Notice that marginal revenue is given by ρ/µ. Keeping the wage fixed, a productivity fall implies

an increase in marginal cost. With flexible prices (at given N), the markup µ is constant and

individual prices increase. But the equilibrium response of relative prices ρ depends on the extent

of entry-exit. Each individual firm contracts its labor demand, and there is a lower number of firms

(one-to-one with the productivity decrease).

    With sticky individual prices, marginal cost and revenue are still equalized. But now when

individual profits go down, firms are stuck with prices too low, generating exit incentives. The

markup goes down (it was constant under flex prices), which dampens the fall in individual labor

demand. The number of firms however falls by more, generating exactly the same aggregate labor

demand response. Thus, the relative price falls by more under sticky prices to compensate for the

fall in markup and generates the same real marginal cost (and revenue) regardless of whether

prices are flexible or sticky. In other words, the welfare price index (CPI) P falls more under sticky

prices.

    The above discussion hints that our mechanism is likely to be more relevant and realistic for

negative productivity shocks than for positive ones, in terms of the relative timing of entry and

pricing decisions. For a positive shock, an undesirable model feature is that entry itself happens

before individual firms can adjust their price. This can be fixed by introducing a sunk cost, but

this would need to be lower than the price adjustment cost (Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz 2007 uses

a sunk-cost model and investigates those issues).

    Yet for negative productivity shocks, the same criticism has less bind. If firms are stuck and

cannot reduce their scale, a greater proportion of them fail. In case of a big negative shock, if

it were possible to redistribute the fall in individual sales (intensive margin), more firms would

survive. But this is impossible, so disproportionately more firms fail. While price stickiness is
  13 A key observation is that the labor market equilibrium is identical under flexible and sticky prices: the real wage

and marginal cost change by exactly the same amount.



                                                          12
probably not the most micro-plausible mechanism for this failure of intensive-margin adjustment,

the firms’ inability to increase prices enough in a slump certainly seems realistic for crisis such as

the current one (alternative mechanism would have to take into account coordination and wage

stickiness). So we take price stickiness as a metaphor for firms’ inability to contract even though a

large negative profit results in exit.

      A final remark is that the difficulty of increasing prices and reduce individual production is

likely to apply to product (as opposed to firm) level, so the exit emphasized here applies as well to

multi-product firms dropping products as it does to the exit of firms.


2.3    Aggregate-Demand Amplification Through Entry-Exit

When does this entry-exit multiplier of the supply, productivity shock lead to aggregate demand

amplification—a higher response of consumption? A key point to note in this context is that N is

linear in A, but C is nonlinear in A, because C ( N ) is nonlinear. It is useful for comparison to review

the standard NK model with no entry-exit, with a fixed number of varieties Nt = N̄, which we

normalize to 1. For reference, we denote throughout variables in the No-Entry-Exit model by the

superscript N. Labor supply is still given by (7), but labor demand is simply: WtN = At /µtN , a

special case of (5) with no benefit of variety. Furthermore, there is now no distinction between

producer and consumer prices. Since we normalize the mass of goods to 1, individual and aggre-

gate variables coincide. The production function is YtN = CtN = At LtN , where we normalize the

fixed cost in the no-entry economy to zero (this is immaterial for our analysis).

      Under flexible prices, optimal pricing implies a constant markup rule µtNF =                     θ
                                                                                                      θ 1.   Denoting this
                                                                                 θ 1
equilibrium with the superscript NF, the solution is WtNF =                       θ At   with hours and consumption
                           1
                   θ 1    1+ ϕ
LtNF = L̄ =         θχ           and CtNF = YtNF = At L̄. Hours are constant in equilibrium, even though

labor supply is endogenous, because income and substitution effects cancel out (a consequence of
                                                                                                              Mt
logarithmic utility in consumption). With sticky prices we now have CtNS = At LtNS =                          P̄
                                                                                                                   ! LtNS =
Mt 1
P̄ At
      :   as long as they stay within the time constraint, hours go up when productivity goes down

in order to keep consumption constant at the demand-determined level.14

      This core intuition of the NK model is at odds with the data and is at work in richer versions

of this model. It is overturned in our model with endogenous entry-exit. This restores procyclical
 14 Evidently,                                   Mt 1
                 there is rationing as soon as   P̄ At
                                                         becomes larger than the feasible time endowment.


                                                                 13
hours in response to productivity, just like under flexible prices. We return to this issue in the

dynamic model later on.
                                                                                                                                  1+ ϕ
                                                                                                                       ϕ    Mt
    The effect on hours is due to income effects. Note that wages and profits are: WtNS = At χ                              P̄
                                            (1+ ϕ )                  1+ ϕ
and DtNS = ( Mt / P̄) 1              At               χ ( Mt / P̄)          . Wages are countercyclical and profits procyclical

conditional on supply shocks. In particular, wages go up and profits down in response to a bad

shock. Agents work more because of the extra income effect of profits relative to the free-entry

(C = wL) case whereby income and substitution effects cancel out. With entry-exit, this decrease

in profits results in exit. In the top row of Table 1, we record the closed-form equilibrium solution

of the no-entry model with flexible and sticky prices.

    We plot consumption C as a function of the shock A for the two equilibria in the left panel of

Figure 1. Since output is demand-determined under flexible prices, it is the upward sloping line
                                                                                             Mt
with slope L̄. Under sticky prices, it is the horizontal line CtNS =                         P̄
                                                                                                .   We choose the domain of At

such that there is no rationing. That is, the equilibrium level of output is equal to demand and the

adjustment is borne by hours worked. Those hours increase to compensate for the productivity-

driven shortfall.15

    The main takeaway is that in response to a bad supply shock (lower A), consumption and

output go down proportionally under flexible prices. But under sticky prices, they either stay

unchanged (if labor is elastic enough) or at most fall by as much as under flexible prices: in other

words, there is never a demand shortage in response to a negative supply shock, and there can

even be excess demand. The "output gap" is positive in response to supply disruptions. This is a

well-known property of the standard no-entry sticky-price model restated here as a benchmark.

    Consider now the role of endogenous entry and exit. In the right panel of Figure 1, we plot

the EF (red dash) and ES (blue solid) equilibria. The economies are again calibrated so that the

steady-state equilibria (A = 1) coincide, and also coincide with the steady-state of the NF model

(see Appendix A for details). The only remaining free parameter is θ, which we set to 3.8. This is

a conservative value in line with the trade estimates. As the figure makes clear, consumption and
  15 With a negative enough shock, demand can exceed supply (what can be produced), so the equilibrium amount

produced and consumed would be represented by a kinked line (where to the left, the upward-sloping part would be
supply-determined). The kink point itself is determined by labor supply elasticity: for instance with inelastic labor, any
small negative A shock would lead to rationing. In particular, there is rationing as soon as MP̄t A1t > Ltot (the total time
endowment), which calibrating real money balances to equate the two equilibria at A = 1 (in the absence of shocks)
                                     1
                M̄ 1          θ 1   1+ ϕ    1
delivers At <   P̄ Ltot
                          =    θχ          Ltot
                                                .


                                                                            14
output under sticky prices are always lower than under flexible prices. In particular, consumption

and output fall by more in response to a bad supply shock when prices are sticky. That is, the

output gap is negative in response to supply disruptions. Moreover, the larger the disruption, the

larger the demand recession, and the more negative the output gap.



   C 1.4               No Entry-Exit                               C 1.4          Endogenous Entry-Exit

      1.2                                                            1.2


      1.0                                                            1.0


      0.8                                                            0.8


      0.6                                                            0.6


      0.4                                                            0.4


      0.2                                                            0.2


      0.0                                                            0.0
             0.8     0.9      1.0      1.1      1.2                         0.8      0.9   1.0    1.1     1.2
                                                        A                                                       A


  Figure 1: CES. C xF (flex. prices) red dash, C xS (sticky prices) solid blue

    To understand what drives this key result that completely overturns the propagation of supply

shocks in the no-entry New Keynesian model, we compare the free-entry equilibria formally. We

take a second-order approximation around the point C ES = C EF denoting the percentage deviation

from steady-state by a small letter e.g. at           ( At        A) /A, to obtain our second Proposition.


Proposition 2 To second order, consumption under flexible and sticky prices is, respectively:

                                                    θ              1    θ
                                    ctEF '                  at +            a2 ,
                                                θ       1          2 ( θ 1)2 t
                                                    θ              1 θ 2 (2 θ ) 2
                                    ctES '                  at +               a .
                                                θ       1          2 ( θ 1)2 t

Therefore, the "output gap" is:
                                                                            1 2
                                     ytES    ytEF = ctES           ctEF '    θa .
                                                                            2 t



                                                             15
   We note that the first order elasticities are identical under flexible and sticky prices. The funda-

mental reason is that, under CES preferences, the market equilibrium is Pareto optimal: as in Dixit

and Stiglitz, the number of varieties is efficient. By an envelope argument, first-order deviations

from that allocation are negligible (a consequence of the neutrality proposition in Bilbiie (2019)).

But through the second-order term, the output gap response is always negative. That is, there is

an asymmetry: consumption increases by less in response to positive shocks, but falls by more

in response to negative shocks. For large negative shocks in particular, the response under sticky

prices can be much larger.

   Dissecting the Mechanism. The key to understanding these second-order, concavity effects

lies in understanding the equilibrium dependence of aggregate consumption to the number of

varieties C ( N ). As we already noted, N itself is a linear function of A. In other words, N is

(linearly) amplified through our entry-exit multiplier, while C is then amplified further through

second-order effects. In particular, the key equation is the "aggregate production function" for C:

                                                    θ
                                                        1
                                                             At L̄
                                         Ct = Ntθ                    f   ,
                                                             Nt

a second-order approximation of which around the steady-state (common to F and S) equilibrium

yields:
                                                    1    θ
                                           ct '              n2 .                                 (10)
                                                    2 ( θ 1)2 t

   The amplification of N to (negative) A generates the amplification of C by this curvature. This

effect, through the concavity of consumption in the number of varieties, is decreasing with the
                             1
benefit of variety (θ   1)       . It is thus determined by the same parameter governing the ampli-

fication of entry-exit itself. Naturally, when the benefit of variety vanishes there is no curvature

of consumption in the number of varieties. The benefit of variety is crucial for the balance be-

tween the extensive and intensive margin adjustment that becomes distorted under sticky prices.

More intensive-margin adjustment would be desirable but is unfeasible, and this distortion is less

important when goods are closer substitutes: θ larger, less benefit of variety, less distortion. To

summarize, θ determines both entry-exit amplification and the concavity distortion, but has op-

posite effects on these two forces.



                                                            16
     Overall, the net effect of θ is to amplify the difference between flexible and sticky-price alloca-

tions: the positive effect through the entry-exit multiplier is proportional to θ 2 , while the negative
                                                                1                                   2
effect through (10) is proportional to θ                            , (i.e. θ (θ           1)           ). We disentangle these two forces subse-

quently, using preferences that break this link between the benefit of variety and the elasticity of

substitution.


A Numerical Nonlinear Model

Up to now, we relied on some strong functional form assumptions. This allowed us to analytically

characterize the full nonlinear solution to this dynamic general-equilibrium model (which we used

to produce Figure 1). However, our insights carry through under more general conditions. We

assume elastic labor supply (unit elasticity), a Phillips curve (adjustment cost parameter to deliver

a first-order slope of around 0.01), a Taylor rule responding to PPI inflation (which is justified on

welfare grounds, see e.g. Bilbiie, Ghironi, Melitz (2007)) with response 1.5 and a persistent 20%

decrease in productivity perfectly anticipated to survive next period with persistence 0.5.16

                                 Consumption                                         GDP                                                    Hours
                 0                                             0                                                 0.1

                -10                                           -10                                               0.05

                -20                                           -20                                                  0

                -30                                           -30                                               -0.05

                -40                                           -40                                                -0.1
                      0     5          10         15     20         0     5           10           15      20           0   0.2       0.4          0.6    0.8   1

                                Number of firms                               Productivity shock                                            Wage
                 0                                             0                                                   0

                -20                                            -5                                                -10

                -40                                           -10                                                -20

                -60                                           -15                                                -30

                -80                                           -20                                                -40
                      0     5          10         15     20         0     5           10           15      20           0         5          10          15     20

                          Nominal Interest (Level*100)                          Inflation (*100)                                        Markup
                20                                                                                                 0
                                                              10
                15
                                                                                                                 -10
                10
                                                               5
                                                                                                                 -20
                 5

                 0                                             0                                                 -30
                      0     5          10         15     20         0     5           10           15      20           0         5          10          15     20




Figure 2: Effect of a 20% fall in productivity with persistence .5. CES-DS preferences. Flexible (red dash) and Sticky (solid blue) prices.

  16 We still use logarithmic utility in consumption; we explore alternatives like CRRA and GHH analytically in the
loglinearized model below. The conclusions for the nonlinear model are largely unaffected (beyond the insight we
provide in the loglinearized model).




                                                                                 17
      In Figure 2, we plot the dynamic equilibrium responses of key macroeconomic variables in our

nonlinear model to a 20% fall in productivity with persistence 0.5 under flexible prices (red dash)

and under sticky prices (solid blue). The larger response of sticky-price consumption under CES

preferences is driven by higher-order terms.17 In the next section, we show that it can occur to

first order too, when departing from the CES benchmark; but before, we emphasize an important

implication for the business-cycle properties of the model.


2.4    Entry-Exit Solves the NK vs RBC Hours Controversy

It is a well-known controversial implication of sticky-price models that hours worked fall in re-

sponse to positive labor productivity shocks (and increase with negative). This stands in stark con-

trast with the implications for standard flexible-price, RBC models, whose transmission greatly

relies upon (and that try hard to match) procyclical hours worked in response to productivity

shocks. As our discussion above shows, the puzzling sticky-price response is driven by an income

effect stemming from the response of profits.

      It follows immediately that entry and exit, which operate precisely in response to these profit

variations, can overcome this difficulty and bring the responses of hours worked in line between

the flexible- and sticky-price models. Indeed, it seems a desirable property of a model to deliver a

response of hours worked to productivity that is invariant to the largely orthogonal model feature

of whether firms can reset prices or not. Our model with entry and exit does that, aligning more

closely the responses of hours between the flexible and sticky price versions.

      The responses of hours can be aligned even more closely when we eliminate the income ef-

fects on labor supply driving their divergence. In Appendix D.1, we solve the model under pref-

erences that eliminate those effects (called "GHH", from Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Huffmann)

and show that the response of hours becomes in fact positive ceteris paribus under both flexible

and sticky prices, as long as there is entry and exit.

      The full solution is outlined in Table A1 in the Appendix. In the no-entry-exit model, the

response of hours worked is ltNF = η            1a
                                                     t   with flexible prices (η is the inverse labor elasticity),

whereas it has the opposite sign ltNS =                  θat with sticky prices. This sharply illustrates the di-
  17 The responses are produced by solving the full model globally using Dynare’s nonlinear perfect-foresight solver
(Adjemian et al, 2011). As clear from our analytical derivations, the difference between the sticky-price and flexible-
price responses is higher with higher demand elasticity θ; note that we calibrate this to its lower empirical bound.


                                                             18
chotomy we previously highlighted. With entry-exit, the responses are instead:

                                                                               θ
                                               ltEF = ltES =                                  at .                                    (11)
                                                                         η ( θ 1)         1

This clearly illustrates that in both cases, hours are procyclical: η (θ                                      1) > 1 is a restriction for

productivity improvements to be expansionary (see Appendix). Indeed, the responses are identi-

cal, a property of the CES benchmark (we show in the Appendix that for general preferences for

variety hours are still procyclical in both cases, but their responses are no longer identical).18


3     The Benefit of Product Variety and First-order Effects

In this section, we relax the CES assumption and consider the generalized CES aggregator Ct =
  e θ 1 1 R Nt
                             θ
                      θ 1   θ 1
Nt         0
               ct (ω ) dω
                       θ        , where e parameterizes love for variety. We use this functional form

for tractability, but our results generalize easily to non-CES homothetic preferences as we show in
                                                                      e R Nt
                                                                   1                         1
                                                                                     1 θ    θ 1
Appendix D.3.19 The welfare-based price index is now Pt = Ntθ 1            0
                                                                              p t( )
                                                                                  ω      dω     , and

the benefit of variety through relative prices (replacing equation (1) above) is: ρt                                        pt ) Pt = Nte ,

with e 7 (θ       1)   1
                           . Crucially for our results, the consumer benefit of an additional variety is

no longer aligned with the producers’ incentive to provide it—the net markup. The aggregate
                                                                     At Lt
accounting equation (3) is now Ct = Nt1+e                             Nt          f     and the aggregate labor demand (5) and

relation between PPI and CPI inflation (8) also change as a consequence.20

      The equilibrium number of firms is unchanged under both flexible and sticky prices, since it is

determined by markups, which govern the incentive for entry. It follows that the entry-exit mul-

tiplier we previously uncovered remains unchanged. But the equilibrium values of consumption

change respectively to:

                                           e                                                                        e
                                      1                   1+ e   θ       1                Mt         At L̄   Mt
                           CtEF   =            ( At L̄)                      ;   CtES   =                               .
                                      θf                             θ                    p̄          f      f p̄
    18 As
        we show in the Appendix, the requirement for the output gap to go down with adverse supply shocks is the
same as under separable preferences, e > (θ 1) 1 .
  19 This function has been introduced in the working paper version of Dixit and Stiglitz and used widely thereafter to

parameterize the love for variety separately: i.a. Benassy (1996), Blanchard and Giavazzi (2007), Bilbiie, Ghironi, and
Melitz (2019).
  20 The insights from the nonlinear model also apply to the general CES preferences subject to some qualifications

described in Appendix B.




                                                                         19
    A key property of models with endogenous entry under general preferences is that the equi-

librium amount of entry may be inefficient. In our model, the wedge between the flexible-price
                                                                                                  opt               opt
market equilibrium and a Pareto optimal level chosen by a planner Nt                                    is given by Nt /NtEF =

θ/ 1 + e    1   . It follows that the market number of firms is inefficiently low whenever:21

                                                                     1
                                                           e>                .                                            (12)
                                                                θ        1

Since the number of varieties is inefficiently low and its elasticity with respect to productivity

shocks is also inefficiently low, a mechanism that provides a magnification of the response of

entry to productivity shocks will yield first-order welfare improvements: this is indeed the case

for our entry-exit multiplier.

    To understand the amplification properties of the model under general-CES preferences, we

take a second-order approximation of the equilibrium value of consumption, obtaining Proposi-

tion (3) (the derivation is in the Appendix):

Proposition 3 To second order, consumption under flexible and sticky prices is, respectively:

                                                         1
                                      ctEF = (1 + e) at + e (1 + e) a2t ,
                                                         2
                                                    1
                                      ctES = eθat + e (e 1) θ 2 a2t .
                                                    2

Therefore, the output gap is:

                                                                   1 h                           i
                       ytES    ytEF = [e (θ     1)         1] a t + e ( e        1) θ 2   (1 + e) a2t .
                                                                   2

    To help intuition, it is useful again to take a second-order approximation of consumption as a

function of the number of varieties, yielding:

                                                   1             1               θ+1
                                  ct '    e                  nt + e e                     n2t .                           (13)
                                               θ       1         2               θ 1

The first-order response of the output gap to a negative supply shock d ( at ) with endogenous
  21 The planner solution is found by maximizing the number of varieties subject to technology and resource constraints

only; see Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz (2019) for a detailed analysis of the welfare implications of entry, variety, and
markups.


                                                                20
entry is 1   e (θ    1) and is thus negative when (12) holds. The combination of an inefficiently low

(and inelastic) number of varieties with the entry-exit multiplier—increasing the responsiveness of

varieties to productivity shocks under sticky prices—translates into first-order aggregate demand

amplification. As (13) makes clear, there is a first-order welfare benefit of expanding the number of

varieties. This first-order amplification generalizes to the model with an Euler equation, Phillips

curve, and Taylor rule; in Appendix C, we outline a loglinearized model that is isomorphic to the

textbook NK no-entry model and affords an aggregate demand-aggregate supply analysis.

    The equilibrium responses are also different to second order and, importantly, we can now

disentangle the effects of the benefit of variety and of demand elasticity, which were conflated

under CES preferences. The second-order term in (13) illustrates that C is concave in N whenever
          2
e < 1+   θ 1.   This disentangles the effect of the curvature of consumption in the benefit of variety

from that of the elasticity of substitution, discussed after Proposition 2. Ceteris paribus, C is more

concave the smaller the benefit of variety e and the smaller the elasticity of substitution θ—but the

former effect dominates. For CES preferences, the overall effect is that a higher θ makes C more

concave because, implicitly, it reduces the benefit of variety.


4   Substitution Across Goods and Over Time: CRRA Utility

We now study the role of the elasticity of intertemporal substitution in consumption, normalized

to one until now by the assumption of logarithmic utility in consumption. Consider the more
                                                                      1
                                                          1       1
general CRRA utility in consumption: U (Ct ) = 1          σ      Ct   σ
                                                                          1 , with ln Ct as a limit when

σ ! 1. We assume inelastic labor and CES preferences for simplicity but treat the case of elastic

labor and arbitrary benefit of product variety for full generality in Appendix D.2.

    With this change in utility, the only change to our model (in the inelastic-labor case) is that the

aggregate Euler equation becomes (in loglinear terms): ct = Et ct+1         σ it   Et π Ct+1 . Solving our

model under flexible and sticky prices yields the generalization of the entry-exit multiplier (the

solution is outlined in the Appendix for the more general case):

                                                   θ EF  θ
                                          ntES =     nt = at .                                       (14)
                                                   σ     σ

This illustrates that entry’s response under sticky prices is larger than the response under flexible

                                                    21
prices if and only if:

                                                           θ > σ.                                    (15)

   Our next Proposition emphasizes that under this same condition needed for the entry-exit mul-

tiplier, a negative output gap also occurs under CES preferences—through second-order terms, as

in our log-utility benchmark.


Proposition 4 To second order, consumption under flexible and sticky prices is, respectively:

                                                  θ              1 θ 2 (1 + σ θ ) 2
                                   ctES '                 at +                   at ,
                                            θ         1          2 σ ( θ 1)2
                                                  θ              1    θ
                                   ctEF '                 at +            a2 .
                                            θ         1          2 ( θ 1)2 t

Therefore, the output gap is:

                                                                    1   θ            θ
                            ytES    ytEF = ctES       ctEF '                 1               a2t .
                                                                    2   σ        θ       1

   A demand recession in response to negative supply shocks occurs again when consumption is

more concave under sticky prices, that is if (15) holds (θ > 1 is again a restriction). This is the same

condition required for the entry-exit multiplier, and is very plausible empirically—since most es-

timates of the substitution between goods θ is between 4 and 8, while estimates of intertemporal

substitution σ are smaller than 2, and in fact most often smaller than 1.

   The intuition for these results is similar to the one we previously discussed. In response to a

negative supply shock, aggregate activity can adjust through two margins: intensive and exten-

sive. With endogenous entry and when the entry-exit multiplier is at work (θ > σ), adjustment

happens disproportionately at the extensive margin. Through the concavity of consumption in

the number of varieties, this then translates into aggregate-demand amplification—even though

in the CES benchmark the first-order responses are still identical.

   The condition (15) is, however, the opposite of the requirement found by Guerrieri et al (2020) to

generate aggregate-demand recessions in response to (sector-specific) supply shocks. The reason

is precisely that we focus on the response of aggregate activity in general equilibrium, comprising

both an intensive and an endogenous extensive margin (the general-equilibrium response of net


                                                             22
entry). On the other hand, Guerrieri et al focus on the endogenous response of the intensive

margin (in the surviving goods) to an exogenous change in the extensive margin.

    To illustrate this difference in our framework, we perform an analysis that is similar to that

in Guerrieri et al. Namely, consider the good-specific Euler equation, linking the marginal rate of

intertemporal substitution in one good and the "real" interest rate (with respect to inflation in the

price of that good). In log-deviations from steady state, with cωt the log deviation of individual

consumption of good ω a measure of the intensive margin, this is:

                    1           1     1          1                          1        1
                      cωt +               ct =     Et cωt+1 +                               Et ct+1          (it     Et π t+1 ) .           (16)
                    θ           σ     θ          θ                          σ        θ

The aggregation of individual into total consumption is: ct = cωt +                                           θ       22
                                                                                                             θ 1 nt ;      replacing this above,

we obtain an Euler equation for the intensive margin for an exogenously given extensive margin:

                                                    σ           θ
                      cωt = Et cωt+1         1                          (nt        Et nt+1 )             σ (it     Et π t+1 ) .             (17)
                                                    θ       θ       1

An exogenous fall in the number of varieties dnt < 0 (at fixed PPI-real interest rate it                                                Et π t+1 )

induces a fall in the demand for continuing goods if σ > θ: this is exactly the condition in Guerrieri

et al, the opposite of our requirement (15).23 The intuition is that when σ > θ, from the viewpoint

of aggregate utility, any two individual goods are Edgeworth complements: a fall in the demand for

one, or a fall in the number of goods, can only trigger a fall in the demand of surviving goods at

constant real interest rates (and thus constant marginal utility of those goods) if the cross-derivative

of utility with respect to any two goods is positive, i.e. complementarity. As it can be easily

seen by direct differentiation of the CRRA function of the CES aggregator with respect to any two
                                                                                            1        1
individual goods, the cross-derivative is proportional to                                   θ        σ    and thus positive when σ > θ;

our amplification condition instead requires individual goods to be Edgeworth substitutes.

    But the above characterizes a partial-equilibrium response, whereas our focus is on the general-
  22 This is the loglinear version of Ct = ρt Nt cωt .
  23 An  alternative illustration uses the solution under flexible prices to obtain the natural real (with respect to inflation
in the individual good) interest rate rωtEF    (it Et π t+1 ) EF :

                                             EF         θ               1
                                            rωt =               1               ( Et at+1       at ) .
                                                        σ           θ       1
This "natural" interest rate can fall with bad supply shocks when, again, σ > θ.



                                                                    23
equilibrium, endogenous entry-exit response.24 Consider thus instead the same Euler equation

rewritten in terms of aggregate consumption (having replaced the expression for CPI inflation):

                                                  σ
                             ct = Et ct+1 +               (nt   Et nt+1 )   σ (it     Et π t+1 ) .                    (18)
                                              θ       1

    For aggregate activity to go down more than under flexible prices, the number of firms needs

fall enough—since exit increases the aggregate-demand relevant real (with respect to CPI infla-

tion) interest rate and triggers intertemporal substitution towards future consumption. Endoge-

nous changes in the extensive margin are thus key determinants of the aggregate response.

    Under our benchmark of CES preferences, however, the equilibrium responses of consumption

under flexible and sticky prices coincide to a first order as illustrated in Proposition (4). In this

reference case, intensive and extensive margins move in exactly compensating ways: when goods

are complements σ > θ, the intensive margin still falls with negative supply shocks, following

the logic described above. But the response of entry-exit itself is scaled down by θ/σ < 1, which

exactly compensates the former. When the opposite condition holds, θ/σ > 1, the extensive

margin response is magnified, but the intensive margin moves, again, in a compensating way.25

Taking a first-order approximation of consumption given the number of products we have under

sticky prices ctES =      σ   ES
                         θ 1 nt ,   while under flexible prices ctEF =               θ   EF
                                                                                    θ 1 nt .   The sticky-price response

of entry-exit to the shock is scaled by θ/σ, but here we see that the (partial-equilibrium) response

of consumption to entry-exit is scaled by the inverse σ/θ, neutralizing the former.26 Deviating

from CES preferences opens up an output gap to first order, by mechanisms similar to the ones

emphasized in our benchmark case (we analyze this for completion this in the Appendix).

    Lastly, when our condition (15) fails and σ > θ , the entry-exit dampening generates aggregate-

demand dampening too through second-order terms, as clear from Proposition (4): the output gap

response to supply disruptions is in fact positive, just like in the no-entry NK model.
  24 Guerrieri et al show how the   σ > θ restriction is relaxed in an economy with liquidity constraints; we abstract from
this and focus instead on endogenous entry-exit as a complementary amplification channel.
   25 The intuition for the exact compensation is the envelope argument stemming from the efficiency of entry with CES

preferences.
   26 With elastic labor, the aggregate-demand amplification properties now depend in subtler ways on the balance of

these parameters and labor elasticity; in particular, the economy may even exhibit perverse effects whereby consump-
tion in both EF and ES goes up with negative shocks, but the output gap goes down, making it inappropriate as a
sufficient statistic. We discuss this in the Appendix.




                                                                24
5   Conclusion

The responses of entry-exit to adverse supply shocks like the recent COVID-19 crisis are amplified

by firms’ inability to increase their prices, which leads to additional losses for individual firms.

This in turn amplifies the response of exit relative to a flexible-price benchmark. We call this

simple mechanism, which operates in any model with entry-exit and price stickiness, the entry-exit

multiplier.

    This "supply-side" amplification further induces an aggregate-demand recession; that is a fall

in sticky-price output that is larger than the fall in flexible-price output: a negative output gap. We

analyze two separate mechanisms that generate this negative output gap. First, when preferences

for variety are of the standard CES form, aggregate-demand amplification occurs through second-

order terms: the concavity of aggregate consumption in the number of varieties, combined with

the entry-exit multiplier. In this case, the elasticity of the output gap to the shock is a function of

the size of the shock—underscoring the importance of considering higher-order, nonlinear terms

for large crises such as the Covid-19 recession.

    Second, when the benefit of an additional variety is larger than the net markup, a further

source of aggregate-demand amplification operates, this time to a first-order. The entry-exit mul-

tiplier now magnifies the response of entry which is "too low" to start with, compared to what a

planner would choose: the combination of the two directly implies an amplification of aggregate

demand, through entry-exit.

    We generalize our results to the case of an arbitrary elasticity of intertemporal substitution. The

parameter condition for our amplification to occur is very plausible empirically: that the elasticity

of substitution between goods (ranging between 4 and 8 empirically) be larger than the elasticity

of intertemporal substitution (smaller than 2 empirically)

    We build a benchmark New Keynesian sticky-price model with endogenous entry-exit that we

solve in closed-form. Another potential empirical advantage of our model pertains to its business-

cycle properties: the (sign of the) response of hours worked to supply shocks is largely invariant

to price stickiness. This solves a well-known controversy between the standard RBC and NK

models. In their baseline versions, they generate diametrically opposed dynamics: under sticky

prices, hours worked fall after a positive supply shock. With endogenous entry-exit in addition to


                                                   25
sticky prices, hours worked increase following a productivity increase—just as in standard RBC

models.


References

Adjemian, S., H. Bastani, M. Juillard, F. Karamé, J. Maih, F. Mihoubi, G. Perendia, J. Pfeifer, M. Ratto, and Ś.

Villemot, 2011, “Dynare: Reference Manual Version 4.” CEPREMAP Dynare Working Paper 1


Baqaee, D. and E. Farhi, 2020, “Supply and Demand in Disaggregated Keynesian Economies with an Ap-

plication to the Covid-19 Crisis.”


Bénassy, J.P., 1996, "Taste for variety and optimum production patterns in monopolistic competition," Eco-

nomics Letters, vol. 52, pp 41-47.


Bergin, P. and G. Corsetti, 2008, "The extensive margin and monetary policy," Journal of Monetary Eco-

nomics, 55(7), pp. 1222–1237


Bilbiie F. 2008. "Limited Asset Market Participation, Monetary Policy, and (Inverted) Aggregate Demand

Logic". Journal of Economic Theory 140, 162-196.


Bilbiie, F. 2020, "The New Keynesian Cross," Journal of Monetary Economics


Bilbiie, F. 2019, "Monetary Neutrality With Sticky Prices and Free Entry," forthcoming, Review of Economics

and Statistics


Bilbiie, F. O., F. Ghironi, and M. Melitz, 2007, " Monetary Policy and Business Cycles with Endogenous

Entry and Product Variety," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, vol. 22, pp. 299-353


Bilbiie, F. O., F. Ghironi, and M. Melitz, 2012, "Endogenous Entry, Product Variety and Business Cycles,"

Journal of Political Economy,120(2), 304-345


Bilbiie, F. O., F. Ghironi, and M. Melitz, 2019, "Monopoly Power and Endogenous Product Variety: Distor-

tions and Remedies" American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics.


Bilbiie, F. O., I. Fujiwara, and F. Ghironi, 2014, "Optimal Monetary Policy with Endogenous Product Variety,"

Journal of Monetary Economics, 2014, vol. 64, pp. 1-20.



                                                       26
Cacciatore and Fiori, 2016, "The Macroeconomic Effects of Goods and Labor Markets Deregulation," Review

of Economic Dynamics


Cantore, C., F. Ferroni, and M. León-Ledesma, 2019 “The missing link: monetary policy and the labor

share,”Journal of the European Economic Association


Chari, V.V., P. Kehoe, and E. McGrattan, 2008. "Are structural VARs with long-run restrictions useful in

developing business cycle theory?," Journal of Monetary Economics, 55(8), 1337-1352


Chatterjee, S., and R. Cooper, 1993, “Entry and Exit, Product Variety and the Business Cycle,” NBER WP

4562.


Christiano, L., M. Eichenbaum, and R. Vigfusson, 2003, “What Happens after a Technology Shock?” Mimeo


Colciago, A. and F. Etro, 2010 "Endogenous Market Structures and the Business Cycle" The Economic Jour-

nal


Colciago, A. and R. Silvestrini, 2020, "Monetary Policy, Productivity, and Market Concentration," Mimeo


Cook, D., 2001, “Time to Enter and Business Cycles,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 25 (8):

1241-1261.


Devereux, M. B., A. C. Head, and B. J. Lapham, 1996, “Aggregate Fluctuations with Increasing Returns to

Specialization and Scale,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 20: 627-656.


Dixit, A. K., and J. E. Stiglitz, 1977, “Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product Diversity,” American

Economic Review 67: 297-308.


Dixon, H. and A. Savagar, 2020, "Firm Entry, Excess Capacity and Endogenous Productivity," European

Economic Review


Edmond, C., V. Midrigan, and D. Xu, 2019, "How costly are markups?," Mimeo


Etro, F. and L. Rossi, 2015, "New-Keynesian Phillips curve with Bertrand competition and endogenous

entry," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control


Fornaro, L. and M. Wolf, 2020, "The Scars of Supply Shocks," Mimeo



                                                   27
Furlanetto, F., Ø. Robstad, P. Ulvedal and A. Lepetit, 2020, "Estimating Hysteresis Effects," Mimeo


Galí, J. 1999, “Technology, Employment and the Business Cycle: Do Technology Shocks Explain Aggregate

Fluctuations?” American Economic Review 89/1, 249–7


Galí, J. 2008, "Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the New Keynesian

Framework and Its Applications", Princeton University Press


Guerrieri, V., G. Lorenzoni, I. Werning, and L. Straub, 2020 "Macroeconomic Implications of COVID-19:

Can Negative Supply Shocks Cause Demand Shortages," Mimeo


Haltiwanger, J., 2020 "Applications for New Businesses Contract Sharply in Recent Weeks: A First Look at

the Weekly Business Formation Statistics"


Hamano M. and F. Zanetti, 2017, "Endogenous Product Turnover and Macroeconomic Dynamic," Review

of Economic Dynamics


Hamano M. and F. Zanetti, 2020, "Monetary Policy, Firm Heterogeneity, and Product Variety," Mimeo


Jaimovich, N., 2007, Firm Dynamics and Markup Variations: Implications for Multiple Equilibria and En-

dogenous Economic Fluctuations, Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. 137, Issue 1, 300-325.


Jaimovich, N., and M. Floetotto, 2008, Firm Dynamics, Markup Variations and the Business Cycle, Journal

of Monetary Economics, Vol. 55, Issue 7, 1238-1252.


Kalemli-Ozcan, S., P.-O. Gourinchas, V. Penciakova and N. Sander, 2020, "COVID-19 and SME Failures,"

Mimeo


Kaplan, G. and P. Zoch, 2020, "Markups, Labor Market Inequality and the Nature of Work," Mimeo


Krugman, P., 1980, "Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of Trade," American Eco-

nomic Review, 70:5, 950-59


Lewis, V. and C. Poilly, 2012, "Firm Entry, Markups and the Monetary Transmission Mechanism," Journal

of Monetary Economics 59(7), 670-685.


Melitz, M., 2003, "The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry Productiv-

ity," Econometrica 71(6), pp. 1695-1725


                                                      28
Michelacci,C., L. Paciello, and A. Pozzi, 2019, "The extensive margin of aggregate demand," Mimeo


Peersman, G. and R. Straub 2009, "Technology shocks and robust sign restrictions in a euro area SVAR,"

International Economic Review, 50(3)


Romer, P., 1986, Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 94, No. 5. pp.

1002-1037


Romer, P., 1987, Growth Based on Increasing Returns Due to Specialization, American Economic Review,

Vol. 77, No. 2, pp. 56-62


Woodford, M., 2003, Interest and prices: foundations of a theory of monetary policy, Princeton University

Press

Woodford, M., 2020 "Effective Demand Failures and theLimits of Monetary Stabilization Policy," Mimeo




                                                   29
A     Derivations under CES Benchmark

A.1     Equivalence of quantity equation and Euler equation with fixed real rate

We show that the quantity, money-supply rule considered in text is equivalent to the more stan-

dard Euler equation with an interest rate rule fixing the real rate (or with fixed prices). Consider
                                                                                                         1             1
for generality the case of CRRA utility (used later in the paper) U = C1                                 σ   1 / 1     σ   . Labor

is inelastic for simplicity.

      Now the "quantity equation" becomes, assuming that M enters utility logarithmically,

                                                              1            Mt
                                                            Ctσ =
                                                                           Pt

      Note: a policy whereby the central bank fixes M is equivalent to a policy whereby it fixes the

(relative-to-PPI) real interest rate. Our previous work (Bilbiie Ghironi Melitz 2007) shows that PPI

is the right object to target with price stickiness. Recall 1 + π t = pt /pt                        1   and 1 + π C = Pt /Pt   1:


                                                                                      e
                                                   1 + πt                   Nt
                                                            =                             .
                                                   1 + π Ct                Nt 1

      The aggregate-demand relevant object, however, is the CPI π Ct which matters for intertemporal

substitution. Households’ standard Euler equation is (take perfect foresight, no expectation):

                                                       1          1 + It      1
                                                  Ct   σ
                                                           =β         C
                                                                           Ct+σ1 .
                                                                1 + π t +1

Replace CPI inflation definition

                                                                           e
                                          1                 Nt+1                 1 + It      1
                                    Ct    σ
                                                  =β                                      Ct+σ1 .
                                                             Nt                1 + π t +1

Now assume that the Taylor rule is such that it neutralizes expected PPI inflation entirely (it fixes
                                            1+ It
the real rate with respect to it), i.e.   1 + π t +1       = β 1 . The same holds if individual prices p are fixed.
Then we have:
                                              1                   1
                                     Ct       σ
                                                  Nte = Ct+σ1 Nte+1 = constant

This is clearly identical to a model with fixed M and fixed prices. In the model with fixed variety,


                                                                      30
     1           1                                          1
                                                                  Mt
Ct   σ
         = Ct+σ1 =constant is the same as Ctσ =                   Pt =constant.

      In the model with variety and fixed individual p̄, we have Pt = p̄Nt e . So fixed-money rule
                 1
                      e        Mt
delivers Ctσ Nt            =   p̄ =constant,   which is exactly the same as the fixed-real-rate rule.

      We work with the former for simplicity, but the reader can bear in mind throughout that this

has exactly the same interpretation as a fixed real rate. We then solve the dynamic version of the

model with a Phillips curve and Taylor rule that does not entirely neutralize PPI inflation.


A.2       Calibration equalizing steady states across models

In Figure 1, we choose the fixed cost f in order to make models consistent in the steady state,
                                                                                                             θ 1 θ 1
when the shock is absent A = 1; i.e. we pick f that equalizes C EF to C NF , θ f = L̄                         θ      .   Then,

we choose money supply M to equalize the SP equilibrium C ES with FE to this same C EF = C NF .

This requires, using f :

                                                                         1
                                          θ        1   L̄        Mt     θ 1
                                                                                        M              L̄θ
                                     C=                                       = L̄ !       = L̄
                                               θ       f         f p̄                   p̄              θ

                                                                                                                 L̄   θ 1 θ 1
      So for the free entry-exit (E) model we plot, for the sticky-price S case, replacing f =                   θ     θ
         M           L̄θ
and      p̄   = L̄    θ
                                                                                         1
                                                                                        θ 1
                                                   CtES = θ At            θ + L̄θ   1



and for flex-price F:
                                                                              θ
                                                                ĊtEF = Atθ 1 L̄.

                                                                                                  M
While with no entry N (left panel) we plot CtNF = At L̄ and CtNS =                                P.



B        General CES Preferences

Solving the benchmark model with general CES preferences (arbitrary benefit of variety e) under

flexible and fixed prices, respectively, delivers:




                                                                        31
                                                                                     e
                                                                            1                             1+ e    θ           1
                                             ĊtEF =                                     ( At L̄)
                                                                            θf                                            θ
                                                                                                                      e
                                                                         Mt          At L̄             Mt
                                             CtES =                                                                       .
                                                                         p̄           f                f p̄

                                                                     M           θ 1                           A L̄           M            A L̄
Consider a steady state equilibrium with                             f p̄   =     θ f A L̄            !         f             f p̄    =    θf


                                                                 e
                                                     1                           1+ e     θ           1
                               Ċ EF =                               ( A L̄)
                                                     θf                                          θ
                                                                             e                                                    e
                                                  M          A L̄                    θ           1                A L̄
                                C ES =                                           =                    A L̄                            = C EF
                                                  p̄         θf                              θ                    θf

                                                                                                      e                   1+ e θ 1
                                                                                             1
   Taking a Taylor approximation around Ċ EF =                                              θf           ( A L̄)               θ


                                                                                             e
                                                             θ           1       1                             1+ e           At           A
                 ĊtEF        C EF = (1 + e)                                                     ( A L̄)
                                                                     θ           θf                                                   A
                                                                                                           e                                                   2
                                              1           θ 1                                    1                            1+ e         At         A
                                             + e (1 + e )                                                      ( A L̄)                                             !
                                              2            θ                                     θf                                               A
                                                                                                                                                       2
                 ĊtEF C EF                                       At             A         1                                         At         A
                                       = (1 + e )                                         + e (1 + e )
                      Ċ EF                                                 A              2                                              A



                                                                                             e 1
                                             A L̄ M              A L̄            M                         At                 A
                CtES     C EF = e
                                              f p̄                f              f p̄                             A
                                                                                         2                                             e 2                             2
                                             1                               A L̄            M             A L̄               M                       At           A
                                            + e (e            1)
                                             2                                f              p̄             f                 f p̄                         A

                                        e
                 M     A L̄     Mt                M          θ 1                          A L̄            M               A L̄
   Recall C =    p̄     f       f p̄        and   f p̄   =    θ f A L̄           !         f              f p̄   =        θf


                                                                                                                                                       2
                          CtES C EF                          At              A         1                                              At          A
                                    = eθ                                              + e (e                     1) θ 2
                              Ċ EF                                   A                2                                                   A

                                                                                          1
   The ES response is larger to first-order iff e >                                      θ 1.         Here, we focus on the second-order differ-

ence. The ES response is larger second-order iff:

                                                                                                      θ2 + 1    1
                                       (e    1) θ 2 > (1 + e ) ! e >                                    2
                                                                                                             >
                                                                                                      θ    1   θ 1


                                                                                 32
   But now even with lower benefit of variety there can be over-reaction to negative shocks driven

by higher-order effects. If the shock is negative enough, the higher-order term eventually kicks in.

   The figure plots e = 0.75 (twice the net markup) and e = 0.18 (half the net markup). The thin

lines are the CES case in Figure 1, the thick lies are the General CES for the two cases. Blue solid

for sticky prices, red dash for flexible prices.


    e > θ11 e < θ11
   The response of the output gap to a negative shock can be found as follows to second order.



                                                       1
                                    ctEF = (1 + e) at + e (1 + e) a2t
                                                       2
                                                  1
                                    ctES
                                         = eθat + e (e 1) θ 2 a2t
                                                  2

The effect of supply shocks is thus:

                                     dctEF
                                               = (1 + e) + e (1 + e) dat
                                      dat
                                     dctES
                                               = eθ + e (e          1) θ 2 dat
                                      dat

The effect on the output gap is

                    d ctES ctEF                                 h                          i
                                = [e (θ           1)      1] + e ( e      1) θ 2    (1 + e) dat
                         dat

   This is larger than zero (so falls more to negative shocks) if:

                                                   h                         i
                            [e (θ   1)       1] + e ( e    1) θ 2     (1 + e) dat > 0


                     1
   Even with e <    θ 1,   this can still hold for negative enough shock, i.e.:

                              h                        i
                             e (e    1) θ 2     (1 + e) dat > 1          e (θ      1) > 0




                                                          33
we need
                                                                                                θ2 + 1
                                     (e        1) θ 2           (1 + e ) < 0 ! e <
                                                                                                θ2 1
                                       θ 2 +1           1
which is always satisfied since        θ2 1
                                                  >    θ 1

      So the condition is:
                                                                          1    e (θ    1)
                                       d ( at ) >                    h                              i.
                                                                e (1 + e )        (e       1) θ 2

For a calibration with the benefit of variety equal to half the markup, e (θ                                             1) = .5 (a property of

the translog preferences used in Bilbiie et at 2012 to match the cyclicality of markups and profits),

the threshold is 0.215.


B.1     Insights from approximating C ( N )

Taking a second-order approximation of the aggregate production function/resource constraint:


                                                       Ct = Nte ( At L̄           Nt f )


                                                                                                                                     A L̄
around the steady-state of the FP equilibrium (same as for SP equilibrium) with N EF =                                               fθ , C
                                                                                                                                            EF   =
         e                             e θ 1
 N EF        A L̄    N EF f = N EF        θ A L̄




                                          1
                    Ct ' C + eN e             ( A L̄           Nf)        N e f ( Nt        N)
                              1
                          +     e (e      1) N e           2
                                                               ( A L̄     Nf)     eN e      1
                                                                                                f    eN e        1
                                                                                                                     f ( Nt   N )2
                              2

and writing with percentage deviations:

                                                           1                 1             θ+1
                                 ct '         e                          nt + e e                        n2t .
                                                       θ         1           2             θ 1


C     Loglinearized general-CES NK model

This Appendix presents the loglinearized NK model with arbitrary benefit of variety and first-

order welfare effects, directly comparable with the plain-vanilla textbook version of the no-entry

NK model.

                                                                          34
      In Table 2, we outline the key equilibrium responses of the loglinearized model, around a

steady state with no supply shock mirroring the same structure as for Table 1, but for the loglin-

earized model. Letting a small letter denote the log-deviation from the respective steady-state, the

loglinearized Euler equation (9) and Taylor rule are, respectively:


                                       ct = Et ct+1           it   Et π Ct+1 ; and                                      (19)

                                       it = φπ t .                                                                      (20)


C.1     No-Entry Loglinearized Model

In the No-Entry model (superscript N) in the first row, under price flexibility all real variables

are determined independently of any nominal forces (neutrality): in our case, exclusively by the

supply shock ytNF = ctNF = at .27 Given this optimal solution for consumption and output, the

Euler equation serves to merely pin down the natural (Wicksellian), flexible-price interest rate:

since we already solved for ctNF this implicitly defines the intertemporal price that confirms to

agents that they are right to set that consumption path over time, rtNF = Et at+1                      at . Recalling that

without entry π t = π Ct , the Taylor rule then determines uniquely the path of inflation through

π tNF = φ      1   Et π tNF     NF iff the Taylor principle is satisfied—but this is of course of no conse-
                         +1 + r t

quence for the real allocation.

      With sticky (fixed) prices, the aggregate demand side, Euler equation (9) with no entry (π t =
                        h                    i
               1                           1
π Ct ) is CtN    = βEt 1 + rtN CtN+1           , where the real interest rate is 1 + rtN 1 + ItN / 1 + π tN+1 .

This illustrates most clearly that with either fixed prices and a Taylor rule (Pt = P̄, π tN+1 = 0, ItN

fixed) or with a fixed real rate rtN , aggregate activity is invariant to supply shocks: it is fully pinned

down by (9), where supply shocks do not appear. What bears the adjustment instead is the real

wage, and with it hours worked, markups, and profits.28

      In the upper right quadrant of Table 2 we outline the full equilibrium under sticky (fixed)

prices. Hours worked increase proportionally with the negative supply shock                                at (as long as

there is no rationing, which we implicitly assume); real wages increase, and markups and profits
                                                                                        Dt D
  27 Profits  in the no-entry model are expressed as a share of steady-state Y: dt        Y   ' 1θ yt mct .
  28 Note         p̄t
            that P̄ is no longer the profit-maximizing price. The aggregate production function and resource constraint
is still Ct = At Lt ; this implicitly assumes that all markets clear, although prices are fixed. The adjustment necessary for
equilibium to obtain is borne by the nominal (and real) wage.



                                                             35
fall. Hours increase, even though the real wage goes up, because there is a negative income effect

that dominates. This negative income effect arises because as wages go up, marginal cost goes up

and profits go down—thus decreasing the income of households. This foreshadows the intuition

for our model with entry, in which such profits variations cannot occur in equilibrium because

they entail entry and exit, with different aggregate implications.

   The key summary statistic describing whether the model generates or not a "demand reces-

sion" following a bad supply shock is whether output under sticky prices falls by more than out-

put under flexible prices—that is, whether the output gap responds negatively to negative supply

shocks. As it should be clear by now, in the no-entry-exit NK model the answer is no, the output

gap being:
                                        ∂ ytNS ytNF
                                                    = 1,
                                           ∂ ( at )

and thus in fact increasing with bad supply shocks.




                                                 36
         Table 2: Full loglinearized solution conditional on supply shock at

                          Flexible Prices F                                 Sticky Prices S

                           ytNF = ctNF = at                                  ytNS = ctNS = 0

                           ltNF = 0                                          ltNS =       at

                           wtNF = at                                         wtNS =        ϕat
         No-Entry (N)      µtNF =        mctNF = 0                           µtNS =       mctNS = (1 + ϕ) at

                           dtNF = 1θ at                                      dtNS = (1 + ϕ) at

                           rtNF = Et at+1         at                         rtNS = 0

                           π tNF = φ      1   Et π tNF     NF
                                                    +1 + r t                 π tNS = 0

                           ytEF = ctEF = (1 + e) at                          ytES = ctES = eθat

                           ntEF = at                                         ntES = θat

                           ltEF = 0                                          ltES = 0

                           wtEF = (1 + e) at                                 wtES = eθat
         Entry-Exit (E)    µtEF =       mctEF = 0                            µtES =       mctES = at

                           dtEF = 0                                          dtES = 0

                           rtEF = (1 + e) ( Et at+1             at )         rtES = eθ ( Et at+1         at )

                           π tEF = φ      1   Et π tEF
                                                     +1 + r t                π tES = 0
                                   EF                                                EF
                            π Ct        = π tEF     e ( at        at   1)     π Ct        =    eθ ( at     at   1)


   Labor-Market Intuition with No Entry: The supply disruption (at falls) shifts labor demand

downwards. This triggers an income effect on labor supply as the wage falls, so labor supply shifts

rightward. By virtue of the log-utility assumption, income and substitution effects cancel out and

hours stay unchanged: the wage falls one-to-one, and markup and profits stay unchanged. There

is inflation as firms increase prices to keep real marginal cost (markup) constant at the desired

level; how much inflation there is depends on the Taylor rule response. If the shock is transitory,

the natural interest rate goes up to give agents the right intertemporal incentives to consume less

today.

   With sticky prices, labor demand still moves down initially, as the marginal cost goes up; but

now firms cannot increase prices, so the markup goes down, and profits go down too. Consump-

tion and output do not change because there is no intertemporal substitution: with fixed prices


                                                             37
(or with a fixed real rate) the Euler equation implies that consumption stays unchanged. In terms

of labor market equilibrium, labor supply does not shift: we move along it. Markup and profits

go down by enough to make it optimal to work more and keep consumption unchanged (income

effect), while the real wage goes up by ϕat (substitution effect).


C.2     Endogenous Entry-Exit Loglinearized Model

Under endogenous entry-exit and flexible prices, the solution is readily obtained by noticing that

µtEF =    θ
         θ 1.   By virtue of logarithmic utility in consumption, hours worked stay constant (income

and substitution effects on labor cancel out). Through (5), the real wage responds to labor produc-

tivity with elasticity 1 + e; the effect is amplified relative to the no-entry model by the standard

variety effect that acts like a form of increasing returns, making output and consumption also

move with the shock in the same manner. The number of firms changes proportionally to the

shock: a decrease in productivity triggers exit because it induces losses. The lower left quadrant

of Table 2 outlines the full solution of the EF (endogenous entry-exit, flexible-price) model. Other

than substantiating the above, notice that the natural interest rate responds with the same sign as

under no entry-exit but with a larger elasticity, driven by the variety effect. Since the natural rate

increases with bad shocks, there is inflation in producer prices. And since there is exit, there is

even higher inflation in consumer prices through the benefit of product variety. These inflation

dynamics are nevertheless still irrelevant for the real allocation since prices are flexible.

      Matters are different with sticky prices. Hours worked are again fixed in equilibrium, because

income and substitution effects of the real wage cancel out (log utility in consumption), and in

addition there are no extra income effects due to profits, which are zero by virtue of free entry.

This can be seen by combining equations (7) and (6), and recalling the discussion after the latter,

which implies that in loglinearized terms we have wt = ct .

      Combining the loglinearized Euler equation (19) with the loglinearized (8) relating CPI, PPI

inflation and variety growth:

                                       π t = π Ct + e (nt   nt   1) ,                             (21)




                                                   38
and imposing fixed producer prices π t = 0, we obtain:


                                    ct = Et ct+1          e ( Et nt+1      nt ) .                (22)


   Loglinearization of the markup-pricing rule (2) combined with the relative price (benefit of

variety) (1) delivers:

                                            wt         at = ent    µt ,                          (23)

while the free-entry condition (4) is:


                                         n t = a t + lt + ( θ         1) µ t .                   (24)


Combining the last two while imposing that hours are constant in this equilibrium lt = 0 and

replacing in wt = ct , we obtain:

                                               θ                       1
                                    ct =               at + e                    nt
                                           θ       1              θ        1

Together with the Euler equation under fixed prices (22), this delivers


                                          ntES = θat ; ctES = eθat ,


and the rest of the solution reported in the lower right quadrant of Table 2. Direct comparison

with the solution under flexible prices delivers our condition for (first-order) negative output gap

following a negative supply shock (12) in text.

   To help intuition, consider again the labor market equilibrium. With free entry-exit and flexible

prices (EF), there is a larger recession than with no entry (NF) because of the variety effect which

generates aggregate returns to scale: aggregate LD is upward sloping ( with slope e) and shifts

by 1 + e with supply disturbances. Individual labor demand is as before, but now an increase in

marginal cost and fall in markup triggers exit (product destruction); since prices can be freely set,

the amount of product destruction is dictated by the benefit of variety. This is represented with

blue dashes in Figure 4.

   Consider next sticky (fixed) prices ES. Since prices cannot increase now, the markup goes down.

                                                          39
The crucial questions is: does LD shift up, or down? This depends on the benefit of variety e
                            1
versus the net markup      θ 1.   When the benefit of variety is higher, LD shifts further down: instead

of a fall in profits, as under no entry), there is now exit. As a result, LS shifts further right due to the

further negative income effect and, as we will see, consistent with intertemporal substitution. In

other words, there is a negative output gap: consumption and income fall more than under flexible

prices.

   A complementary intuition starts from recalling that since prices cannot increase, the markup

goes down. When the benefit of variety is higher than the markup, labor demand shifts further

down: instead of a fall in profits (as under no entry-exit), there is now exit. The loglinear approxi-

mation of aggregate labor demand is:


                                  wt = (1 + e) at + elt + [e (θ          1)    1] µ t ;


when the markup falls and real marginal cost increases there is a shift downwards in labor demand
            1
when e >   θ 1:   demand forces dominate, labor demand plunges, and this demand shortage is met

by dropping products. As a result, labor supply shifts further right due to the further negative

income effect and, as we discuss in the dynamic model, consistent with intertemporal substitution.


Aggregate Demand and Variety: Intertemporal Interpretation

A key element of the model is the aggregate Euler equation governing aggregate demand (19),

which written in gaps from the flexible-price equilibrium is:

                                                                                   ES
                        ctES   ctEF = Et ctES
                                            +1      Et ctEF
                                                          +1      it   Et π Ct+1           rtEF


where rtEF = (1 + e) ( Et at+1      at ) is the natural interest rate. In this Euler equation, the relevant

real rate is defined relative to CPI inflation. Spelling out CPI inflation using (21) we have:


               ctES    ctEF = Et ctES
                                    +1   Et ctEF
                                               +1      it      Et π tES          ES
                                                                      +1 + e Et nt+1      ntES    rtEF ,   (25)


which generalizes the aggregate-Euler IS curve with entry derived in Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz

(2007, equation 12).

                                                            40
      With entry-exit, even when producer prices are fixed (or the real rate defined with respect to

PPI inflation it   Et π tES
                          +1 is fixed), the output gap is no longer proportional to the natural interest
                                                                                           ∂(c ES c EF )
rate, as in a no-entry model. Indeed, the output gap then falls with bad supply shocks ∂t( at )t <

0 if:
                                                 ∂ Et ntES
                                                         +1   ntES     ∂rtEF
                                             e                     >          ,
                                                     ∂ ( at )        ∂ ( at )

that is if the increase in "expected inflation" that is purely due to the variety effect exceeds the

increase in the natural rate. Replacing the responses of ntES and rtEF we recover the (12) condition.

      Thus, with it     Et π tES
                               +1 fixed, the real rate that is relevant for aggregate demand—i.e. real rela-

tive to CPI inflation—goes up since there is exit today, thus triggering intertemporal substitution

towards the future. The labor supply then shifts right because of intertemporal substitution. This

is a general mechanism that translates to a setup where producer prices are arbitrarily sticky, not

fixed, as we show in the Appendix.

      The AD representation (25) also suggests a possible way out of a supply-driven, exit-amplified

crisis: subsidize entry or sales temporarily so as to break the exit loop and generate future expected

CPI inflation, and a boost in aggregate demand today by intertemporal substitution. This policy

works even when interest rates are constrained against the lower bound.


C.3     The 3-Equation NK model with Free Entry-Exit

Like the textbook NK model (Woodford 2003, Gali 2008) our model can be summarized by an

Aggregate Demand (IS curve) and Aggregate Supply (Phillips curve), with arbitrary degree of

price stickiness. The former is given by (25), where we replace the number of firms using aggre-
                              θ                   1
gate accounting ct =         θ 1 at   + e        θ 1    nt to obtain, after substitutions and using the flex-price

equilibrium ctEF = (1 + e) at and rtEF = Et ctEF
                                               +1                ctEF = (1 + e) ( Et at+1      a t ):



              1                                    1                                                       1 EF
                        ct    ctEF =                          Et ct+1     ctEF       it     Et π t+1         r    (26)
        1   e (θ   1)                   1        e (θ    1)                  +1
                                                                                                          1+e t

or in levels (instead of gaps)


                        ct = Et ct+1        eθ ( Et at+1      at )   [1   e (θ    1)] (it    Et π t+1 )           (27)

                                                                41
   We derive Aggregate Supply starting from the Phillips curve for PPI inflation obtained by

assuming that it is costly for individual producers to change their prices, as in Bilbiie, Ghironi and

Melitz (2007):

                                                π t = βEt π t+1             ψµt ,                                  (28)

where ψ = (θ          1) /κ and κ is the Rotemberg adjustment-cost coefficient ranging from 0 (flexible

prices) to infinity (fixed prices). The loglinearized free entry condition, using that hours worked
                                                                        1
are fixed in equilibrium, implies that µt = (θ                   1)         (nt     at ) and using aggregate accounting
        θ               1
ct =   θ 1 at   + e    θ 1   nt to replace the number of goods we obtain:


                                                  1
                                     µt =                        [ct        (1 + e ) a t ] .
                                            e ( θ 1)        1

Replacing in the pricing equation and using ctEF = (1 + e) at we obtain:

                                                                   1
                                 π t = βEt π t+1 + ψ                                ct    ctEF                     (29)
                                                        1        e (θ        1)

   Equations (26) and (29), together with a standard Taylor rule


                                                      it = φπ t ,                                                  (30)


constitute a full description of the model.

   Notice that when prices are flexible, the equilibrium is fully determined by the supply side AS

(29), ct = ctEF . While when prices are completely rigid, it is determined exclusively by the demand

side, AD (26) or (27) ctES = eθat . In between these two extremes, we need to solve the model.

   To do so, we first notice that the requirement for equilibrium determinacy in the model with

entry-exit is exactly the same as in the no-entry model: the Taylor principle φ > 1. To prove this,

replace (29) and (30) into (26) to eliminate the output gap and interest rate, obtaining (let ):

                                                                                                  1 EF
                  πt     βEt π t+1 = Et π t+1     βEt π t+2        ψ φπ t            Et π t+1       r  ,           (31)
                                                                                                 1+e t

   Solving under AR1 shock with persistence ρ a , Et at+1 = ρ a at and letting ψ̃                     ψ/ (1   βρ a ), we

obtain:


                                                            42
                                                                         1 ρa
                                          πt =          ψ̃                             at
                                                             1       ρ a + (φ ρ a ) ψ̃
                                                                                    1 ρa
                                   ct    ctEF = [e (θ                1) 1]                       at
                                                                             1 ρ a + (φ ρ a ) ψ̃

      The result generalizes the previous one, derived with fixed prices: when the condition making
                                                                                                                      1
demand, variety forces dominate supply, entry-exit forces holds (e > (θ                                          1)       ), a bad supply

shock causes a negative output gap and PPI inflation. Whereas in the opposite case, it causes a

positive output gap that is still accompanied by PPI inflation. As a side note, this points to the

possibility of deriving an implicit empirical test, based on macro comovements, of the mysterious

micro parameter e.

      Since there is exit regardless of whether e ? (θ                         1), CPI inflation is also going up.

      An important point, which is related to determinacy results staying unchanged relative to
                                                                                                          1
the no-entry model, is that the crossing of the threshold e = (θ                                     1)       triggers a swiveling of
                                                    1
both AD and AS: in the e > (θ                  1)       , AD slopes upwards and AS slopes downwards. A shift

upwards of AD (as happens when the natural interest rate goes up, in response to an adverse

supply shock) moves us leftward along the downward sloping AS, thus triggering a fall in output
                                                                 1
gap and inflation. Whereas for e < (θ                    1)          AS and AD have regular slopes and a shock shifting

AD up causes an increase in the output gap and inflation, moving along an upward sloping AS

curve.29


C.4      No-entry NK model recap

It is important to understand that the effects we emphasize are altogether absent in the standard,

no-entry, fixed-variety NK model. A recapitulation of that model’s core equations illustrates that

point. Recalling that we use as a benchmark a logarithmic utility function in consumption, the IS

curve is:


                                        ctN   = Et ctN+1              itN     Et π tN+1 , or in gaps                                 (32)

                             ctN        ctNF = Et ctN+1                ctNF
                                                                         +1        itN   Et π tN+1    rtNF
 29 In   the CES-DS case, AD is vertical and price stickiness is irrelevant, the neutrality result in Bilbiie (2019).


                                                                       43
while the Phillips curve is π t = βEt π t+1              ψµt or, replacing the markup:


                                      π tN = βEt π tN+1 + ψ (1 + ϕ) (ctN          at )


    If we now allow for inflation to move in response to adverse supply shocks, it will increase and,

through the active Taylor rule, trigger an increase in real interest rates and a fall in consumption.

The output gap, however, is still always positive (in a determinate equilibrium). Take shock with

persistence ρ a and using the same notation for ψ̃                  ψ/ (1    βρ a )

                                                    drtNF
                                                            =1         ρa
                                                   d ( at )



                     d ctN ctNF                                                           1    drtNF
                                           = (1          ρ a + (φ    ρ a ) ψ̃ (1 + ϕ))
                       d ( at )                                                               d ( at )
                                                                1    ρa
                                           =                                              0
                                               1         ρ a + (φ    ρ a ) ψ̃ (1 + ϕ)

with the limit dctN = dctNF reached when shocks are permanent, prices flexible (trivially), or labor

inelastic. The response of the consumption (output) level is:

                                    dctN                   (φ ρ a ) ψ̃ (1 + ϕ)
                                           =
                                  d ( at )           1     ρ a + (φ ρ a ) ψ̃ (1 + ϕ)


D     Extensions: Alternative Utility Functional Forms

We extend our results to GHH utility without income effects on labor; CRRA utility of C; and

general homothetic preferences for variety instead of CES.


D.1    GHH Utility: no income effects on labor

To analyze the response of hours worked, we solve all our models with GHH utility function:

                                                         1 ν
                              1             L 1+ η                               L 1+ η
                    U=                 C                       and = ln C                     if ν = 1
                          1       ν         1+η                                  1+η

    The key property of this is that it eliminates income effects on labor altogether, because the


                                                               44
optimality condition for labor choice (the labor supply) is simply:


                                                           W = Lη ,


which does not shift when income changes—we always move along it. The equilibrium is dictated

by shifts in labor demand. The full solution is outlined in Table A1.


                Table A1: Full loglinearized solution. labor productivity shock at
    Table 2a: Full loglinearized solution conditional on supply shock at

                     Flexible Prices F                                        Sticky Prices S
                                           1+ η
                      ytNF = ctNF =         η at                               ytNS = ctNS =               (θ        1) a t

                      ltNF = η1 at                                             ltNS =       θat

                      wtNF = at                                                wtNS =           ηθat
    No-Entry (N)      µtNF =        mctNF = 0                                  µtNS =       mctNS = (1 + ηθ ) at
                                1 1+ η                                                      1
                      dtNF =    θ η at                                         dtNS =       θ   + ηθ at
                      rtNF = Et at+1         at                                rtNS = 0

                      π tNF = φ      1   Et π tNF     NF
                                               +1 + r t                        π tNS = 0

                                                       1+ η                                                     1+ η
                      ytEF = ctEF = (1 + e) η             e at                 ytES = ctES = eθ 1+η                 eθ at
                               1+ η                                                             1+ η
                      ntEF =   η e at                                          ntES = θ 1+η         eθ at
                               1+ e
                      ltEF =   η e ât                                         ltES = eθ 1+η1          eθ ât

                      wtEF = η η1+ee at                                        wtES = eθ 1+η
                                                                                                   η
                                                                                                        eθ ât
                                                                                                                 1+ η
    Entry-Exit (E)    µtEF =       mctEF = 0                                   µtES =       mctES =             1+η eθ at

                      dtEF = 0                                                 dtES = 0
                                           1+ η                                                  1+ η
                      rtEF = (1 + e) η        e   ( Et at+1       at )         rtES = eθ 1+η         eθ    ( Et at+1          at )

                      π tEF = φ      1   Et π tEF
                                                +1 + r t                       π tES = 0
                              EF                   1+ η                                EF                   1+ η
                       π Ct        = π tEF        eη  e   ( at    at     1)     π Ct        =      eθ 1+η       eθ    ( at      at   1)


   The output gap response is

                          ∂ ytES ytEF                            1+η               1+η
                                      =                   eθ            + (1 + e )
                            ∂ ( at )                           1 + η eθ            η e




                                                                 45
and it is negative whenever
                                             1+η               1+η
                                    eθ              > (1 + e )
                                           1 + η eθ            η e

Restricting attention to equilibria with standard responses (expansionary productivity improve-

ments in both equilibria) we obtain the same condition as before:

                                                                1
                                                 e>                     .
                                                        θ           1

D.2   CRRA utility of C: Income effects and intertemporal substitution

Assume that utility takes the CRRA form, allowing for arbitrary income effects on labor supply

and intertemporal substitution, both parameterized by the curvature σ                            1


                                                            1
                                              C1            σ       1           L 1+ ϕ
                                   U (C, L) =                   1
                                                                            χ
                                               1                σ
                                                                                1+ϕ

   This changes (only) the labor supply and the Euler equation for aggregate consumption in a

standard way, i.e.:

                                                    1
                                       ϕ
                                   χLt       = Ct σ Wt ;                                             (33)
                                                                                    !
                                       1                      1 + It     1
                                  Ct   σ
                                             = βEt                    C  σ
                                                                                         .           (34)
                                                            1 + π Ct+1 t+1

   To find the condition for Edgeworth complementarity, take the cross-derivative of utility with

respect to demand of two goods   " ω and ω̃; direct differentiation
                                                                  # of the CRRA function having
                                   R Nt        θ 1
                                                            1
                                                     θ 1 (1 σ )
                                                      θ

replaced the CES aggregate 1 1 1    0
                                        ct (ω ) θ dω             1 delivers:
                              σ




                                                1       1               1   1   2   1
                                                                                         1
                                  Ucω cω̃ =                     cωtθ cω̃tθ ctθ      σ
                                                                                             ,
                                                θ       σ

implying immediately that goods are Edgeworth complements Ucω cω̃ > 0 when σ > θ.




                                                        46
   Solving the model under this utility function delivers, for flexible prices:

                                                                  1
                                  ntEF =                                               1   ât
                                                 1       (1 + e) 11+σϕ
                                                                              1+e
                                  ytEF = ctEF =                                                     1   ât
                                                              1        (1 + e) 11+σϕ

and for fixed sticky prices SP:

                                   θ                                  1
                       ntES =                                 h                                                   i ât
                                   σ1    (1          σ   1)       1       e (θ              1) +         eθ
                                                                                                        1+ ϕ
                                                                                  eθ
                       ytES = ctES =                                      h                                               i ât
                                             1    (1         σ    1)          1        e (θ         1) +            eθ
                                                                                                                   1+ ϕ


   The first observation is that the "entry multiplier" (ratio of ES and EF responses of nt ) is now:

                                                                                       1
                                  θ              1    (1 + e) 11+σϕ
                                                       h                                                      i
                                  σ1    (1       σ 1 ) 1 e ( θ 1) +                                 eθ
                                                                                                   1+ ϕ


   When is there amplification of the entry response? Under log utility, we recover θ > 1; under

inelastic labor, the solution in text θ/σ with the multiplier requirement θ > σ (the opposite of

Guerrieri et al, for reasons discussed therein). Under CES, likewise θ/σ. The interaction non-log

utility, elastic labor, and arbitrary benefit of variety generates richer dynamics. In particular, the

responses of entry in both FP and SP can even change sign (positive to negative shock) when:

                                       e ϕ               1
                          EF :             >σ
                                       1+e
                                                         1                                                eθ
                          ES : 1 < 1                 σ            1           e (θ               1) +
                                                                                                         1+ϕ

For CES, the condition is the same for EF and ES:


                                             θ < σ (1             (θ          1) ϕ )


Thus, under this condition—which under infinitely elastic labor ϕ = 0 in fact coincides with

Guerrieri et al—the endogenous response of entry to supply shocks flips sign under both flexible


                                                              47
and sticky prices.

   The response of the output gap to a supply disruption in the free entry-exit model is thus:

                             ∂ ytES ytEF   1 + (1 + e ) σ                    1       1   [1   e (θ    1)]
                                         =
                               ∂ ( at )                                          Ω

                                      h                              i                           1
where Ω         1       1     σ   1       1   e (θ     1) +    eθ
                                                              1+ ϕ       1       (1 + e) 11+σϕ       > 0 by the restriction that
ytES and ytEF both individually still fall with supply shocks. The question is, as before, when does

the former fall by more than the latter?

                                                                ∂(ytES ytEF )
Proposition 5 Supply-driven demand recessions                     ∂( at )
                                                                                 < 0 can occur in two cases:
                1                             1
   1. If e >   θ 1,   when σ < 1 + e              <θ
                1                             1
   2. If e <   θ 1,   when σ > 1 + e              >θ

   Case 1 is a generalization of our Proposition (3), in particular the condition for first-order

effects (12), to the case with larger income effect. Case 2 is different, and the parameter condition

is the equivalent of Guerrieri et al in our model of endogenous entry and exit. Thus, in this case

there is a dampening of the entry-exit response under ES, and a magnification of the intensive-

margin response. This translates into amplification of the aggregate response when the benefit of

variety is smaller than the markup, the reason being mirroring our benchmark case: entry is now

inefficiently high and too elastic, so anything that reduces its response to supply shocks generates

a welfare improvement; sticky prices, in this case, play precisely that dampening role.

   As entry-exit becomes inefficient—say, inefficiently low and to little responsive in the market
                              1
equilibrium, i.e. e >        θ 1 —a   mechanism such as sticky prices that raises its responsiveness when

1+e   1   > σ then generates a first-order effect on consumption too, while engendering an increase
in the intensive margin of surviving goods, as goods are substitutes. Conversely, with too high
                       1
entry-exit e <        θ 1,   we need the entry response to be dampened and the intensive margin to

contract (by complementarity) in order to obtain a demand contraction.


D.3   General Homothetic Preferences

Assuming that preferences for variety take the general homothetic form outlined in detail in Bil-

biie, Ghironi, and Melitz (2012, 2019), the model changes as follows. The relative price capturing


                                                                 48
the benefit of variety is now an arbitrary function ρ ( Nt ) and so is the elasticity of substitution

between goods—and thus the markup. The pricing condition becomes

                                                    wt
                                         µ ( Nt )      = ρ ( Nt )
                                                    At

Loglinearization of the markup rule delivers model delivers


                                         wt      at = ent             µt ,


while the free entry condition is (with µ the steady-state markup).

                                                                  1
                                       n t = a t + lt +                    µt .
                                                          µ           1

   Finally, letting ζ be the markup elasticity to N we have, under flexible prices:


                                                 µt = ζnt .


   The elasticity of the relative price to the number of goods capture the benefit of variety and

we denote it by the same letter as in the special general-CES case, for simplicity, e   ρ N N/ρ. The

other equations remain unchanged. Because log utility in consumption, hours worked are fixed

and solving the above we obtain:


                                                          1
                                            ntEF =            ζ
                                                                      at
                                                     1    µ 1

   Intuitively, countercyclical markups ζ < 0 imply less entry in response to a supply shock.

   Substituting in the economy resource constraint we obtain


                                            (µ      1) (1 + e )              ζµ
                                   ctEF =                                         at
                                                    µ 1 ζ

   Under fixed prices, we have instead from the Euler equation with fixed real (relative to PPI)




                                                     49
rate ct   ent = 0 and replacing in the aggregate resource constraint ct = µat + [e                            (µ        1)] nt :

                                                     µ                             µ
                                   ntES =                    at and ctES = e               at
                                                 µ       1                     µ       1

                                                                                                     µ            1
This illustrates clearly that the "entry-exit multiplier" survives as long as                       µ 1   >        ζ    , which is
                                                                                                              1   µ 1
                                                                                                                          µ 1
always true when desired markups are countercyclical ζ < 0 and generically true for ζ <                                    µ .

    Note that we still have identical EF and ES elasticities in the knife-edge case e = µ                                1, ctES =

ctEF = µat .

    AD amplification instead occurs when

                                            µ            (µ      1) (1 + e )       ζµ
                                    e                >                                  ,
                                        µ        1               µ 1 ζ

which (with countercyclical desired markups ζ < 0 or ζ < µ                             1) implies

                                             e
                                                         1 (µ        1    ζµ) > 0,
                                         µ       1

yielding the equivalent of our previous condition:


                                                         e>µ         1.


    The same condition also holds for procyclical desired markups ζ > µ                               1 > 0 since the re-

quirement becomes:
                                             µ
                                     ζ                       1 (e    (µ    1)) > 0,
                                         µ       1

which also holds for e > µ    1.

    Therefore, our amplification condition applies to the wide class of general (non-CES) homo-

thetic preferences.




                                                                50
