                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 AI AND JOBS: EVIDENCE FROM ONLINE VACANCIES

                                      Daron Acemoglu
                                        David Autor
                                      Jonathon Hazell
                                      Pascual Restrepo

                                     Working Paper 28257
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28257


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2020




This paper was prepared for the JOLE Virtual Conference in Honor of Alan Krueger, October 16,
2020. We are grateful to David Card, Alex Mas, Andreas Mueller, and the conference
participants for insightful comments and suggestions. We thank Bledi Taska for detailed
comments and providing access to Burning Glass data, Joshua Angrist, Rob Seamans, and Betsey
Stevenson for discussion and comments, Jose Velarde and Zhe Fredric Kong for expert research
assistance, and David Deming and Kadeem Noray for sharing their code and data. Acemoglu and
Autor acknowledge support from Accenture LLP, IBM Global Universities, Schmidt Futures, and
the Smith Richardson Foundation. Acemoglu also acknowledges support from Google, the
National Science Foundation, the Sloan Foundation, and the Toulouse Network on Information
Technology, and Autor also thanks the Carnegie Fellows Program and the Washington Center for
Equitable Growth for their support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Daron Acemoglu, David Autor, Jonathon Hazell, and Pascual Restrepo. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
AI and Jobs: Evidence from Online Vacancies
Daron Acemoglu, David Autor, Jonathon Hazell, and Pascual Restrepo
NBER Working Paper No. 28257
December 2020
JEL No. J23,O33

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the impact of AI on labor markets, using establishment level data on vacancies with
detailed occupational information comprising the near-universe of online vacancies in the US
from 2010 onwards. We classify establishments as "AI exposed" when their workers engage in
tasks that are compatible with current AI capabilities. We document rapid growth in AI related
vacancies over 2010-2018 that is not limited to the Professional and Business Services and
Information Technology sectors and is significantly greater in AI-exposed establishments. AI-
exposed establishments are differentially eliminating vacancy postings that list a range of
previously-posted skills while simultaneously posting skill requirements that were not previously
listed. Establishment-level estimates suggest that AI-exposed establishments are reducing hiring
in non-AI positions as they expand AI hiring. However, we find no discernible relationship
between AI exposure and employment or wage growth at the occupation or industry level,
implying that AI is currently substituting for humans in a subset of tasks but it is not yet having
detectable aggregate labor market consequences.

Daron Acemoglu                                   Jonathon Hazell
Department of Economics, E52-446                 Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology            Princeton University
77 Massachusetts Avenue                          214 Julis-Rabinowitz Center
Cambridge, MA 02139                              Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER                                         jadhazell@gmail.com
daron@mit.edu
                                                 Pascual Restrepo
David Autor                                      Department of Economics
Department of Economics, E52-438                 Boston University
Massachusetts Institute of Technology            270 Bay State Road
77 Massachusetts Avenue                          Boston, MA 02215
Cambridge, MA 02139                              and NBER
and NBER                                         pascual@bu.edu
dautor@mit.edu
                                      1      Introduction
The last decade has witnessed rapid advances in artificial intelligence (AI) based on new
machine learning techniques and the availability of massive data sets. The pace of change
is expected to increase in the years to come (e.g., Neapolitan and Jiang, 2018, Russell,
2019), and AI applications have already started to impact businesses (e.g., Agarwal, Gans
and Goldfarb, 2019).1 Some commentators see this as a harbinger of a jobless future (e.g.,
Ford, 2015; West, 2018; Susskind, 2020), while others see the oncoming AI revolution as
enriching human productivity and work experience (e.g., McKinsey Global Institute, 2017).
The persistence of these contrasting visions is unsurprising given the limited evidence to date
on the labor market consequences of AI. Data collection efforts have only recently commenced
to determine the prevalence of commercial AI use, and hence, aside from Burning Glass data
used here, we lack systematic evidence on whether there has indeed been a major increase in
AI adoption--as opposed to just extensive media coverage of AI.2 Moreover, it is possible to
find examples of AI technologies either replacing work or complementing workers, precisely
because AI, as a broad technological platform, is capable of doing both, and it is thus partly
a matter of societal and business choice how much job displacement AI will create (Acemoglu
and Restrepo, 2019b).
       This paper studies AI adoption in the US and its implications. Our starting point is
that AI adoption can be partially identified from the footprints it leaves at adopting estab-
lishments as they hire workers specializing in AI-related activities, such as supervised and
unsupervised learning, natural language processing, machine translation, or image recogni-
tion. To put this idea into practice, we build an establishment-level data set of AI activity
based on the near-universe of US online job vacancy postings and their detailed skill require-
ments from Burning Glass Technologies (Burning Glass or BG, hereafter) for the years 2007
and 2010 through 2018.3
       We start with a task-based perspective, linking the adoption of AI and its possible impli-
cations to the task structure of an establishment. This perspective emphasizes that current
   1
     AI is a collection of algorithms that act intelligently by recognizing and responding to their environment.
AI algorithms process and identify patterns in vast amounts of unstructured data (for example, speech data,
text, or images), and this allows them to perceive their environment and take actions to achieve some specific
goal.
   2
     Papers by Alekseeva et al. (2020) and Babina et al. (2020), discussed below, also apply Burning Glass
data to study AI use.
   3
     The BG data have been used in several recent papers. A non-exhaustive list of recent papers that use
the Burning Glass data includes Hershbein and Kahn (2016), Azar et al. (2018), Modestino, Shoag, and
Ballance (2019), Hazell and Taska (2019) and Deming and Noray (forthcoming).



                                                       1
applications of AI are capable of performing specific tasks and predicts that firms engaged
in those tasks will be the ones that adopt AI technologies.4 To identify the tasks compatible
with current AI capabilities, we use three different but complementary measures: Felten,
Raj and Seamans' (2018, 2019) AI Occupational Impact measure; Brynjolfsson, Mitchell
and Rock's (2018, 2019) Suitability for Machine Learning (SML) index; and Webb's (2020)
AI Exposure score. Each of these indices is computed based on different assumptions and
identifies different sets of tasks and occupations as being most impacted by AI technologies,
and we construct an establishment's AI exposure from its baseline (2010) occupational struc-
ture according to each one of these indices. We use all three of these proxies for AI exposure
throughout our analysis.5 Since our goal is to study the impact of AI on AI-using firms
rather than AI-producing firms, our empirical analysis excludes firms in the Professional and
Business Services and Information Technology sectors (NAICS 51 and 54), both of which
are primary suppliers of AI services
       Our first result is that there is a rapid takeoff in AI vacancy postings starting in 2010 and
significantly accelerating around 2015-2016. Moreover, consistent with a task-based view of
AI, this AI adoption is driven by establishments with task structures that are compatible
with current AI capabilities. For instance, a one standard deviation increase in our baseline
measure of AI exposure based on Felten et al.--which is approximately the difference in
the average AI exposure between finance versus the mining and oil extraction sector--is
associated with 15% more AI vacancy posting. The strong association between AI exposure
and subsequent AI hiring is robust to numerous controls and specification checks when using
the Felten et al. and the Webb measures, but not robust with SML. Because the SML
measure is not strongly predictive of AI adoption, we place greater emphasis on the other
two measures, Felten et al. and Webb.
       We then investigate whether AI exposure is associated with changes in the skill content
of posted vacancies. With the Felten et al. and Webb measures (and with the SML measure
to a lesser degree), we find that AI exposure is associated with both a significant decline
in some of the skills previously demanded in vacancies and the emergence of new skills.
   4
     See Acemoglu and Autor (2011) and Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018, 2019a). This is not the only approach
one could take to AI. One could also think of AI as complementing some particular business models (rather
than performing specific tasks within those models) or as allowing firms to generate and commercialize new
products (see Agarwal, Gans and Goldfarb, 2019, and Bresnahan 2019). We explain below why the task-
based approach is particularly well-suited to our empirical approach and how it receives support from our
empirical findings.
   5
     Figure 4 below shows that the relationship between mean wage of an occupation and the three AI
exposure measures are very different, which is the basis of our claim that each one of these indices captures
a different aspect of AI exposure.



                                                     2
This evidence bolsters the case that AI is altering the task structure of jobs, replacing some
human-performed tasks while simultaneously generating new tasks accompanied by new skill
demands.
   The finding that establishments with AI-suitable tasks hire workers into AI positions
and change their demand for certain types of skills does not, of course, tell us whether AI
is substituting for or complementing the workers engaged in these tasks. To gain insight
into this question, we next investigate the consequences of the recent surge in AI for labor
demand across establishments.
   In principle, AI-exposed establishments may see an increase in (non-AI) hiring, if either
AI directly complements workers in some tasks, increasing productivity and encouraging
more hiring, or AI substitutes for workers in some tasks, but increases (total factor) produc-
tivity sufficiently to raise demand in non-exposed tasks and occupations via a productivity
effect (Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2019a). Alternatively, AI adoption may reduce hiring if
many tasks are replaced by AI while the additional hiring in non-automated tasks spurred
by AI adoption does not make up for this displacement.
   Our results consistently show no positive relationship between AI exposure and estab-
lishment hiring. Rather, we find evidence of lower hiring associated with greater AI exposure
in almost all of the specifications using the Felten et al. measure and in most specifications
with the Webb measure. The timing of these relationships is also plausible, concentrating
in the time window between 2014 and 2018, during which AI vacancy postings surged. This
pattern of results, combined with our estimates showing that AI adoption is concentrated
in establishments with more AI-exposed tasks, suggests that the recent AI surge is driven
in part by task substitution whereby AI automates a subset of tasks formerly performed by
labor. We find no evidence for either the view that there are major human-AI complemen-
tarities in these establishments or the expectation that AI will increase hiring because of its
large productivity effects--though of course we cannot rule out that other applications of AI
not captured here could have such effects.
   In contrast to the establishment-level patterns, we do not detect any relationship between
AI exposure and overall employment or wages at the industry or occupation level. There
are no significant employment impacts on industries that have a task structure that exhibit
greater exposure to AI, and also no employment or wages effects for occupations that are
more exposed to AI.
   We conclude that despite the notable surge in AI adoption, the impact of AI is still
too small relative to the scale of the US labor market to have had first-order impacts on
employment patterns--outside of AI hiring itself. Nevertheless, our finding that AI adoption

                                              3
is significantly driven by establishments that have a large fraction of tasks that are AI-
suitable, combined with the evidence for a negative association with establishment-level
non-AI hiring, implies that any positive productivity and complementarity effects from AI
are at present small compare to AI's displacement consequences.
       Our paper builds on Alan Krueger's seminal work on the effects of new digital technologies
on workers and wages (Krueger, 1993; Autor, Katz and Krueger, 1998). Subsequent literature
has investigated the implications of automation technologies, focusing on wages, employment
polarization and wage inequality (e.g., Autor, Levy and Murnane, 2003; Goos and Manning,
2007; Autor and Dorn, 2013; Goos, Manning, and Salomons, 2014; Michaels, Natraj and
Van Reenen, 2014; Gregory, Salomons and Zierahn, 2016). Recent work has studied the
impact of specific automation technologies, especially industrial robots, on employment and
wages (Graetz and Michaels, 2019; Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2020a; Acemoglu, Lelarge and
Restrepo, 2020).6
       There are fewer studies of the effects of AI specifically, though this body of work is growing
rapidly. Bessen et al. (2018) conduct a survey of AI startups, which among other things
asked them to report the benefits that their products provide to customers. About 75% of
AI startups report that their products help their clients make better predictions, manage
data better, or provide higher-quality; and 50% of startups report that their products help
customers automate routine tasks and reduce labor costs. Grennan and Michaely (2019)
study how the use of AI algorithms has affected security analysts. In line with the view
that AI might substitute for some workers, they document that analysts are more likely to
leave the profession when they cover stocks for which there are abundant data available.
Differently from these papers' focus on AI-producing sectors and specific applications of AI
such as finance, we study AI's effects on typical AI-using establishments and their non-AI
workers.
       Most closely related to our paper are a few recent works also investigating the relationship
between and firm-level outcomes. Babina et al. (2020) study the relationship between AI
adoption and employment and sales at both the firm and industry level. They document
that, consistent with Alekseeva et al. (2020), AI investment is stronger among firms with
higher cash reserves, higher mark-ups and higher R&D intensity, and moreover, that these
firms grow relatively more than non-adopters. A contrast between our approach and Babina
et al.'s is that we focus on AI suitability based on establishments' occupational structures
   6
    Other papers using proxies of firm-level usage of robots include Dixon, Hong and Wu (2019), Bonfiglioli
et al. (2019), Humlum, (2019). Also, other papers have relied on firm surveys of technology use and
investments in automation for sub-sectors of manufacturing or available only for some European countries
(see for example, Dinlersoz and Wolf, 2018; Koch, Manuylov and Smolka, 2019; Bessen et al., 2019).


                                                    4
rather than observed AI adoption, and this may explain why we arrive at different results
on for hiring. Also closely related is Deming and Noray (forthcoming), who use Burning
Glass data to study the relationship between wages, technical skills, and skills obsolescence.
Though their focus is not AI, their work provides strong evidence that Burning Glass data
are suitable for detecting changes in job skill requirements, an angle of inquiry we pursue
below.
   As noted above, our work exploits measures of AI-suitability developed by Felten, Raj
and Seamans (2018, 2019), Brynjolfsson, Mitchell and Rock (2018, 2019), and Webb (2020).
Our work is largely consistent with Felten, Raj and Seamans (2019), who find no significant
relationship between AI-suitability and employment growth at the occupation level, and
a positive relationship between AI-suitability and AI vacancy posting at the occupational
level. Complementing their work, we evaluate outcomes at the establishment, occupation,
and industry level. Our results confirm that AI suitability is not at present associated with
more hiring at the occupational level, but we estimate significant changes in job skill demands
and reduced non-AI hiring at establishments with AI-suitable occupational structures.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a model motivating our
empirical strategy and interpretation. Section 3 describes the data, and Section 4 presents
our empirical strategy. Section 5 presents our main results on establishment AI exposure and
AI hiring, while Section 6 looks at changes in the types of skills AI-exposed establishments
are looking for. Section 7 explores the effects of AI on hiring at the establishment, industry
and occupation levels and also looks at the relationship between AI and new skills. Section 8
concludes. Additional robustness checks and empirical results are presented in the Appendix.


                                      2     Theory
In this section, we provide a model that motivates our empirical approach and interpretation.


2.1      Tasks, Algorithms and Production
Establishment e's output, ye , is produced by combining the services, ye (x), of tasks x  Te 
T with unit elasticity (i.e., a Cobb-Douglas aggregator):

                                  ln ye =        (x) ln ye (x)dx,                          (1)
                                            Te




                                                  5
where T is the set of feasible tasks, a subset Te of which is used in the production process
of establishment e, and (x)  0 designates the importance or quality of task x in the
production process and are common across establishments. Throughout, we assume that
each establishment faces a downward-sloping demand curve for its product, and also impose
 Te
      (x)dx = 1 for all feasible Te , which ensures that all establishments have constant returns
to scale.
      Tasks are produced by human labor    e (x)   or by AI-powered algorithms or machines ae (x):
                                                                                  
                                                    -1                      -1    -1
                       ye (x) = Ae ( (x) e (x))          + (a (x)ae (x))               ,       (2)

where Ae is an establishment-specific productivity term,  is the elasticity of substitution
between labor and algorithms or machines, and  (x) and a (x) are assumed to be common
across establishments.
      The common technology assumption can be relaxed easily but simplifies the exposition by
ensuring that differences in factor demands across establishments are driven entirely by task
structures, making the link between the model and our empirical approach more transparent.
      Workers are homogeneous, can be hired at wage w, and can be assigned to any task.
Only a subset of tasks, denoted by T A , can be performed by algorithms/AI, which can be
purchased at user cost R.
      We assume that the set of tasks in the economy, T , is partitioned into tasks performed
by a set of distinct occupations and denote the set of tasks performed in occupation o  O
by T o . Each establishment e's task structure is represented by the set of occupations that
the establishment employs, denoted by Oe  O, and so Te = oOe T o . In words, each
establishment employs workers in a subset of occupations, and its task structure is given
by (all of) the tasks performed in these occupations. For example, some establishments will
employ accountants and their production will use the set of tasks accountants perform, while
others require the tasks performed by security analysts or retail clerks and thus hire workers
into these occupations.
      These assumptions imply that advances in AI technology that improve the ability of
algorithms to perform certain tasks--corresponding to an increase a (x) for some x--will
have have heterogeneous impacts on establishments depending on their task/occupation
structure, represented by Oe for establishment e. For example, an increase in a (x) for text
recognition will impact occupations in which workers perform significant text recognition
tasks and will change the factor demands of "exposed establishments" meaning those that
employ workers in these occupations. To make these ideas precise, analogously with our


                                                   6
empirical work, we define establishment e's exposure to AI as

                                                                xTe T A e
                                                                          (x)dx
                                     exposure to AIe =                                  .                         (3)
                                                                 xTe e
                                                                       (x)dx

This measure represents the share of tasks performed in an establishment that can be per-
formed by AI-powered algorithms.7 High exposure establishments will be more impacted
by advances in AI technologies. In our empirical work, we operationalize AI exposure using
occupational indices provided by Felten, Raj and Seamans (2018, 2019), Webb (2020) and
Brynjolfsson, Mitchell and Rock (2018, 2019), as noted above.8
       We next explore under what conditions greater establishment exposure to AI will lead to
AI activity and to more or less hiring of (non-AI) workers.


2.2       Task Structure and AI Adoption
To illustrate how the task structure determines AI adoption, let us follow Acemoglu and
Autor (2011) and Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018, 2019a) and assume that  = , so that
algorithms and labor are perfectly substitutable within a task.

Proposition 1 Suppose that  = . Consider an improvement in AI technologies that
increases a (x) in T A . Establishments with greater exposure to AI will increase their share
of AI/algorithms in value added.

       The proof of this proposition follows from Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018) and is omitted.
       Although the formal statement of the proposition applies to the case  = , a similar
logic applies when AI does not fully replace workers in the tasks it is deployed, meaning that
 > 1. In this case, we still have that more exposed establishments will tend to adopt more
   7
     When  =  as in Propositions 1 and 2 below, e (x) is proportional to (x) in all establishments
(provided that task x is performed by labor). In that case, equation (3) can be written in terms of (x)'s.
   8
     Using our notation, we can represent these indices as

                                                        xT o T A
                                                                      (x)dx
                                            OExpo =                         ,
                                                          xT o
                                                                    (x)dx

where (x) is average employment in task x and we denote average employment in occupation o by o =
 xT o
      (x)dx. When (x) = e (x), which follows from our common technology assumption, the exposure to
AI measure is equal to the employment weighted average of the occupation AI exposure measure:

                                            xT o T A
                                                      (x)dx o
               oOe   OExpo   o
                                      oOe    xT o
                                                    (x)dx            xTe T A
                                                                                 (x)dx
                        o
                                 =                  o
                                                                =                           = exposure to AIe .
                  oOe                        oOe                       xTe
                                                                                (x)dx




                                                         7
AI, and this will raise the share of AI/algorithms in value added. When  < 1, there will
again be greater AI use following improvements in AI technology, but this may not increase
the share of AI/algorithms in value added, because of strong complementarities.
       In our empirical work, we will identify greater use of AI with the posting of more AI
vacancies.9 We also note that if different tasks require different skills that are included in
job postings, the adoption of AI technologies for tasks previously performed by labor will be
associated with a reduction in some of the skills that were previously demanded in vacancies.
Conversely, if working with AI requires new skills, we may also see additional skills demanded
in vacancies after the adoption of AI technologies. We explore these implications empirically
as well.


2.3       AI, Task Displacement and Hiring
How do improvements in AI technology impact hiring? We first study this question in the
case in which  =  and AI systems substitute for and displace workers in the tasks they
are deployed. The next proposition also follows from the analysis in Acemoglu and Restrepo
(2018) and its proof is omitted.

Proposition 2 Suppose that  = . Consider an improvement in AI technologies that
increases a (x) in T A . This will increase the share of AI/algorithms in value added and will
reduce the share of labor in value added. The total employment effects for the establishment
are ambiguous.

       The direct consequence of an improvement in AI technology is to expand the set of tasks
now performed by algorithms, T A , and to shrink the set of tasks allocated to workers in
exposed occupations. Because  = , better AI technology will displace workers from tasks
in T A , reducing the share of employment in exposed occupations in overall employment.10
       However, as emphasized in Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018), the reallocation of tasks from
humans to machines or algorithms also reduces production costs, creating a "productivity
effect". This productivity effect increases establishment output, ye , and may generate an
expansion in hiring driven by tasks that are not displaced by AI. Establishment employment
will increase if this expansion is greater than the displacement of workers from tasks taken
over by AI. It will decrease otherwise.
   9
      We do not incorporate AI workers explicitly into the model, both for simplicity and to avoid confusion
between their employment and the employment of (non-AI) workers performing tasks suitable for AI.
   10
      The same conclusion would apply even when  is not infinite but still greater than 1. In this case, not
all employment in the AI-exposed tasks would be displaced, but there would be a substitution away from
labor to algorithms/machines within these exposed tasks, with the same qualitative consequences.

                                                     8
    Our empirical work will explore the relationship between AI adoption and employment.
Specifically, we ask how AI exposure affects (non-AI) hiring, and in particular, whether
establishments with baseline task structures that are well-suited to AI technologies according
to (3) post more vacancies for non-AI positions.


2.4        Human-Complementary AI
What about the human-complementary effects of AI? The possibility that AI will comple-
ment workers engaged in exposed tasks can be captured by assuming that (x) increases for
exposed tasks or, alternatively that  < 1, so that algorithms and human labor are comple-
mentary within a task (or both). This type of human-complementary AI will increase labor
demand because algorithms raise human productivity in exactly the tasks in which AI is
being adopted.
    Evidence that AI is associated with greater establishment-level employment would be
consistent with the human-complementary view, but could also be consistent with task
substitution associated with large productivity effects that nonetheless increase hiring at
the exposed establishments. Conversely, evidence of negative, or even zero, effects would
weigh against both the human-complementary view and the possibility of large productivity
effects from AI--since AI-human complementarity or employment-generating productivity
effects are needed for AI adoption to raise establishment-level employment. Our evidence
below suggests that establishments with AI-suitable task structures reduce hiring of non-AI
workers, providing support for the view that the current generation of AI technologies is
predominantly task-replacing and generates productivity effects that are not large enough
to counterbalance any resulting worker displacement. We note again that this conclusion
applies to the variation in AI adoption identified by baseline task structure. It remains
possible that other AI technologies than the ones we are proxying here could have different
effects.


                                       3     Data
We next describe the Burning Glass Technologies data, document that it is broadly repre-
sentative of employment and hiring trends across occupations and industries, present our
AI exposure indices, and document their distribution across occupations and their evolution
over time.




                                              9
3.1       Burning Glass Data
Burning Glass collects data from roughly 40,000 company websites and online job boards,
with no more than 5% of vacancies from any one source. Burning Glass applies a dedu-
plication algorithm and converts the vacancies into a form amenable to data analysis. The
coverage is the near-universe of online vacancies from 2010 onwards in the United States,
with somewhat more limited coverage in 2007. Our primary sample comprises data from the
start of 2010 until October 2018, though we also make use of data from 2007. The vacancy
data enumerate occupation, industry and region information, firm identifiers, and detailed
information on skills required by vacancies, garnered from the text of the job posting.
       A key question concerns the representativeness of Burning Glass (BG) data given that
the source of the vacancies is online job postings. Figure 1 shows that BG data closely
track the evolution of overall vacancies in the US economy as recorded by the nationally
representative Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey
(JOLTS). The exception is the downturn in BG postings data between 2015 and 2017.11
Appendix Figure A1 shows that over the 2010-2018 period, the occupational and industry
composition in BG is closely aligned with both overall occupation employment shares from
the OES and with industry vacancy shares from JOLTS.12
       We make use of Burning Glass' establishment and industry detail. When this information
is available from the text of postings, vacancies are assigned a firm name and a location,
typically at the city level, as well as an industry code. We classify each firm as belonging
to the industry in which it posts the most vacancies over our sample period. We define an
establishment of a firm as the collection of vacancies pertaining to a firm and commuting
zone. Commuting zones are groups of counties that, due to their strong commuting ties,
approximate a local labor market (Tolbert and Sizer, 1996).
       Of particular importance for our paper are BG's detailed skill and occupation coding.
Vacancies in BG data contain information on skill requirements, scraped from the text of
the vacancy. The skills are organized according to several thousand standardized fields.
Groups of related skills are collected together into "skill clusters". Over 95% of vacancies
are assigned a six-digit (SOC) occupation code.13
  11
     We adjust the numbers of job openings in JOLTS to match the concept of vacancies in Burning Glass,
using the approach developed by Carnevale et al. (2014). The difference in concept between JOLTS and
Burning Glass vacancies likely accounts for the downturn in BG postings data between 2015 and 2017.
  12
     Descriptive statistics and additional information on the BG data are provided in the Appendix. We note
that BG data represent vacancy flows, while the OES reports employment stocks, and thus we do not expect
the two data sources to align perfectly. Moreover, online vacancy postings tend to overrepresent technical
and professional jobs relative to blue collar and personal service jobs (Carnevale et al., 2014).
  13
     Six-digit occupation codes are highly granular, including occupations such as pest control worker, college

                                                      10
   We construct two measures of AI vacancies, narrow and broad, using this information.
The narrow category includes a selection of skills relating to AI.14 The broad measure of
AI includes skills belonging to the broader skill clusters of Machine Learning and Artificial
Intelligence. A concern with our broad AI measure is that it may include various IT functions
that are separate from core AI activities. For this reason, we focus on the narrow AI
measure in the text and show the robustness of our main results with the broad occupation
measure in the Appendix. Figure 2 shows the evolution of postings of narrow and broad AI
vacancies in the BG data, highlighting the rapid takeoff of AI vacancies after 2015, as noted
in the Introduction. Our empirical work exploits this sharp acceleration to test whether
the estimated relationship between AI adoption and non-AI hiring matches the timing of
adoption. While a sharp uptick is visible in all industries, the the second panel of Figure
2 shows that the takeoff is particularly pronounced in the information, professional and
business services, finance, and manufacturing sectors.
   Our primary focus is on "AI-using sectors". Therefore in our establishment level analysis,
we drop establishments belonging to sectors likely to be producing AI-related products,
namely the information sector (NAICS sector 51) and the professional and business services
sector (NAICS sector 54). The former includes various Information Technology industries,
likely to be selling AI products, while the latter contains industries such as management
consultancy, likely to be integrating AI into other industries' production processes.


3.2     AI Indices
We study three measures of AI exposure. Each is assigned at the 6 digit SOC occupation
level, and each is designed to capture occupations concentrating in tasks that are compatible
with the current capabilities of AI.
   The first measure is from Felten et al. (2019). It is based on data from the AI Progress
Measurement project, from the Electronic Frontier Foundation. The Electronic Frontier
data identify a set of nine application areas in which artificial intelligence has made progress
since 2010--for example, image recognition or language modeling. Felten et al. use Amazon
MTurk to collect crowdsourced assessments of the relevance of each of these application
professor in physics, and home health aide.
   14
      The skills are Machine Learning, Computer Vision, Machine Vision, Deep Learning, Virtual Agents,
Image Recognition, Natural Language Processing, Speech Recognition, Pattern Recognition, Object Recog-
nition, Neural Networks, AI ChatBot, Supervised Learning, Text Mining, Support Vector Machines, Un-
supervised Learning, Image Processing, Mahout, Recommender Systems, Support Vector Machines (SVM),
Random Forests, Latent Semantic Analysis, Sentiment Analysis / Opinion Mining, Latent Dirichlet Alloca-
tion, Predictive Models, Kernel Methods, Keras, Gradient boosting, OpenCV, Xgboost, Libsvm, Word2Vec,
Chatbot, Machine Translation and Sentiment Classification.


                                                  11
areas to the 52 O*NET ability scales, e.g., depth perception, number facility, and written
comprehension. The authors finally construct the AI Occupational Impact (AIOI) for each
O*NET occupation as the weighted sum of the 52 AI application-ability scores over each
occupation, where weights are equal to the O*NET-reported prevalence and importance of
each ability in the occupation.
       The second measure is from Webb (2020). Webb's analysis identifies occupations that
are exposed to AI based on whether the occupation's tasks, measured using O*NET as in
Felten et al., overlap with capabilities described in AI patents. Occupations that have a
larger fraction of such overlapping tasks are classified as more exposed.
       The third measure is Suitability for Machine Learning (SML) from Brynjolfsson et al.
(2019). To build this measure, Brynjolfsson et al. (2019) develop a 23-item rubric for sys-
tematically scoring the suitability of any given job task for machine learning/AI. They apply
this rubric to the full set of O*NET occupations using CrowdFlower, a human intelligence
task crowdsourcing platform, to score the O*NET textual description of each occupation,
thus producing an SML score.
       Figure 3 shows the distribution of our three indices by broad occupation categories and
by one-digit industry.15 Figure 4 relates this same information to wages by plotting average
AI exposure by occupational wage percentile for each index. The figures underscore that
these three measure capture different aspects of AI. The Felten et al. measure, for example,
is particularly high for managers, professionals and office and administrative staff and is
very low for service, production and construction workers, capturing the fact that these
occupations involve various manual tasks that cannot be performed by algorithms. The Webb
measure is not particularly high in sales occupations and shows a strong positive relationship
with occupational wage percentiles. In contrast, Brynjolfsson et al.'s SML measure is high for
office and administrative occupations, and for sales occupations, and (perhaps surprisingly)
above average for personal services, but is low for professional occupations and most blue-
collar and service occupations. Consequently, SML has no systematic relationship with
occupational wage percentiles.16
  15
     The broad occupational categories are those utilized by Autor (2019) and aggregate six-digit occupations
into 10, roughly one-digit categories.
  16
     Another notable difference is that the Webb index finds very little AI-suitability in either office or sales
occupations. Alongside his AI index, Webb (2020) creates a separate software exposure index, pertaining to
traditional non-AI software, that detects substantial software-suitability in office, administrative, and sales
occupations. We use this index in our robustness checks as a control.




                                                       12
                               4      Empirical Strategy
Our empirical strategy links measures of AI activity and job posting outcomes to AI exposure,
where both outcome and exposure variables are measured at the establishment level and AI
exposure is measured using the three indices above.
      We estimate the following regression model:

                                   ye,t-t0 = AIe,t0 + xe,t0  + e,t-t0 ,                               (4)

where e denotes establishment, ye,t-t0 denotes the change in one of our establishment-level
outcomes between 2010-12 and 2016-18, AIe,t0 =                o share   postingsoe,t0 ×AI scoreo is one of
our three measures of establishment AI exposure calculated using establishment data for
2010 through 2012, and xe,t0 is a vector of baseline controls, including industry dummies,
firm size decile dummies, a dummy for the commuting zone (CZ) in which the establishment
is located and, in some specifications, a set of firm fixed effects.17 Finally, e,t-t0 is an error
term representing all omitted factors.
      Our primary interest is in the coefficient  , which captures the relationship between AI
exposure and the outcome variable. We standardize the establishment AI exposure measure
by dividing it by its standard deviation, weighted by vacancies in 2010-2012. Hence,  is the
change in the outcome variable associated with a standard deviation change in AI exposure.
We also aggregate this equation to the occupational and industry level to explore hiring and
other outcomes for more exposed occupations and industries.
      The three main outcome measures we focus on for ye,t-t0 are AI vacancies, changes in
job skill requirements of posted vacancies, and overall non-AI hiring, all measured at the
establishment level.


                     5     AI Exposure and AI Vacancies
We first document that AI exposure predicts establishment-level AI activity, as proxied by
our measure of narrow AI vacancies. Table 1 presents the main estimates. Panel A of this
table shows the relationship between AI exposure based on Felten et al.'s index and growth
in AI vacancies, while the subsequent two panels present results for our other measures of
AI exposure. We estimate regression models based on (4), with the left-hand side variable
defined as the change in the inverse hyperbolic sine of AI vacancies between 2010-12 and
 17
      We pool 2010-12 data and, separately, 2016-18 data to improve precision.


                                                     13
2016-18.18 We focus on weighted specifications, using baseline establishment vacancies as
weights. We report heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors that allow for arbitrary cross-
sectional correlation across the establishments of each firm.
       Column 1 is our most parsimonious specification and includes no covariates, thus depict-
ing the unconditional bivariate relationship. The coefficient estimate in Panel A of  = 15.96
is precisely estimated (standard error = 1.73) and shows a sizable association between AI
exposure and AI vacancies. This estimate implies that a one standard deviation increase in
AI exposure--which corresponds to the difference between the finance and the mining and
oil extraction sector--is associated with approximately a 16% increase in AI vacancies.19
       The remaining columns explore the robustness of this relationship. Column 2 controls
for firm size decile and commuting zone fixed effects. The coefficient estimate of AI exposure
declines slightly to 13.82 but is now more precisely estimated. Column 3 additionally adds
three-digit (NAICS) industry fixed effects. Reflecting the sizable variation in AI exposure
across industries shown in Figure 3 above, these controls are more important for our regres-
sions, and they reduce the magnitude of our estimate by about a third, to 9.19, but the
standard error of the estimate also declines (to 1.21).
       Column 4 goes one step further and includes a full set of firm fixed effects, so that now the
comparison is between two establishments of the same firm that differ in their AI exposure
as measured by their baseline vacancy postings across detailed occupations in 2010-12. The
estimate of  is quite similar to the bivariate relationship reported in column 1, 16.53, albeit
slightly less precise, since all of the cross-firm variation is purged in these specifications.
       Figure 3 documented significant differences in AI exposure across occupations. This raises
the concern that our results may be confounded by secular trends across broad occupational
categories. Columns 5 and 6 additionally control for the baseline shares of vacancies that
are in sales and administration, two of the broad occupational categories that have been in
decline for other reasons (e.g., Autor and Dorn, 2013). These controls do not substantially
change the estimate in either column, which remain, respectively, at 9.75 (standard error =
1.20) and 16.87 (standard error = 1.86).20
  18
       The inverse hyperbolic sine transformation is given by:

                                              ln x +    (x2 + 1) .

For small values of x, this approximates a proportional change, but is well defined when x = 0, which is a
frequent occurrence in our sample of establishments.
   19
      The partial R2 for our AI exposure measure in this regression is 2.5%. Given the vast cross-establishment
variation in AI adoption, this is a sizable share of variation. For comparison, the partial R2 of three-digit
industry fixed effects in column 3 is 5.2%.
   20
      Table ?? in the Appendix shows that the results in Panel A are also robust if we include the baseline


                                                       14
    The first panel of Figure 5 shows the specification from column 3 in the form of a bin
scatterplot, where each bin represents about 50,000 establishments. The relationship be-
tween AI exposure and AI vacancy postings is fairly close to linear across the distribution
and does not appear to be driven by outliers. The first panel of Figure 6 provides a comple-
mentary visualization, depicting the evolution of AI vacancies for the four quartiles of the
establishment AI exposure measure. It shows that the top two quartiles post significantly
more AI vacancies and drive the surge in AI vacancies after 2015.
    Panels B and C of Table 1 repeat the Panel A regressions using the Webb and SML
indices of AI exposure, respectively. Estimates using the Webb measure, reported in Panel
B, are similar to those in Panel A in the first four specifications, though they are not fully
robust to controls for the baseline shares of sales and administration vacancies in columns 5
and 6. The second panel of Figure 5 shows that the bin scatter plot with the Webb measure
looks similar to the one in the first panel with the Felten et al. measure, and Figure 6
confirms that the surge in AI vacancies is again driven by the top two quartiles. Given
that the Felten et al. and Webb indices capture different components of AI exposure (recall
Figure 3), the broadly similar picture that emerges from these two measures is reassuring.
    Results with the SML index in Panel C are significantly weaker, however. There is a
positive association between the SML-based measure of exposure to AI and AI vacancy
growth without any covariates, but when three-digit industry fixed effects are included,
this relationship becomes negative. The proximate explanation for this pattern is that,
as noted above, the sales and administration occupations have a high SML score and are
negatively associated with the adoption of AI. When we control for the baseline shares of
these occupations in columns 5 and 6, the positive relationship in column 1 is restored. The
third panels of Figures 5 and 6 show a less clear pattern as well. The bin scatterplot confirms
the lack of a robust relationship between exposure to AI based on the SML measure and AI
vacancies (from the specification in column 3), and the evolution of AI vacancy growth by
exposure quartiles in Figure 6 no longer shows a monotone pattern. This pattern motivates
our greater emphasis on the results using the Felten et al. and Webb measures in the
remainder of the paper.
    One concern is that the AI measures may be proxying for exposure to non-AI digital
technologies. If so, this would cloud the interpretation of our estimates as primarily capturing
the impacts of AI exposure on establishment outcomes. We check for this possibility in
shares of ten broad occupational categories. For example, the coefficients in the specifications that parallel
columns 5 and 6 are, respectively, 7.24 (standard error = 1.44) and 13.70 (standard error = 2.12). However,
some of the results for the Webb and SML AI exposure measures are sensitive to these controls.



                                                     15
Table 2 by additionally controlling for Webb's measure of exposure to "software", which is
calculated analogously to his AI exposure measure, but focusing on occupations and tasks
suitable for traditional software and digital technologies. The inclusion of the software
exposure measure has little impact on the coefficients of interest, particularly in the case of
the Felten et al. measure. For example, in the most exhausitve specification (column 6),
the point estimate is now 17.47 with a standard error of 1.90, as compared to 16.87 and
a standard error of 1.86 in Table 1. The software exposure measure itself does not have a
consistent association with AI vacancy growth: it is positive and statistically significant in
some specifications, small and insignificant in others, and negative and significant in still
others. This set of estimates bolsters our confidence that the AI exposure variable identifies
meaningful variation in the suitability of establishment task structure for AI, and that this
variation is distinct from exposure to traditional software and digital technologies.
   We provide several robustness checks on these basic patterns in the Appendix. In Table
A1, we report estimates for AI vacancy growth using AI exposure calculated using establish-
ments' occupational structures in 2007 rather than 2010. Although this greatly reduces the
sample size as many establishments operating in both 2010 and 2018 are not found in the
2007 data, we obtain qualitatively similar results to those in Table 1.
   In Table A2, we replace the narrow AI vacancy measures used in Table 1 with the broad
AI vacancy indices discussed above (see Figure 2), and in Table A3, we use the change in
the share of AI vacancies among all vacancy postings as the dependent variable. The results
in both tables corroborate our main findings in Table 1 and, if anything, are stronger and
more stable, especially with the Webb measure. The quantitative magnitudes implied by
the estimates in these tables are comparable and plausible. For example, with the Felten et
al. measure and the specification in column 6, a one standard deviation higher AI exposure
is associated with a 0.18 percentage point increase (standard error 0.02) in the share of AI
vacancies between 2010 and 2018.
   We also explored firm-level variants of the establishment-level models above. Because of
the many zeros in the data, the establishment-level estimates do not aggregate cleanly to
firm-level estimates. As shown in columns 1 and 2 of Table A4, these estimates are generally
imprecise and inconsistently signed. However, when we estimate models for the firm-level
mean of establishment AI vacancy growth (columns 3 and 4) or models with share of AI
vacancies (columns 5 and 6), the estimates are very similar to our main results in Table 1.
   In summary, the data point to a recent surge in AI-related hiring, and our regression evi-
dence finds that establishments whose task structures enable the use of AI. have substantially
increased their postings of AI-related vacancies. This evidence suggests that an important

                                              16
component of AI activity is related to the types of tasks performed in an establishment--
though it does not preclude the possibility that AI activity has other drivers, such as the
development of new products or new business models. Having established the link between
AI suitability and AI hiring at the level of establishments, we next turn to the broader labor
market implications of growing AI adoption.


                              6     AI and New Skills
Since AI is intended to supplement, replicate, and in some cases, exceed human-level intel-
ligence in a variety of tasks, we anticipate that establishments with task structures that are
suitable for AI will tend to change the types of skills they demand. We explore here whether
this occurs.
   To investigate whether AI exposure predicts change in the nature of skills that an estab-
lishment demands in non-AI jobs, we build on work by Deming and Noray (forthcoming)
who document such changes associated with broader IT-related activity. We adapt Deming
and Noray's (forthcoming) measure of change in skill demands to establishments, and we
also separate their gross skill change measure into negative and positive changes, capturing
the disappearance of existing skills and the emergence of new skills, respectively:

                                             S
                                                       skills
                                                            e,t2            skills
                                                                                 e,t1
 negative skill changee,t2 ,t1 = - min                                -                    , 0 , and
                                             s=1
                                                     vacanciese,t2        vacanciese,t1

                                                 S
                                                        skills
                                                             e,t2            skills
                                                                                  e,t1
       positive skill changee,t2 ,t1 = max                            -                     ,0 ,
                                              s=1
                                                      vacanciese,t2        vacanciese,t1

Here, skills
           e,t is the number of times skill s is posted by establishment e in year t, which
we normalize by dividing it by the total number of vacancies posted by that establishment.
The negative skill change measure therefore represents a decline in the frequency with which
some of the skills that were formerly posted appear in vacancies, while the positive skill
change measure captures increases in the frequency with which other skills are posted in
vacancies--which may include the addition of skills that were not previously posted. We
calculate these measures for non-AI vacancies and, as before, for all establishments except
those in the Professional and Business Services and Information Technology sectors (51 and
54).
   Tables 3 and 4 show that establishment AI exposure is robustly associated with both
more negative and more positive skill changes. For example, in the first panel of Table


                                                     17
3, which focuses on negative skill changes, the column 1 estimate of 0.83 indicates that a
one standard deviation in the Felten et al. AI exposure measure is associated with a 0.83
absolute decline in the per-vacancy frequency with which skills previously demanded are
posted (standard error 0.09). This is a large change compared to the mean negative skill
change in our sample, 4.70, and thus suggests that the deployment of AI technologies goes
hand-in-hand with significant skill redundancies. Equally interesting is the pattern in Table
4, which shows that AI exposure is associated with demand for new skills. Column 1 of this
table shows that a one standard deviation increase in the Felten et al. AI exposure measure is
associated with 0.95 absolute increase (standard error = 0.08) in the per-vacancy frequency of
skills that were either demanded less frequently previously or were not previously demanded.
This too is a sizable impact as compared to the mean positive skill change in our sample of
6.30.
   These patterns are quite robust, as is shown in the remaining columns and panels of
Tables 3 and 4. Each of the three AI exposure measures--Felten et al., Webb, and SML--
predict both negative and positive establishment-level skill changes between 2010 and 2018.
Paralleling our findings at many points in the paper, the Felten et al. measure proves to have
the most stable and the largest quantitative relationship to the outcome variable, followed
by Webb and SML. In particular, all measures prove robust to the inclusion of firm size
deciles, commuting zone dummies, and controls for initial establishment vacancy structures
in sales and administrative occupations. All three are robust to the inclusion of firm fixed
effects as well. The association between AI exposure and positive skill changes is no longer
present when we include firm fixed effects, however, presumably because the addition of new
skills is not localized to the establishments that have higher AI exposure but rather occurs
throughout the firm.
   The finding that AI exposure is associated with significant changes in the set of skills
posted in vacancies bolster our confidence that AI adoption has real effects on the job
content of non-AI jobs--enabling firms to replace some of the tasks previously performed
by workers, making certain skills redundant, while simultaneously generating demand for
new skills. These results are also consonant with our theoretical model in Section 2, which
suggests that AI adoption will induce churn of job tasks performed by workers as some tasks
previously performed by humans are taken over by algorithms, causing labor reallocation.
While the churn prediction is unambiguous, the theory leaves open the possibility that
hiring of workers in AI-exposed establishments could either rise or fall: if algorithms are
a complement to labor, hiring will increase; conversely, if algorithms are a substitute for
labor, hiring will fall unless the productivity gains from AI adoption are sufficiently strong

                                             18
to offset the direct reduction in labor demand stemming from algorithm-labor substitution.
The following section explores the net impact of AI exposure on (non-AI) hiring.


                                  7     AI and Jobs
This section reports our results on the effects of our measures of AI exposure on broader
labor market outcomes.


7.1    AI Exposure and Establishment Hiring
Table 5 turns to the hiring (vacancy posting) implications of AI exposure. The structure
of the table is identical to that of Table 1 except that the left-hand side variable is now
the change in the inverse hyperbolic sine of total non-AI vacancies (and there are two extra
columns, which we describe below). The non-AI vacancy measure is chosen so as to focus
on the effects of AI activity on establishment hiring exclusive of already-reported impact on
AI hiring itself. As before, we drop the primary sectors 51 and 54.
   In Panel A, where we focus on Felten et al.'s measure, we see a robust negative association
between AI exposure and subsequent non-AI hiring. The estimate in column 1 is -13.80
(standard error = 4.22), indicating that a one standard deviation increase in AI exposure
is associated with a roughly 14% decline in overall non-AI vacancies. (We interpret the
economic magnitudes of these point estimates below.) This coefficient estimate remains
stable when we control for firm size decile, commuting zone and three-digit industry fixed
effects in columns 2 and 3.
   In column 4, we replace firm-level covariates with firm fixed effects while retaining the
commuting zone dummies from the prior column. This is a stringent specification since we
are now comparing between establishments of the same firm that differ in their AI exposure
as measured by their baseline (2010-2012) vacancy postings across detailed occupations. In
this specification, the point estimate for AI exposure is -4.81, which is about half of its prior
magnitude. Simultaneously, the estimates become more precise as the standard error falls
from 4.08 to 1.44.
   The relationship between AI exposure and non-AI vacancies remains comparable when
we include the baseline shares of sales and administration occupations in columns 5 and 6:
-12.42 (standard error = 4.01) and -4.04 (standard error 1.47), respectively.
   We also investigated whether these estimates are driven by establishments that posted
jobs in 2010-2012 and then stopped posting in 2016-2018 (which may reflect either true zero


                                               19
vacancy postings or establishment exits, perhaps for sampling reasons). Columns 7 and 8,
therefore, limit the sample to establishments that posted in 2016-2018. The estimates are
now somewhat smaller, but still negative and statistically significant at 5%: -8.38 (standard
error = 3.46) in column 7, with three-digit industry fixed effects, and -3.56 (standard error
1.86) in column 8, with firm fixed effects.21
       How large are the effects reported in Panel A? The interpretation of the regression coef-
ficients is not straightforward because our outcome variable is vacancy flows, which differs
from the stock of employment. To estimate the implied impact on employment, we cumu-
late vacancies between 2010 and 2018 to create a measure of 2018 employment for each
establishment. Then we regress our measure of cumulative hiring between 2010 and 2018
on establishment AI exposure in 2010 exactly as in Table 5.22 Table A6 in the Appendix
reports the results of this exercise. In Panel A, with Felten et al.'s measure of AI exposure,
the regression coefficient in column 1 is -7.24, which implies that a one standard deviation
in AI exposure is associated with a 7% decline in implied non-AI employment between 2010
and 2018. Since a one standard deviation increase in AI exposure is quite large, this is a
sizable but not implausible relationship. We also note that because this coefficient estimates
the relative change in non-AI hiring at more versus less AI-exposed establishments, it does
not imply an aggregate reduction in total hiring.
       Panel B turns to Webb's measure of AI exposure. The pattern is broadly similar to the
one we see in Panel A but less stable. The coefficient estimate without any covariates in
column 1 is -17.24 (standard error = 3.72). It is comparable in column 2 when we control
for commuting zone and three-digit industry fixed effects. However, the estimate declines
substantially to -2.22 (standard error = 0.93) in column 4 when we control for firm fixed
effects, and is inconsistent in sign and magnitude in columns 5 through 8. When we use the
SML measure in Panel C, there is no consistent evidence for a negative association between AI
exposure and non-AI vacancy postings. While there is a negative and statistically significant
estimate in column 6, there is a positive association in other columns.
       If AI is indeed distinct from traditional ("procedural") software in that it can potentially
  21
      Since there are positive effects on AI vacancies, it is not self-evident whether the impact on total vacancies
(including AI hiring) is also negative. We show in Table A5 in the Appendix that the answer is yes. This is
as expected, since AI vacancies are a tiny share of total vacancies.
   22
      More specifically, we assume that establishment employment, e,t , follows the law of motion e,t+1 =
f ve,t + (1 - s) e,t , where ve,t denotes the establishment's vacancies, f is the vacancy fill rate and s is the
employment separation rate. We calculate employment in 2010 by assuming that the establishment is in
steady state at the state, and we compute employment in 2018 by iteratively solving the law of motion
forward. We set s = 0.4 to match the 2018 annual separation rate from JOLTS. We thank Andreas Mueller
for suggesting these exercises.



                                                        20
perform job tasks requiring pattern recognition, learning, and prediction, we should expect
AI exposure and traditional software exposure to have different relationships with non-AI
hiring. We put this idea to the test in Table 6, controlling as before for Webb's measure of
exposure to software. These estimates find that inclusion of the software exposure variable
in our main specification has modest effects on the estimates using the Felten et al. and
Webb AI exposure measures, which remain very similar to those in Table 5. The software
exposure measure itself has no consistent association with non-AI hiring in these models, with
magnitude, sign, and significance varying substantially across specifications and panels.23
    We showed in Figure 2 that AI adoption sharply accelerated after 2015, after having
grown comparatively slowly in the prior five yeas. This discontinuous growth provides an
opportunity to test whether any potential association between AI exposure and non-AI hiring
fits this timing. We perform this exercise in Table 7, where we break the outcome period of
2010-2018 into two subperiods, 2010-2014 and 2014-2018. We then estimate a subset of the
specifications in Table 5 separately for these sub-intervals.
    Focusing on Felten et al.'s AI exposure measure in Panel A, we see no economically or
statistically significant relationship between AI exposure in 2010 and non-AI hiring during
the years 2010-14. This is reassuring since AI adoption had not yet taken off in this period.
For 2014-18, we instead see a very different pattern: column 5 shows a strong negative
association between AI exposure and subsequent non-AI hiring. The estimate is -11.94
(standard error = 3.80), indicating that a one standard deviation increase in AI exposure
is associated with an approximately 12% decline in overall non-AI vacancies. This estimate
remains quite stable and actually becomes more precise when we control for firm size deciles,
commuting zone controls, and three-digit industry fixed effects in column 6. The relationship
also remains comparable when we include in column 7 the baseline shares of sales and
administration occupations. The point estimate is now -10.60 with a standard error of
2.82. Column 8 shows that this result is robust to firm fixed effects, though, as before,
their inclusions reduces the magnitude of the relationship. Panels B and C report the
same specifications for the Webb and SML AI measures, respectively. As in Table 5, the
relationships between non-AI hiring and AI exposure are less consistent and robust for these
AI exposure indexes.
   23
      Another prediction of our conceptual framework is that we should also see a decline in postings of
vacancies for occupations that have themselves high exposure to AI. When we include the growth of "at-
risk" vacancies on the left-hand side, we see consistent negative effects with all three measures. Nevertheless,
we are cautious in interpreting these specifications, and do not report them, because they suffer from potential
mean reversion. In particular, because the exposure measure is equal to the share of establishment postings
that are `at-risk' in 2010-2012, any mean reversion in this measure will induce a spurious negative relationship
between an establishment's at-risk vacancy share in 2010-2012 and its subsequent change.


                                                      21
       Table A7 in the Appendix presents results at the firm level, which are, on the whole, quite
similar to the establishment-level results. Table A8, on the other hand, depicts similar, even
if slightly smaller, estimates with average establishment size weights (rather than baseline
establishment size weights as in Table 5).
       In sum, we find no evidence that AI exposure is associated with greater hiring at the
establishment level. Rather, several of our specifications show statistically significant and
economically meaningful negative effects, and these effects concentrate in the years between
2015 and 2018, precisely when we see the surge in AI vacancies.


7.2       AI and Industry Employment
Associated with the surge in AI activity, there may also be changes in industry-level organiza-
tion that potentially offset or augment the establishment-level consequences. To investigate
whether more exposed industries are contracting (or expanding), we aggregate our exposure
measure to the industry sector by Commuting Zone level, and then use County Business
Patterns data (CBP) between 2000 and 2016. To do this aggregation, we take the mean
occupation AI exposure, across the 6 digit occupations posted in each sector by commuting
zone cell, weighted by the number of vacancies posted in each occupation, for 2010-12. Un-
fortunately, our CBP sample ends in 2016--thus excluding the last several years of rapid AI
expansion--because changes to reporting in CBP after 2016 create many incompatibilities.24
       The results are reported in the first three columns of Table 8, which again has three
panels, one for each of our AI exposure measure. In these regressions, the observations are
at the industry by commuting zone level, and throughout we include industry fixed effects,
commuting zone fixed effects, and baseline occupational shares in sales and administration.
The standard errors are robust to heteroscedasticity and correlation within commuting zones.
       Columns 1 and 2 examine trends in industry employment during 2003-2007 and 2007-
2010, before the major AI advances that followed. These columns show that industry AI
exposure in 2010 does not predict differential employment behavior before 2010. This result
implies that three-digit industries with different levels of AI exposure were on roughly parallel
trends before the pickup in AI activity in the late 2010s. Yet, we do not see consistent positive
or negative effects associated with AI exposure after 2010 either. For example, the estimate in
column 3, which is for 2010-2016, is -0.05 (standard error = 0.08). The point estimate implies
very small effects from industry AI exposure: a one standard deviation increase in industry
AI exposure should be associated with a small 0.049% decline in industry employment.
  24
   In processing the CBP data, we use the harmonization and imputation procedures developed by Fabian
Eckert, Teresa Fort, Peter Schott, and Natalie Yang, available at http://fpeckert.me/cbp/.

                                                 22
       Panels B and C of the table show similar results using the Webb and SML measures of
AI exposure in place of the Felten et al. measure.
       This set of null results may indicate that it is too soon to see the impact of AI activity
on industry reorganization or growth. It could also indicate that much of the effect of AI on
employment, if eventually present, will occur within industries.


7.3       Employment and Wages in AI-Exposed Occupations
Columns 4 through 9 of Table 8 explore variation across occupations, in particular, assessing
whether more occupations with greater AI exposure exhibit differential employment or wage
trends after the onset of rapid AI hiring. For this analysis, we use occupational employment
and wage information from the US BLS Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) data
series. This establishment-based data series is likely to provide more accurate estimates
of changes in employment and wages within occupations than is available from household
surveys.
       The observations in this table are at the six-digit occupation level, and the dependent
variable is the sum of employment in a six-digit occupation across all industries (excluding
sectors 51 and 54). In all columns, we control for three-digit occupation fixed effects and use
baseline employment as weights. The standard errors are robust against heteroscedasticity.
In columns 4 through 6, the dependent variable is change in occupational employment, while
in columns 7 though 9 it is change in occupational (log) wage.
       The results for employment and wage growth using each of the AI exposure measures
parallel our industry-level results: we detect no differential employment or wage behavior in
more AI-exposed occupations after 2010.25
       In summary, we find no robust effects of AI activity on more AI-exposed industries or
occupations. These occupation results are also consistent with the patterns Felten et al.
(2019) report.


7.4       Interpretation
What do the totality of the results reported about the labor market effects of AI? Our
interpretation of the evidence is that AI is having real effects: there is a significant surge
in vacancies for AI workers in establishments with task structures that are more suitable
  25
    Differently from our industry results, we detect a significantly faster increase in the employment of more
exposed occupations between 2007 and 2010 when using the Felten et al. AI measure. This may reflect fast
expansion in some IT-related occupations which have high Felten et al.'s scores, or it may be the result of
random variation given the large number of point estimates report in this table.


                                                     23
for AI; skill churn increases differentially at AI-exposed establishments, with both greater
retirement of previously-posted skills and greater introduction of not-previously-posted skills;
and finally, AI-exposed establishments show some evidence of reduced non-AI hiring. These
patterns are consistent with the hypothesis that AI-powered algorithms are being used, at
least in part, for substituting for human skills--though of course, our evidence concerns the
component of AI adoption driven by baseline task structure, and is therefore silent on the
consequences of other types of AI technologies.
   Our evidence is also fairly clear that there is no systematic aggregate relationship between
industry and occupation-level AI exposure and either changes in industry or occupation-level
employment or changes in occupational wage levels. Our overall interpretation is that, while
AI technologies appear to be changing task and skill composition at exposed establishments
and firms, any aggregate effects of AI, if present, are too small to detect.


                                  8     Conclusion
There is much excitement and quite a bit of apprehension about AI and its labor mar-
ket effects. In this paper, we explored the nature of AI activity in the US labor market
and its consequences for skill change, hiring, and industry and occupation level changes in
employment and earnings. We have four main findings:

  1. We see a surge in AI activity, particularly after 2014, proxied by vacancies seeking
      workers with AI skills, and this surge is driven by establishments with high exposure
      to AI--meaning that their task structure in 2010 is suitable for the introduction of AI
      technologies. This pattern is highly robust with two of our three AI-exposure measures
      (those based on the indices constructed by Felten et al., 2018, 2019, and Webb, 2020)
      and still present but less robust with our third measure, the SML index (based on the
      work by Brynjolfsson, Mitchell and Rock, 2018, 2019).

  2. We estimate consistent and robust changes in the skills demanded by high-exposure es-
      tablishments. In particular, establishments with task structures suitable for AI cease to
      post vacancies that list a range of previously-posted skills and start posting additional
      skill requirements. This evidence suggests that some of the tasks that workers used to
      perform in these establishments are no longer being performed, while simultaneously
      they introduce new tasks.

  3. With two of our three measures, we also estimate that establishments with high ex-
      posure to AI reduce their non-AI hiring. These results are statistically significant,

                                              24
      economically sizable, and robust with the Felten et al. measure and robust in most
      specifications with the Webb measure. We do not detect such negative employment
      effects with the SML index. Because the relationship between AI exposure and AI
      hiring is also much less robust and consistent with the SML measure, we view this
      evidence as suggestive but inconclusive.

  4. We do not detect any negative relationship between AI exposure and employment or
      wage levels at more aggregated levels. Specifically, we find no AI-employment relation-
      ship in more exposed industries or occupations and no AI-wage relationship in more
      exposed occupations.

   Taken together, we interpret these results as indicating that there is a genuine increase in
the deployment of AI technologies throughout the US economy and this increase is much more
pronounced in establishments that have task structures suitable for deploying AI-powered
algorithms. Reflecting the potential for substitution between algorithms and humans, we
detect nontrivial reductions in non-AI hiring in more AI-exposed establishments, though
these estimates are not uniformly robust with all three of our AI exposure measures. We
do not detect any aggregate relationships between AI exposure and either employment or
wages, plausibly because AI technologies are still in their infancy and have spread only to a
limited part of the US economy.
   Our results raise several important questions and also have evident shortcomings. First,
it is important to further explore and understand the juxtaposition of negative relationships
between AI exposure and non-AI hiring at the level of establishments that are not present
at the level of industries and occupations. Second, our focus on AI adoption that is driven
by the task structure of establishments may leave out other types of AI impacts that are
less related to task structures, such as the use of AI to launch new products and services.
Our estimates are not informative about AI applications that are missed by our AI exposure
measures. Finally, because the next generation of AI-powered technologies will likely have
different capabilities and applications from the current generation, our results do not foretell
whether future AI technologies will prove more complementary or more substitutable with
human capabilities.




                                              25
                                    References
Acemoglu, Daron, and David Autor (2011) "Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Impli-
cations for Employment and Earnings." Handbook of Labor Economics. Vol. 4. Elsevier,
1043­1171.
   Acemoglu, Daron, and Pascual Restrepo (2018) "The Race between Man and Ma-
chine: Implications of Technology for Growth, Factor Shares, and Employment.? American
Economic Review, 108(6), 1488?-1542.
   Acemoglu, Daron, and Pascual Restrepo (2019a) "Automation and New Tasks:
How Technology Displaces and Reinstates Labor." Journal of Economic Perspectives 33(2):
3­30.
   Acemoglu, Daron, and Pascual Restrepo (2019b) "The Wrong Kind of AI? Ar-
tificial Intelligence and the Future of Labour Demand." Cambridge Journal of Regions,
Economy and Society 13(1): 25­35.
   Acemoglu, Daron, and Pascual Restrepo (2020) "Robots and Jobs: Evidence from
US Labor Markets." Journal of Political Economy 128(6): 2188­2244.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Claire Lelarge, and Pascual Restrepo (2020) "Competing
with Robots: Firm-Level Evidence from France." AEA Papers and Proceedings. Vol. 110.
   Alekseeva, Liudmila, Jose Azar, Mireia Gine, Sampsa Samila, and Bledi Taska
(2020) "The Demand for AI Skills in the Labor Market." CEPR Discussion Paper No.
DP14320.
   Autor, David, Lawrence Katz, and Alan Krueger (1998) "Computing Inequality:
Have Computers Changed the Labor Market?" The Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(4):
1169­1213.
   Autor, David, Frank Levy, and Richard Murnane (2003) "The Skill Content
of Recent Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration." The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 118(4): 1279­1333.
   Autor, David and David Dorn (2013) "The Growth of Low-skill Service Jobs and
the Polarization of the US Labor Market." American Economic Review 103(5): 1553­97.
   Autor, David (2019) "Work of the Past, Work of the Future." AEA Papers and
Proceedings 109: 1­32.
   Agarwal, Ajay, Joshua S. Gans and Avi Goldfarb (2018) Prediction Machines:
The Simple Economics of Artificial Intelligence. Harvard Business Review Press, Cambridge
   Azar, Jos´
            e, Ioana Marinescu, Marshall Steinbaum, and Bledi Taska (2020)
"Concentration in US Labor Markets: Evidence from Online Vacancy Data." Labour Eco-

                                           26
nomics, 101886.
   Babina, Tania, Anastassia Fedyk, Alex Xi He, and James Hodson (2020) "Ar-
tificial Intelligence, Firm Growth, and Industry Concentration." Unpublished manuscript,
Columbia University.
   Bessen, James E., Stephen Michael Impink, Lydia Reichensperger, and Robert
Seamans (2018) "The Business of AI Startups." Boston University, School of Law, Law
and Economics Research Paper 18-28.
   Bessen, James, Maarten Goos, Anna Salomons and Wiljan Van der Berge
(2019) "Automatic Reaction-What Happens to Workers at Firms that Automate?" Un-
published manuscript. Boston University.
   Bonfiglioli, Alessandra, Rosario Crino, Harald Fadinger, and Gino Gancia
(2019) "Robot Imports and Firm Level Outcomes" Unpublished manuscript. Queen Mary
University of London.
   Bresnahan, Timothy (2019)          "Artificial Intelligence Technologies and Aggregate
Growth Prospects." Unpublished manuscript, Stanford.
   Brynjolfsson, Erik, Tom Mitchell, and Daniel Rock (2018) "What can Machines
Learn, and What Does it Mean for Occupations and the Economy?" AEA Papers and
Proceedings. Vol. 108.
   Brynjolfsson, Erik, Tom Mitchell, and Daniel Rock (2019) "Machine Learning
and Occupational Change." Unpublished manuscript, MIT.
   Carnevale, Anthony, Tamara Jayasundera and Dmitri Repnikov (2014) "Un-
derstanding Job Ads Data: A Technical Report." Center on Education and the Workforce
McCourt School of Public Policy Georgetown University.
   Deming, David J., and Kadeem Noray (forthcoming)                  "Earnings Dynamics,
Changing Job Skills, and STEM Careers." Quarterly Journal of Economics.
   Dixon, Jay, Bryan Hong and Lynn Wu (2019) "The Employment Consequences of
Robots: Firm-level Evidence" Unpublished manuscript. Statistics Canada.
   Felten, Edward, Manav Raj, and Robert Seamans (2018) "A Method to Link
Advances in Artificial Intelligence to Occupational Abilities." AEA Papers and Proceedings.
Vol. 108.
   Felten, Edward, Manav Raj, and Robert Seamans (2019) "The Effect of Arti-
ficial Intelligence on Human Labor: An Ability-based Approach." Academy of Management
Proceedings Vol. 1.
   Ford, Martin (2015) The Rise of the Robots. Basic Books, New York.
   Graetz, Georg, and Guy Michaels (2018)             "Robots at Work." The Review of

                                            27
Economics and Statistics 100(5): 753­768.
   Grennan, Jillian, and Roni Michaely (2019) "Artificial Intelligence and High-
Skilled Work: Evidence from Analysts." Unpublished manuscript, Duke University.
   Goos, Maarten, and Alan Manning (2007) "Lousy and Lovely Jobs: The Rising
Polarization of Work in Britain." The Review of Economics and Statistics 89(1): 118­133.
   Goos, Maarten, Alan Manning, and Anna Salomons (2014) "Explaining Job
Polarization: Routine-biased Technological Change and Offshoring." American Economic
Review 104(8): 2509­26.
   Hazell, Jonathon and Bledi Taska (2019) "Downward Rigidity in the Wage for
New Hires" Unpublished manuscript, MIT.
   Hershbein, Brad, and Lisa B. Kahn (2018) "Do Recessions Accelerate Routine-
biased Technological Change? Evidence from Vacancy Postings." American Economic Re-
view 108(7): 1737­72.
   Humlum, Anders (2019) "Robot Adoption and Labor Market Dynamics" Unpub-
lished manuscript. Princeton University.
   Koch, Michael, Ilya Manuylov and Marcel Smolka (2019) "Robots and Firms"
Unpublished manuscript. Aarhus University.
   Krueger, Alan B. (1993) "How Computers Have Changed the Wage Structure: Evi-
dence from Microdata, 1984­1989" The Quarterly Journal of Economics 108(1): 33­60.
   McKinsey Global Institute (2017) "Artificial Intelligence: The Next Digital Fron-
tier?" Discussion Paper.
   Michaels, Guy, Ashwini Natraj, and John Van Reenen (2014) "Has ICT Po-
larized Skill Demand? Evidence from Eleven Countries over Twenty-five Years." Review of
Economics and Statistics 96(1): 60-77.
   Neapolitan, Richard E. and Xia Jiang (2018) Artificial Intelligence: With an
Introduction to Machine Learning. Chapman and Hall/CRC, Second Edition
   Russell, Stuart (2019) Human Compatible: Artificial Intelligence and the Problem of
Control. Penguin.
   Susskind, Daniel (2020) A World Without Work: Technology, Automation and how
We Should Respond. Penguin, UK.
   Tolbert, Charles and Molly Sizer (1996) "US Commuting Zones and Labor Mar-
ket Areas: A 1990 update." ERS Staff Paper Number 9614. Washington, DC: Economic
Research Service.
   Webb, Michael (2020) "The Impact of Artificial Intelligence on the Labor Market."
Unpublished manuscript, Stanford.

                                            28
   West, Darrell M (2018) The Future of Work: Robots, AI, and Automation. Brookings
Institution Press.




                                        29
                                                                                  Figure 1: Vacancies in Burning Glass and JOLTS




                                                                                                                                        JOLTS
                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                        Total
                                                                   25000




                                                                                                                               q


                                                                                                                           q


                                                                   20000                                               q
                                 Number of Vacancies (thousands)



                                                                                                                                        Burning Glass
                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                 q                      Total
                                                                            q




                                                                   15000                                               q   q
                                                                                                          q
30




                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                               q


                                                                                                 q


                                                                                                                 q

                                                                                            q

                                                                   10000
                                                                                                          q




                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                 q



                                                                                            q


                                                                    5000
                                                                            q




                                                                           2007           2010                  2014               2018
                                                                                                              Year


     This figure plots the total number of vacancies in JOLTS and the total number of vacancies in Burning Glass, by year. We multiply the
     number of job openings in JOLTS by a constant factor, to arrive at a number of vacancies that matches the concept of a vacancy in Burning
     Glass. This method follows Carnevale et al. (2014).
                                                                                   Figure 2: Share of AI Vacancies in Burning Glass


                                                       Share of AI Vacancies in Burning Glass Share of AI Vacancies by Broad Industry

                                                                                                    q   Broad AI                                         q   Information       2.0
                                                 0.8
                                                                                                                                                     q



                                                                                                                                                             Prof & Business
                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                             Svcs
                                                                                                q


                                                                                                                                                                               1.5
                                                 0.6
                    Share of AI Vacancies (pp)




                                                                                                                                                                                     Share of AI Vacancies (pp)
                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                    q   Narrow AI
                                                                                                                                                         q   Finance


                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                               1.0
31




                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                         q   Manufacturing
                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                 0.4                                                                                                 q

                                                                                            q
                                                                                        q                                                        q
                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                     q       q
                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                    q                                                    q
                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                               q                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                           q                                                             q   q
                                                                                            q
                                                                                        q                                    q
                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                 q           q
                                                                                                                                                                               0.5
                                                                           q   q    q                                                q

                                                                       q                                                         q
                                                                                                                                     q   q
                                                                                                                                                             Retail Trade
                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                         q   q   q                       q   Wholesale Trade
                                                 0.2             q     q
                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                             q                       q
                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                 q                                                           q

                                                                                                                                                 q   q   q   Other Sectors
                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                    q    q       q
                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                 q   q
                                                                                                                                                         q   Services
                                                                                                                    q                q       q
                                                                                                                    q            q       q   q
                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                             q   q   q
                                                                                                                             q   q   q   q   q   q
                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                         q
                                                          q                                                         q
                                                                                                                    q
                                                          q                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                               0.0

                                                                2010               2015                   2020          2010             2015                 2020
                                                                               Year                                                      Year


     The left panel plots the share of vacancies in Burning Glass, that post a skill in the Broad or Narrow AI categories, as defined in the main
     text. The right panel plots the share of narrow AI vacancies in Burning Glass, by year, in each broad industry grouping.
                                                 Figure 3: AI Exposure by Broad Occupation and Sector


                                             AI By Broad Occupation                                   AI By Sector
                                                                                                                              Finance/Insurance
                         Managers
                                                                                                                              Prof & Business Svcs
                      Professionals                                                                                           Education Svcs
                                                                                                                              Information
                      Office/Admin
                                                                                                                              Real Estate

                       Technicians                                                                                            Government
                                                                                                                              Manufacturing
                             Sales                                                                                            Utilities
                                                                                                                              Mining
                     Personal Svcs
                                                                                                                              Other Svcs
32




                       Health Svcs                                                                                            Healthcare & Social Asst
                                                                                                                              Agriculture
                        Production                                                                                            Wholesale Trade
                                                                                                                              Arts/Entertainment
               Clean + Protect Svcs
                                                                                                                              Construction
                      Construction                                                                                            Accomodation/Food Svcs
                                                                                                                              Retail Trade
                              Farm
                                                                                                                              Transportation/Warehousing
                                      -1.0   -0.5    0.0      0.5     1.0                  -2        -1       0       1   2
                                               Occupation AI Exposure                             Industry AI Exposure

                                                            Measure         Felten et al        SML     Webb



     The left panel plots the average of the standardized measures of AI exposure across broad occupations. The right panel plots the average of
     the standardized measures of AI exposure across 2-digit NAICS sectors, by taking the mean across the 6 digit SOC occupations posted in
     each 2 digit NAICS sector, weighted by the number of vacancies posted by each sector in each occupation.
                                                                  Figure 4: AI Exposure by Occupation Wages




                                                        1.0


                              Occupation AI Exposure
                                                        0.5




                                                        0.0
33




                                                       -0.5




                                                              0          25               50             75          100
                                                                          Occupation Wage Percentile

                                                                  Measure         Felten et al     SML        Webb


     The figure plots a smoothed polynomial regression of the (standardized) measures of AI exposure in each 6-digit SOC occupation against
     its rank in the wage distribution. We rank occupations according to their mean hourly wage for 2010-2018, obtained from the Occupational
     Employment Statistics.
                                                        Figure 5: Binscatter of AI Growth and Establishment AI Exposure


                                            (a) Felten et al Measure                                                                             (b) Webb Measure

                 Growth of AI Vacancies (%)                                                                      Growth of AI Vacancies (%)
                 20




                                                                                                                  20
                 10




                                                                                                                  10
                 0




                                                                                                                  0
                 -10




                                                                                                                  -10
                 -20




                                                                                                                  -20
                       -2                  -1                0                   1                       2              -2                -1                0                 1         2
                                  Establishment AI Exposure in 2010 (Felten et al Measure)                                           Establishment AI Exposure in 2010 (Webb Measure)

                       Coefficient is 9.19, SE is 1.21, regressor is standardized                                       Coefficient is 3.21, SE is .81, regressor is standardized
34




                                                                                                 (c) SML Measure

                                                                 Growth of AI Vacancies (%)
                                                                 20
                                                                 10
                                                                 0
                                                                 -10
                                                                 -20




                                                                       -2                 -1                0                1                           2
                                                                                     Establishment AI Exposure in 2010 (SML Measure)

                                                                       Coefficient is -2.21, SE is .96, regressor is standardized



     The figure presents binned scatter plots that summarize the relationship between establishment AI Exposure in 2010 and the growth of AI establishment vacancies
     between 2010 and 2018. The covariates from column 3 of Table 1 are partialled out. The solid line corresponds to a regression with 2010 establishment vacancies as
     the weight. The corresponding point estimates and standard errors are reported at the bottom of each panel. Panel A uses the measure of AI exposure from Felten
     et al. (2019). Panel B uses the Webb (2020) measure. Panel C uses the SML measure, from Brynjolfsson et al. (2019).
                                                                             Figure 6: Establishment Share of AI Vacancies by Quartile of AI Exposure


                                             Felten et al Measure                                                                                   SML Measure                                                                                  Webb Measure
                                  1.5                                            Top Quartile                                                                                                                                                                                  Top Quartile
                                                                             q                                                                                              q   Third Quartile                                 1.00                                        q
                                                                                 of AI Exposure                                                                                                                                                                                of AI Exposure


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                0.75                                            Top Quartile
                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                        q       of AI Exposure
                                                                         q



                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.75

                                  1.0
     Share of AI Vacancies (pp)




                                                                                                   Share of AI Vacancies (pp)




                                                                                                                                                                                                  Share of AI Vacancies (pp)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                        q                                                                                                  q   Third Quartile
                                                                                                                                                                    q


                                                                                                                                0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.50                    q   q
                                                                             q   Third Quartile                                                                                                                                                                        q
35




                                                                 q                                                                                          q                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                             q                                                                                                      q
                                                         q                                                                                          q
                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                q
                                  0.5                                                                                                                       q                                                                                  q
                                                     q                                                                                                                      q   Second Quartile                                            q
                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                        q                                                                                                                  q   Second Quartile
                                             q
                                                                                                                                0.25        q                           q
                                                 q                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                    q                                                                          0.25                        q   q       q
                                                             q                                                                              q                                                                                                          q
                                                         q                                                                                                          q                                                                              q
                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q                   q
                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                 q                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q               Bottom Quartile
                                             q                                                                                                          q                       Bottom Quartile                                       q                    q               q
                                        q                                q
                                                                             q   Second Quartile                                       q        q
                                                                                                                                                                            q                                                                      q   q               q       of AI Exposure
                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                       q    q                           q       of AI Exposure                                                 q
                                        q            q           q                                                                                                                                                                    q    q
                                                         q   q                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                 q
                                             q                                   Bottom Quartile                                       q            q   q   q   q   q                                                                 q            q   q   q   q
                                        q                                q   q                                                              q   q                                                                                              q
                                                     q   q   q   q   q                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                  0.0   q    q   q                               of AI Exposure                                        q                                                                                              q

                                                                                                                                0.00                                                                                           0.00
                                            2010             2015                 2020                                                     2010             2015                 2020                                                     2010             2015                 2020
                                                             Year                                                                                           Year                                                                                           Year


     This figure plots establishments' share of AI vacancies in Burning Glass, for each quartile of the distribution of 2010 establishment AI
     exposure, after partialling out their 2010-2012 share of vacancies in sales and administration. In the first panel, the measure of occupation
     AI exposure is from Felten et al. (2019). In the second panel, the measure is SML, from Brynjolfsson et al. (2019). In the third panel, the
     measure is from Webb (2020). We exclude vacancies in industry sectors 51 (Information) and 54 (Business Services).
                                       Table 1: Effects of AI Exposure on Establishment AI Vacancy Growth, 2010-2018


                                                                         Growth of Establishment AI Vacancies, 2010-2018
                                                    (1)                 (2)                 (3)                  (4)                 (5)                 (6)
                                                                          Panel A: Felten et al. Measure of AI Exposure
              Establishment AI                   15.96               13.82           9.19            16.53           9.75                             16.87
              Exposure, 2010                      (1.73)              (1.43)          (1.21)          (1.89)         (1.20)                            (1.86)
              Observations                      1,075,474           1,075,474        954,519        1,075,474       954,518                           762,672
                                                                             Panel B: Webb Measure of AI Exposure
                                                                           
              Establishment AI                   6.59                5.08            3.21          5.91             0.42                                1.14
              Exposure, 2010                      (1.13)              (0.96)          (0.81)       (1.27)          (0.82)                              (1.08)
              Observations                      1,159,789           1,159,789       1,021,673    1,159,789       1,021,673                            824,803
                                                                             Panel C: SML Measure of AI Exposure
                                                                           
              Establishment AI                   3.76                 2.30          -2.21         -3.04           1.95                                4.47
              Exposure, 2010                      (1.19)              (1.04)         (0.96)        (1.38)         (0.89)                               (1.34)
              Observations                      1,159,789           1,159,789      1,021,673     1,159,789      1,021,673                             824,803
36




              Covariates:
              Share of Vacancies in
              Sales & Admin, 2010
              Fixed Effects:
              Firm Size Decile
              Commuting Zone
              3 digit Industry
              Firm


     This table presents estimates of the effects of establishment AI exposure on establishment AI vacancy growth. The sample is establishments posting vacancies in
     2010-12 or 2016-18, outside NAICS sectors 51 (Information) and 54 (Business Services). The outcome variable, constructed from Burning Glass data, is the growth
     rate of AI vacancies between 2010 and 2018, multiplied by 100. We approximate this growth rate with the change in the inverse hyperbolic sine of the number of
     vacancies posted by the establishment in 2010-12 and 2016-18. The regressor, establishment AI exposure in 2010, is the standardized mean of occupation AI exposure,
     over the 6 digit SOC occupations for which the establishment posts vacancies in 2010-2012, weighted by the number of vacancies posted per occupation. In Panel
     A, the measure of occupation AI exposure is from Felten et al. (2019). In Panel B, the measure of occupation AI exposure is SML, from Brynjolfsson et al. (2019).
     In Panel C, the measure of occupation AI exposure is from Webb (2020). The covariates included in each model are reported at the bottom of the table. Column 1
     contains only establishment AI exposure. Columns 2-3 and 5 include fixed effects for the decile of firm size (defined as the total vacancies posted by an establishment's
     firm in 2010-2012). Columns 2-6 include commuting zone fixed effects. Columns 3 and 5 include 3 digit NAICS industry fixed effects. Columns 4 and 6 include firm
     fixed effects. Columns 5 and 6 control for the share of 2010-12 vacancies in each establishment, belonging to the broad occupations of either sales or administration.
     In each regression, observations are weighted by total establishment vacancies in 2010-2012. Standard errors are clustered by firm. One, two and three asterisks
     denote significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level.
                           Table 2: Effects of AI Exposure on Establishment AI Vacancy Growth, Controlling for Software Exposure

                                                                                     Growth of Establishment AI Vacancies, 2010-2018
                                                               (1)                   (2)                  (3)                  (4)                   (5)                  (6)
                                                                                      Panel A: Felten et al. Measure of AI Exposure
                                                                   
                        Establishment AI                    16.28                14.10           9.63            17.43           9.96                                  17.47
                        Exposure, 2010                       (1.74)               (1.44)          (1.23)          (1.95)         (1.24)                                 (1.90)
                        Estab. Software                     2.36                  2.24           2.62            4.83             0.66                                   1.83
                        Exposure                             (0.76)               (0.71)          (0.76)          (1.23)         (0.82)                                 (1.19)
                        Observations                       1,059,620            1,059,620        941,046        1,059,620       941,046                               1,059,620
                                                                                         Panel B: Webb Measure of AI Exposure
                        Establishment AI                    10.64                7.88            3.85          6.81             1.50                                    2.57
                        Exposure, 2010                       (1.83)               (1.50)          (1.10)       (1.52)          (1.07)                                   (1.41)
                        Estab. Software                     -6.28                -4.27             -0.96        -1.44          -1.81                                    -2.54
                        Exposure                             (1.51)               (1.26)          (0.96)       (1.34)          (1.00)                                   (1.49)
                        Observations                       1,159,789            1,159,789       1,021,673    1,159,789       1,021,673                                1,159,789
                                                                                         Panel C: SML Measure of AI Exposure
                                                                                        
                        Establishment AI                    4.14                  2.64          -1.96          -2.42          1.90                                     4.37
37




                        Exposure, 2010                       (1.18)               (1.04)         (0.96)        (1.28)         (0.88)                                    (1.28)
                        Estab. Software                      1.56                 1.44 
                                                                                                  1.09         2.40
                                                                                                                               -0.90                                     -0.76
                        Exposure                             (0.80)               (0.77)         (0.69)        (1.04)         (0.78)                                    (1.11)
                        Observations                       1,159,789            1,159,789      1,021,673     1,159,789      1,021,673                                 1,159,789
                        Covariates:
                        Share of Vacancies in
                        Sales & Admin, 2010
                        Fixed Effects:
                        Firm Size Decile
                        Commuting Zone
                        3 digit Industry
                        Firm


     This table presents estimates of the effects of establishment AI exposure on establishment AI vacancy growth, controlling for establishment software exposure. Our measure of software exposure
     is from Webb (2020). Establishment software exposure is the standardized mean of occupation software exposure, over the 6 digit SOC occupations for which the establishment posts vacancies
     in 2010-2012, weighted by the number of vacancies posted per occupation. The sample is establishments posting vacancies in 2010-12 or 2016-18, outside NAICS sectors 51 (Information) and 54
     (Business Services). The outcome variable, constructed from Burning Glass data, is the growth rate of AI vacancies between 2010 and 2018, multiplied by 100. We approximate this growth rate
     with the change in the inverse hyperbolic sine of the number of vacancies posted by the establishment in 2010-12 and 2016-18. The regressor, establishment AI exposure in 2010, is the standardized
     mean of occupation AI exposure, over the 6 digit SOC occupations for which the establishment posts vacancies in 2010-2012, weighted by the number of vacancies posted per occupation. In Panel
     A, the measure of occupation AI exposure is from Felten et al. (2019). In Panel B, the measure of occupation AI exposure is SML, from Brynjolfsson et al. (2019). In Panel C, the measure of
     occupation AI exposure is from Webb (2020). The covariates included in each model are reported at the bottom of the table. Column 1 contains only establishment AI exposure. Columns 2-3
     and 5 include fixed effects for the decile of firm size (defined as the total vacancies posted by an establishment's firm in 2010-2012). Columns 2-6 include commuting zone fixed effects. Columns 3
     and 5 include 3 digit NAICS industry fixed effects. Columns 4 and 6 include firm fixed effects. Columns 5 and 6 control for the share of 2010-12 vacancies in each establishment, belonging to the
     broad occupations of either sales or administration. In each regression, observations are weighted by total establishment vacancies in 2010-2012. Standard errors are clustered by firm. One, two
     and three asterisks denote significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level.
                                     Table 3: Effects of AI Exposure on Establishment Negative Skill Change, 2010-2018

                                                                       Establishment Negative Skill Change, 2010-2018
                                                (1)                  (2)                  (3)                  (4)                 (5)                  (6)
                                                                       Panel A: Felten et al. Measure of AI Exposure
                                                                        
          Establishment AI                    0.83                0.83            0.97            0.50            1.00                               0.54
          Exposure, 2010                       (0.09)              (0.09)          (0.07)          (0.05)         (0.07)                              (0.05)
          Observations                        339,282             339,282         322,901         339,282        322,901                             339,282
                                                                          Panel B: Webb Measure of AI Exposure
                                                                        
          Establishment AI                    0.62                0.60            0.45          0.20           0.68                                  0.34
          Exposure, 2010                       (0.11)              (0.11)          (0.06)       (0.04)          (0.11)                                (0.04)
          Observations                        353,107             353,107        335,589       353,107         335,589                               353,107
                                                                          Panel C: SML Measure of AI Exposure
                                                                        
          Establishment AI                    0.53                0.52           0.32          0.26           0.46                                   0.36
          Exposure, 2010                       (0.08)              (0.07)         (0.07)        (0.04)         (0.09)                                 (0.04)
          Observations                        353,107             353,107        335,589       353,107        335,589                                353,107
38




          Covariates:
          Share of Vacancies in
          Sales & Admin, 2010
          Fixed Effects:
          Firm Size Decile
          Commuting Zone
          3 digit Industry
          Firm


     This table presents estimates of the effects of establishment AI exposure on establishment negative skill change. The sample is establishments posting vacancies in
     2010-12 or 2016-18, outside NAICS sectors 51 (Information) and 54 (Business Services). The outcome variable, constructed from Burning Glass data, is establishment
     negative skill change for 2010-2018, as defined in the main text. The sample is establishments posting in both 2010 and 2019. The regressor, establishment AI
     exposure in 2010, is the standardized mean of occupation AI exposure, over the 6 digit SOC occupations for which the establishment posts vacancies in 2010-2012,
     weighted by the number of vacancies posted per occupation. In Panel A, the measure of occupation AI exposure is from Felten et al. (2019). In Panel B, the measure
     of occupation AI exposure is SML, from Brynjolfsson et al. (2019). In Panel C, the measure of occupation AI exposure is from Webb (2020). The covariates included
     in each model are reported at the bottom of the table. Column 1 contains only establishment AI exposure. Columns 2-3 and 5 include fixed effects for the decile of
     firm size (defined as the total vacancies posted by an establishment's firm in 2010-2012). Columns 2-6 include commuting zone fixed effects. Columns 3 and 5 include
     3 digit NAICS industry fixed effects. Columns 4 and 6 include firm fixed effects. Columns 5 and 6 control for the share of 2010-12 vacancies in each establishment,
     belonging to the broad occupations of either sales or administration. In each regression, observations are weighted by total establishment vacancies in 2010-2012.
     Standard errors are clustered by firm. One, two and three asterisks denote significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level.
                                     Table 4: Effects of AI Exposure on Establishment Positive Skill Change, 2010-2018


                                                                         Establishment Positive Skill Change, 2010-2018
                                                 (1)                  (2)                  (3)                  (4)                  (5)                  (6)
                                                                        Panel A: Felten et al. Measure of AI Exposure
                                                                         
          Establishment AI                    0.95                 0.94            0.58              0.02          0.62                                  0.05
          Exposure, 2010                       (0.08)               (0.09)          (0.09)          (0.04)         (0.09)                               (0.04)
          Observations                        339,282              339,282         322,901         339,282        322,901                              339,282
                                                                           Panel B: Webb Measure of AI Exposure
                                                                         
          Establishment AI                    0.69                 0.66            0.26           -0.01         0.43                                   0.13
          Exposure, 2010                       (0.09)               (0.09)          (0.08)       (0.03)          (0.08)                                 (0.04)
          Observations                        353,107              353,107        335,589       353,107         335,589                                353,107
                                                                           Panel C: SML Measure of AI Exposure
                                                                         
          Establishment AI                    0.62                 0.59            0.19          0.10          0.26                                      0.03
          Exposure, 2010                       (0.09)               (0.09)         (0.09)        (0.04)         (0.09)                                  (0.04)
39




          Observations                        353,107              353,107        335,589       353,107        335,589                                 353,107
          Covariates:
          Share of Vacancies in
          Sales & Admin, 2010
          Fixed Effects:
          Firm Size Decile
          Commuting Zone
          3 digit Industry
          Firm


     This table presents estimates of the effects of establishment AI exposure on establishment positive skill change. The sample is establishments posting vacancies in
     2010-12 or 2016-18, outside NAICS sectors 51 (Information) and 54 (Business Services). The outcome variable, constructed from Burning Glass data, is establishment
     positive skill change for 2010-2018, as defined in the main text. The sample is establishments posting in both 2010 and 2019. The regressor, establishment AI exposure
     in 2010, is the standardized mean of occupation AI exposure, over the 6 digit SOC occupations for which the establishment posts vacancies in 2010-2012, weighted
     by the number of vacancies posted per occupation. In Panel A, the measure of occupation AI exposure is from Felten et al. (2019). In Panel B, the measure of
     occupation AI exposure is SML, from Brynjolfsson et al. (2019). In Panel C, the measure of occupation AI exposure is from Webb (2020). The covariates included
     in each model are reported at the bottom of the table. Column 1 contains only establishment AI exposure. Columns 2-3 and 5 include fixed effects for the decile of
     firm size (defined as the total vacancies posted by an establishment's firm in 2010-2012). Columns 2-6 include commuting zone fixed effects. Columns 3 and 5 include
     3 digit NAICS industry fixed effects. Columns 4 and 6 include firm fixed effects. Columns 5 and 6 control for the share of 2010-12 vacancies in each establishment,
     belonging to the broad occupations of either sales or administration. In each regression, observations are weighted by total establishment vacancies in 2010-2012.
     Standard errors are clustered by firm. One, two and three asterisks denote significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level.
                                   Table 5: Effects of AI Exposure on Establishment Non-AI Vacancy Growth, 2010-2018


                                                                        Growth of Establishment Non-AI Vacancies, 2010-2018
                                                                               Full Sample                                               Establishments Posting in 2018
                                      (1)              (2)               (3)                 (4)            (5)              (6)              (7)                (8)
                                                                             Panel A: Felten et al. Measure of AI Exposure
      Establishment AI             -13.80           -16.36            -11.90           -4.81           -12.42          -4.04                -8.38               -3.56
      Exposure, 2010                 (4.22)           (4.11)            (4.08)          (1.44)           (4.01)         (1.47)               (3.46)             (1.86)
      Observations                 1,075,474        1,075,474          954,519        1,075,474         954,519       1,075,474             324,901            341,525
                                                                                 Panel B: Webb Measure of AI Exposure
      Establishment AI             -17.24           -18.21            -6.73             -2.22         -8.30            1.51                  -4.70               -1.44
      Exposure, 2010                 (3.72)           (3.63)           (3.01)            (0.93)        (3.70)         (0.98)                 (2.66)             (1.36)
      Observations                 1,159,789        1,159,789        1,021,673         1,159,789     1,021,673      1,159,789               337,758            355,529
                                                                                 Panel C: SML Measure of AI Exposure
      Establishment AI               7.02             5.74              2.05              0.95         2.21          -3.01                    0.01               -0.91
      Exposure, 2010                 (3.13)           (3.01)           (2.92)            (1.16)       (3.61)         (1.22)                  (2.94)             (1.38)
      Observations                 1,159,789        1,159,789        1,021,673         1,159,789    1,021,673      1,159,789                337,758            355,529
40




      Covariates:
      Share of Vacancies in
      Sales, Admin. in 2010
      Fixed Effects:
      Firm Size Decile
      Commuting Zone
      3 digit Industry
      Firm


     This table presents estimates of the effects of establishment AI exposure on establishment non-AI vacancy growth. The sample is establishments posting vacancies in
     2010-12 or 2016-18, outside NAICS sectors 51 (Information) and 54 (Business Services). The outcome variable, constructed from Burning Glass data, is the growth
     rate of non-AI vacancies between 2010 and 2018, multiplied by 100. We approximate this growth rate with the change in the inverse hyperbolic sine of the number of
     vacancies posted by the establishment in 2010-12 and 2016-18. The regressor, establishment AI exposure in 2010, is the standardized mean of occupation AI exposure,
     over the 6 digit SOC occupations for which the establishment posts vacancies in 2010-2012, weighted by the number of vacancies posted per occupation. In Panel A,
     the measure of occupation AI exposure is from Felten et al. (2019). In Panel B, the measure of occupation AI exposure is SML, from Brynjolfsson et al. (2019). In
     Panel C, the measure of occupation AI exposure is from Webb (2020). The final two columns exclude establishments that do not post positive vacancies in 2018. The
     covariates included in each model are reported at the bottom of the table. Column 1 contains only establishment AI exposure. Columns 2, 3, 5 and 7 include fixed
     effects for the decile of firm size (defined as the total vacancies posted by an establishment's firm in 2010-2012). Columns 2-8 include commuting zone fixed effects.
     Columns 3, 5 and 7 include 3 digit NAICS industry fixed effects. Columns 4, 6 and 8 include firm fixed effects. Columns 5 and 6 control for the share of 2010-12
     vacancies in each establishment, belonging to the broad occupations of either sales or administration. In each regression, observations are weighted by total vacancies
     in 2010-2012. Standard errors are clustered by firm. One, two and three asterisks denote significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level.
                        Table 6: Effects of AI Exposure on Establishment Non-AI Vacancy Growth, Controlling for Software Exposure


                                                                                   Growth of Establishment Non-AI Vacancies, 2010-2018
                                                                                          Full Sample                                                        Establishments Posting in 2018
                                             (1)                (2)                 (3)                 (4)                 (5)                 (6)                (7)                   (8)
                                                                                        Panel A: Felten et al. Measure of AI Exposure
        Establishment AI                 -14.62             -17.21               -12.02           -5.43           -12.47          -3.93                          -8.68                 -3.73
        Exposure, 2010                     (4.28)             (4.17)               (4.00)          (1.49)           (3.94)         (1.54)                         (3.36)               (1.90)
        Estab. Software                   -7.50              -7.35                  0.66            -1.77            1.07          2.03                            -1.67                -0.41
        Exposure                           (3.68)             (3.60)               (3.09)          (1.08)           (3.28)         (1.17)                         (3.41)               (1.40)
        Observations                     1,059,620          1,059,620             941,046        1,059,620         941,046       1,059,620                       322,187              338,645
                                                                                            Panel B: Webb Measure of AI Exposure
        Establishment AI                 -23.04             -25.36              -14.04             -3.06        -14.95            -0.29                            -7.30                -2.56
        Exposure, 2010                     (4.61)             (4.47)              (4.68)            (1.05)        (5.59)         (1.09)                           (4.51)               (1.56)
        Estab. Software                    9.01              10.88               10.98               1.36        11.16           3.19                               3.80                 1.74
        Exposure                           (4.32)             (4.22)              (4.79)            (1.14)        (5.11)         (1.18)                           (5.26)               (1.54)
        Observations                     1,159,789          1,159,789           1,021,673         1,159,789     1,021,673      1,159,789                         337,758              355,529
                                                                                          Panel C: SML Measure of AI Exposure
41




                                                   
        Establishment AI                   5.97                 4.70               2.62             0.84        2.40          -2.67                                -0.17                -0.94
        Exposure, 2010                     (3.15)             (3.03)              (2.93)          (1.12)       (3.63)         (1.20)                              (2.89)               (1.39)
        Estab. Software                     -4.41              -4.37               2.46            -0.43        3.04          2.80                                 -0.85                -0.13
        Exposure                           (3.66)             (3.60)              (3.10)          (0.95)       (3.30)         (1.03)                              (3.36)               (1.34)
        Observations                     1,159,789          1,159,789           1,021,673       1,159,789    1,021,673      1,159,789                            337,758              355,529
        Covariates:
        Share of Vacancies in
        Sales & Admin, 2010
        Fixed Effects:
        Firm Size Decile
        Commuting Zone
        3 digit Industry
        Firm


     This table presents estimates of the effects of establishment AI exposure on establishment non-AI vacancy growth, controlling for establishment software exposure. Our measure of software
     exposure is from Webb (2020). Establishment software exposure is the standardized mean of occupation software exposure, over the 6 digit SOC occupations for which the establishment posts
     vacancies in 2010-2012, weighted by the number of vacancies posted per occupation. The sample is establishments posting vacancies in 2010-12 or 2016-18, outside NAICS sectors 51 (Information)
     and 54 (Business Services). The outcome variable, constructed from Burning Glass data, is the growth rate of non-AI vacancies between 2010 and 2018, multiplied by 100. We approximate this
     growth rate with the change in the inverse hyperbolic sine of the number of vacancies posted by the establishment in 2010-12 and 2016-18. The regressor, establishment AI exposure in 2010, is
     the standardized mean of occupation AI exposure, over the 6 digit SOC occupations for which the establishment posts vacancies in 2010-2012, weighted by the number of vacancies posted per
     occupation. In Panel A, the measure of occupation AI exposure is from Felten et al. (2019). In Panel B, the measure of occupation AI exposure is SML, from Brynjolfsson et al. (2019). In Panel
     C, the measure of occupation AI exposure is from Webb (2020). The final two columns exclude establishments that do not post positive vacancies in 2018. The covariates included in each model
     are reported at the bottom of the table. Column 1 contains only establishment AI exposure. Columns 2, 3, 5 and 7 include fixed effects for the decile of firm size (defined as the total vacancies
     posted by an establishment's firm in 2010-2012). Columns 2-8 include commuting zone fixed effects. Columns 3, 5 and 7 include 3 digit NAICS industry fixed effects. Columns 4, 6 and 8 include
     firm fixed effects. Columns 5 and 6 control for the share of 2010-12 vacancies in each establishment, belonging to the broad occupations of either sales or administration. In each regression,
     observations are weighted by total vacancies in 2010-2012. Standard errors are clustered by firm. One, two and three asterisks denote significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level.
                           Table 7: Effects of AI Exposure on Establishment Non-AI Vacancy Growth, 2010-2014 and 2014-2018

                                                                                Growth of Establishment Non-AI Vacancies
                                                         2010-2014 Growth                                                      2014-2018 Growth
                                      (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)               (6)              (7)               (8)
                                                                             Panel A: Felten et al. Measure of AI Exposure
      Establishment AI                -1.86             -0.59            -1.82            0.39          -11.94         -11.32                -10.60             -5.21
      Exposure, 2010                 (4.77)            (3.52)           (3.46)           (1.11)           (3.80)         (2.93)                (2.82)            (1.02)
      Observations                 1,075,474          954,519          954,519         1,075,474       1,075,474        954,519               954,519          1,075,474
                                                                               Panel B: Webb Measure of AI Exposure
                                                                                
      Establishment AI              -7.51               -2.57          -6.04             -0.35      -9.73           -4.16                       -2.26           -1.86
      Exposure, 2010                 (3.38)            (2.17)           (2.66)          (0.64)       (2.42)          (1.83)                    (2.16)            (0.71)
      Observations                 1,159,789         1,021,673        1,021,673       1,159,789    1,159,789       1,021,673                 1,021,673         1,159,789
                                                                               Panel C: SML Measure of AI Exposure
      Establishment AI                3.73              1.17             2.79         1.90            3.30           0.88                       -0.58             -0.95
      Exposure, 2010                 (2.66)            (2.46)           (3.08)         (0.73)        (2.09)         (2.30)                     (2.75)            (0.91)
      Observations                 1,159,789         1,021,673        1,021,673      1,159,789     1,159,789      1,021,673                  1,021,673         1,159,789
42




      Covariates:
      Share of Vacancies in
      Sales, Admin. in 2010
      Fixed Effects:
      Firm Size Decile
      Commuting Zone
      3 digit Industry
      Firm

     This table presents estimates of the effects of establishment AI exposure on establishment non-AI vacancy growth, separately for 2010-2014 and 2014-2018. The
     sample is establishments posting vacancies in 2010-12 or 2016-18, outside NAICS sectors 51 (Information) and 54 (Business Services). In the first four columns, the
     outcome variable, constructed from Burning Glass data, is the growth rate of non-AI vacancies between 2010 and 2014, multiplied by 100. We approximate this
     growth rate with the change in the inverse hyperbolic sine of the number of vacancies posted by the establishment in 2010-12 and 2013-15. In the last four columns,
     the outcome variable is the change in the inverse hyperbolic sine of the number of vacancies posted by the establishment in 2013-15 and 2016-18. The regressor,
     establishment AI exposure in 2010, is the standardized mean of occupation AI exposure, over the 6 digit SOC occupations for which the establishment posts vacancies
     in 2010-2012, weighted by the number of vacancies posted per occupation. In Panel A, the measure of occupation AI exposure is from Felten et al. (2019). In Panel
     B, the measure of occupation AI exposure is SML, from Brynjolfsson et al. (2019). In Panel C, the measure of occupation AI exposure is from Webb (2020). The
     covariates included in each model are reported at the bottom of the table. Columns 1 and 5 contains only establishment AI exposure. Columns 2, 3, 6 and 7 include
     fixed effects for the decile of firm size (defined as the total vacancies posted by an establishment's firm in 2010-2012); and also include 3 digit NAICS industry fixed
     effects. All columns other than 1 and 5 include commuting zone fixed effects. Columns 4 and 8 include firm fixed effects. Columns 3 and 7 control for the share of
     2010-12 vacancies in each establishment, belonging to the broad occupations of either sales or administration. In each regression, observations are weighted by total
     vacancies in 2010-2012. Standard errors are clustered by firm. One, two and three asterisks denote significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level.
                                           Table 8: Effects of AI Exposure on Market Employment and Wage Growth

                              Industry by CZ Employment Growth (CBP)           Occupation Employment Growth (OES)                Occupation Wage Growth (OES)
                               2003-2007       2007-2010      2010-2016       2004-2007       2007-2010      2010-2018       2004-2007      2007-2010       2010-2018
                                  (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)            (6)             (7)            (8)             (9)
                                                                            Panel A: Felten et al. Measure of AI Exposure
      Market AI Exposure,         0.03           0.10            -0.05          0.34            0.86             0.51           -0.00          0.02          -0.17
      2010                       (0.17)         (0.20)          (0.08)         (0.34)           (0.32)          (0.35)         (0.17)         (0.20)          (0.06)
      Observations               10,937         10,926          10,929           736              700            680             680           648             629
                                                                               Panel B: Webb Measure of AI Exposure
      Market AI Exposure,         0.10           0.18            0.11            0.00          0.11           -0.17             0.11           -0.05           -0.02
      2010                       (0.15)         (0.17)          (0.09)          (0.17)        (0.21)         (0.29)            (0.08)         (0.10)          (0.04)
      Observations               10,981         10,968          10,968           713           704             717              660             653             663
                                                                               Panel C: SML Measure of AI Exposure
      Market AI Exposure,         -0.14         0.37             -0.01          0.00          -0.17          -0.37              -0.03          0.18            0.04
      2010                       (0.17)         (0.18)          (0.08)         (0.25)        (0.29)         (0.25)             (0.08)         (0.12)          (0.05)
      Observations               10,981         10,968          10,968          713            704            717                660           653             663
      Covariates:
43




      Share of Vacancies in
      Sales, Admin. in 2010
      Fixed Effects:
      Commuting Zone
      Sector
      3 Digit Occupation

     This table presents estimates of the effects of market AI exposure on market employment and wage growth. In columns 1-3, the outcome is the growth rate of sector
     (i.e. 2 digit NAICS industry) by commuting zone employment, measured in percentage points per year, from the County Business Patterns; for 2003-2007, 2007-2010
     and 2010-2016, respectively. The sample excludes industry sectors 51 (Information) and 54 (Business Services). In columns 4-6, the outcome is the growth rate of 6
     digit SOC occupation employment outside sectors 51 and 54, measured in percentage points per year, from the Occupation Employment Statistics; for 2004-2007,
     2007-2010 and 2010-2018, respectively. In columns 7-9, the outcome is the growth of 6 digit SOC median hourly wages outside sectors 51 and 54, measured in
     percentage points per year, also from the Occupational Employment Statistics. In columns 1-3, the regressor is the standardized mean occupation AI exposure,
     across the 6 digit occupations posted in each sector by commuting zone cell, based on the distribution of vacancies by detailed occupation in each zone and industry
     in 2010?2012. The regressions are weighted by baseline employment in each sector by commuting zone. In columns 4-9, the regressor is standardized occupation
     AI exposure by 6 digit SOC occupation. In panel A, the measure of occupation AI exposure is from Felten et al. (2019); in panel B the measure is SML from
     Brynjolfsson et al. (2019); in panel C the measure is from Webb (2020). All regressions are weighted by baseline employment. The covariates included in each model
     are reported at the bottom of the table. Columns 1-3 contain sector and commuting zone fixed effects, and controls for the share of 2010-2012 vacancies in either
     sales or administration in each sector by commuting zone, measured from Burning Glass. Columns 4-9 control for 3 digit SOC occupation fixed effects. Standard
     errors are clustered by commuting zone in columns 1-3, and robust against heteroskedasticity in columns 4-9. One, two and three asterisks denote significance at the
     10, 5 and 1 percent level.
Appendix Figures and Tables




            44
                            Figure A1: Occupation and Industry Shares in Burning Glass

                                 Occupation Shares                             Industry Shares

           Office/Admin
                                                                                                                   Services
          Professionals
                                                                                                                   Prof & Business
         Personal Svcs                                                                                             Svcs

             Managers
                                                                                                                   Retail Trade

                 Sales
                                                                                                                   Manufacturing
         Transportation

           Construction
                                                                                                                   Finance

             Production
                                                                                                                   Other Sectors
   Clean + Protect Svcs

            Technicians
                                                                                                                   Wholesale Trade

           Health Svcs
                                                                                                                   Information
                  Farm

                          0.0       0.1          0.2         0.3 0.0     0.1      0.2        0.3      0.4    0.5



                                      OES 2010-2018                Burning Glass 2010-2018         JOLTS 2010-2018


The left panel plots the share of vacancies by broad occupation in the 2010-2018 Burning Glass data, and the share of employment
by broad occupation in the 2010-2018 Occupational Employment Statistics. The right panel plots the share of vacancies by broad
industry in the 2010-2018 Burning Glass data, and also in JOLTS data.




                                                              45
                                  Table A1: Effects of 2007 AI Exposure on Establishment AI Vacancy Growth, 2010-2018

                                                                    Growth of Establishment AI Vacancies, 2010-2018
                                              (1)                  (2)                  (3)                   (4)                  (5)                   (6)
                                                                     Panel A: Felten et al. Measure of AI Exposure
                                                 
      Establishment AI                    23.32                 20.43           12.20           15.24          12.07                                 13.68
      Exposure, 2007                       (2.33)                (1.98)          (1.78)          (2.04)         (1.74)                                (1.88)
      Observations                        102,783               102,783         101,553         102,783        101,524                                94,866
                                                                        Panel B: Webb Measure of AI Exposure
                                                                      
      Establishment AI                     8.87                 6.97            4.49          5.04             1.92                                   2.48
      Exposure, 2007                        (1.71)               (1.54)          (1.33)       (1.39)          (1.30)                                  (1.20)
      Observations                         106,022              106,022        104,719       106,022         104,688                                  97,919
                                                                        Panel C: SML Measure of AI Exposure
                                                                      
      Establishment AI                     7.46                 5.44             -1.66        -3.39           1.78                                     -0.68
      Exposure, 2007                        (1.99)               (1.78)         (1.57)        (1.82)         (1.44)                                   (1.64)
46




      Observations                         106,022              106,022        104,719       106,022        104,688                                   97,919
      Covariates:
      Share of Vacancies in
      Sales & Admin, 2010
      Fixed Effects:
      Firm Size Decile
      Commuting Zone
      3 digit Industry
      Firm

     This table presents estimates of the effects of establishment AI exposure on establishment AI vacancy growth. The sample is establishments posting vacancies in
     2010-12 or 2016-18, outside NAICS sectors 51 (Information) and 54 (Business Services). The outcome variable, constructed from Burning Glass data, is the growth
     rate of AI vacancies between 2010 and 2018, multiplied by 100. We approximate this growth rate with the change in the inverse hyperbolic sine of the number of
     vacancies posted by the establishment in 2010-12 and 2016-18. The regressor, establishment AI exposure in 2007, is the mean of occupation AI exposure, over the 6
     digit SOC occupations for which the establishment posts vacancies in 2007, weighted by the number of vacancies posted per occupation. Establishment AI exposure
     is divided by the standard deviation, weighted by 2010-12 vacancies. In Panel A, the measure of occupation AI exposure is from Felten et al. (2019). In Panel B, the
     measure of occupation AI exposure is SML, from Brynjolfsson et al. (2019). In Panel C, the measure of occupation AI exposure is from Webb (2020). The covariates
     included in each model are reported at the bottom of the table. Column 1 contains only establishment AI exposure. Columns 2-3 and 5 include fixed effects for the
     decile of firm total vacancies in 2010-12 to which the establishment's firm belongs. Columns 2-6 include commuting zone fixed effects. Columns 3 and 5 include 3
     digit NAICS industry fixed effects. Columns 4 and 6 include firm fixed effects. Columns 5 and 6 control for the share of 2010-12 vacancies in each establishment,
     belonging to the broad occupations of either sales or administration. In each regression, observations are weighted by total establishment vacancies in 2010-2012.
     Standard errors are clustered by firm. One, two and three asterisks denote significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level.
                                 Table A2: Effects of AI Exposure on Establishment Broad AI Vacancy Growth, 2010-2018

                                                              Growth of Establishment Broad AI Vacancies, 2010-2018
                                             (1)                  (2)                  (3)                  (4)                  (5)                  (6)
                                                                    Panel A: Felten et al. Measure of AI Exposure
                                                
      Establishment AI                    20.05                17.17           10.96           18.72          11.50                                18.80
      Exposure, 2010                       (1.77)               (1.49)          (1.22)          (1.99)         (1.22)                               (1.95)
      Observations                       1,075,474            1,075,474        954,519        1,075,474       954,519                             1,075,474
                                                                       Panel B: Webb Measure of AI Exposure
                                                                     
      Establishment AI                    8.47                 6.43            3.72          7.38             0.99                                  2.53
      Exposure, 2010                       (1.30)               (1.13)          (0.83)       (1.28)          (0.83)                                 (1.00)
      Observations                       1,159,789            1,159,789       1,021,673    1,159,789       1,021,673                              1,159,789
                                                                       Panel C: SML Measure of AI Exposure
                                                                        
      Establishment AI                    4.14                  2.18          -2.22         -2.90           1.92                                   4.90
      Exposure, 2010                       (1.43)               (1.27)         (0.89)        (1.33)         (0.88)                                  (1.34)
      Observations                       1,159,789            1,159,789      1,021,673     1,159,789      1,021,673                               1,159,789
47




      Covariates:
      Share of Vacancies in
      Sales, Admin. in 2010
      Fixed Effects:
      Firm Size Decile
      Commuting Zone
      3 digit Industry
      Firm

     This table presents estimates of the effects of establishment AI exposure on establishment Broad AI vacancy growth. The sample is establishments posting vacancies
     in 2010-12 or 2016-18, outside NAICS sectors 51 (Information) and 54 (Business Services). Broad AI is defined in the main text, as vacancies that post skills in
     the skill clusters "Artificial Intelligence" or "Machine Learning". The outcome variable, constructed from Burning Glass data, is the growth rate of AI vacancies
     between 2010 and 2018, multiplied by 100. We approximate this growth rate with the change in the inverse hyperbolic sine of the number of vacancies posted by the
     establishment in 2010-12 and 2016-18. The regressor, establishment AI exposure in 2010, is the mean of occupation AI exposure, over the 6 digit SOC occupations
     for which the establishment posts vacancies in 2010-2012, weighted by the number of vacancies posted per occupation. Establishment AI exposure is divided by the
     standard deviation, weighted by 2010-12 vacancies. In Panel A, the measure of occupation AI exposure is from Felten et al. (2019). In Panel B, the measure of
     occupation AI exposure is SML, from Brynjolfsson et al. (2019). In Panel C, the measure of occupation AI exposure is from Webb (2020). The covariates included
     in each model are reported at the bottom of the table. Column 1 contains only establishment AI exposure. Columns 2-3 and 5 include fixed effects for the decile of
     firm total vacancies in 2010-12 to which the establishment's firm belongs. Columns 2-6 include commuting zone fixed effects. Columns 3 and 5 include 3 digit NAICS
     industry fixed effects. Columns 4 and 6 include firm fixed effects. Columns 5 and 6 control for the share of 2010-12 vacancies in each establishment, belonging to the
     broad occupations of either sales or administration. In each regression, observations are weighted by total establishment vacancies in 2010-2012. Standard errors are
     clustered by firm. One, two and three asterisks denote significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level.
                                      Table A3: Effects of AI Exposure on Establishment AI Share Change, 2010-2018

                                                              Change in Establishment Share of AI Vacancies, 2010-2018
                                              (1)                  (2)                  (3)                   (4)                  (5)                   (6)
                                                                     Panel A: Felten et al. Measure of AI Exposure
                                                                      
      Establishment AI                     0.29                 0.26            0.20            0.18            0.22                                  0.18
      Exposure, 2010                        (0.03)               (0.02)          (0.02)          (0.02)         (0.02)                                 (0.02)
      Observations                         341,525              341,525         324,901         341,525        324,901                                341,525
                                                                        Panel B: Webb Measure of AI Exposure
                                                                      
      Establishment AI                     0.25                 0.22            0.14          0.11           0.12                                      0.05
      Exposure, 2010                        (0.03)               (0.03)          (0.02)       (0.02)          (0.02)                                   (0.02)
      Observations                         355,529              355,529        337,758       355,529         337,758                                  355,529
                                                                        Panel C: SML Measure of AI Exposure
                                                                      
      Establishment AI                     0.05                  0.03          -0.06         -0.08           0.04                                     0.05
      Exposure, 2010                        (0.02)               (0.02)         (0.02)        (0.02)         (0.02)                                    (0.02)
48




      Observations                         355,529              355,529        337,758       355,529        337,758                                   355,529
      Covariates:
      Share of Vacancies in
      Sales, Admin. in 2010
      Fixed Effects:
      Firm Size Decile
      Commuting Zone
      3 digit Industry
      Firm

     This table presents estimates of the effects of establishment AI exposure on the change in the share of AI vacancies. The outcome variable, constructed from Burning
     Glass data, is the change in the share of AI vacancies between 2010 and 2018, multiplied by 100. The shares are the ratio of AI vacancies to total vacancies in
     2010-12 and 2016-2018. The regressor, establishment AI exposure in 2010, is the mean of occupation AI exposure, over the 6 digit SOC occupations for which the
     establishment posts vacancies in 2010-2012, weighted by the number of vacancies posted per occupation. Establishment AI exposure is divided by the standard
     deviation, weighted by 2010-12 vacancies. In Panel A, the measure of occupation AI exposure is from Felten et al. (2019). In Panel B, the measure of occupation
     AI exposure is SML, from Brynjolfsson et al. (2019). In Panel C, the measure of occupation AI exposure is from Webb (2020). All columns exclude establishments
     in NAICS sectors 51 (Information) and 54 (Business Services). The covariates included in each model are reported at the bottom of the table. Column 1 contains
     only establishment AI exposure. Columns 2-3 and 5 include fixed effects for the decile of firm total vacancies in 2010-12 to which the establishment's firm belongs.
     Columns 2-6 include commuting zone fixed effects. Columns 3 and 5 include 3 digit NAICS industry fixed effects. Columns 4 and 6 include firm fixed effects.
     Columns 5 and 6 control for the share of 2010-12 vacancies in each establishment, belonging to the broad occupations of either sales or administration. In each
     regression, observations are weighted by total establishment vacancies in 2010-2012. Standard errors are clustered by firm. One, two and three asterisks denote
     significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level.
                                           Table A4: Effects of AI Exposure on Firm AI Vacancy Growth, 2010-2018

                                          Firm AI Vacancy Growth,                    Firm Mean, Establishment                     Firm AI Vacancy Share
                                                 2010-2018                             AI Growth, 2010-2018                         Change, 2010-2018
                                              (1)                   (2)                   (3)                   (4)                   (5)                  (6)
                                                                       Panel A: Felten et al. Measure of AI Exposure
      Firm AI Exposure,                      -3.77                 -0.49          13.60           8.01            0.29                                   0.27
      2010                                  (4.81)                (4.13)           (1.85)          (1.49)         (0.03)                                 (0.05)
      Observations                         401,399               320,628          401,399         320,628        110,390                                 99,109
                                                                         Panel B: Webb Measure of AI Exposure
      Firm AI Exposure,                      -6.83                 -7.02         5.29           0.66          0.22                                      0.14
      2010                                  (4.23)                (4.86)          (1.25)       (1.10)          (0.04)                                    (0.02)
      Observations                         431,195               339,512        431,195       339,512         114,975                                   102,917
                                                                         Panel C: SML Measure of AI Exposure
      Firm AI Exposure,                      6.01                  3.44         4.96            1.50         0.11                                         0.06
49




      2010                                  (4.17)                (3.63)         (1.59)        (1.08)         (0.03)                                     (0.04)
      Observations                         431,195               339,512        431,195       339,512        114,975                                    102,917
      Covariates:
      Share of Vacancies in
      Sales & Admin, 2010
      Fixed Effects:
      Firm Size Decile
      3 digit Industry

     This table presents estimates of the effects of firm AI exposure on firm AI vacancy growth. In the first two columns, the outcome variable, constructed from Burning
     Glass data, is the change in the inverse hyperbolic sine of AI vacancies posted by the firm, between 2010-12 and 2016-18, multiplied by 100. In the middle two columns,
     the outcome variable is the firm mean of the change in the inverse hyperbolic sine of AI vacancies posted by each establishment in the firm, between 2010-12 and
     2016-18, multiplied by 100. The firm mean is weighted by vacancies in each establishment in 2010-2012. In the last two columns, the outcome variable is the change
     in the ratio of AI vacancies to total vacancies between 2010-12 and 2016-2018, multiplied by 100. The regressor, firm AI exposure in 2010, is the mean of occupation
     AI exposure, over the 6 digit SOC occupations for which the firm posts vacancies in 2010-2012, weighted by the number of vacancies posted per occupation. Firm
     AI exposure is divided by the standard deviation, weighted by 2010-12 vacancies in the firm. In Panel A, the measure of occupation AI exposure is from Felten
     et al. (2019). In Panel B, the measure of occupation AI exposure is SML, from Brynjolfsson et al. (2019). In Panel C, the measure of occupation AI exposure is
     from Webb (2020). All columns exclude establishments in NAICS sectors 51 (Information) and 54 (Business Services). The covariates included in each model are
     reported at the bottom of the table. Columns 1, 3 and 5 contains only firm AI exposure. Columns 2, 4 and 6 include fixed effects for the decile of firm total vacancies
     in 2010-12, 3 digit NAICS industry fixed effects, and controls for the share of 2010-12 vacancies in each firm, belonging to the broad occupations of either sales or
     administration. In each regression, observations are weighted by total firm vacancies in 2010-2012. Standard errors are clustered by firm. One, two and three asterisks
     denote significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level.
                                   Table A5: Effects of AI Exposure on Establishment Total Vacancy Growth, 2014-2018


                                                                     Growth of Establishment Total Vacancies, 2014-2018
                                                                      (1)                 (2)                 (3)                 (4)
                                                                        Panel A: Felten et al. Measure of AI Exposure
                                 Establishment AI                 -11.80          -11.24           -10.51         -5.13
                                 Exposure, 2010                     (3.80)          (2.93)           (2.81)        (1.02)
                                 Observations                     1,075,474        954,519          954,519      1,075,474
                                                                           Panel B: Webb Measure of AI Exposure
                                                                         
                                 Establishment AI                  -9.62           -4.11          -2.21         -1.81
                                 Exposure, 2010                     (2.42)          (1.83)       (2.16)          (0.71)
                                 Observations                     1,159,789       1,021,673    1,021,673       1,159,789
                                                                           Panel C: SML Measure of AI Exposure
                                 Establishment AI                    3.32           0.85          -0.57          -0.99
                                 Exposure, 2010                     (2.09)         (2.30)        (2.75)         (0.92)
                                 Observations                     1,159,789      1,021,673     1,021,673      1,159,789
50




                                 Covariates:
                                 Share of Vacancies in
                                 Sales, Admin. in 2010
                                 Fixed Effects:
                                 Firm Size Decile
                                 Commuting Zone
                                 3 digit Industry
                                 Firm


     This table presents estimates of the effects of establishment AI exposure on establishment total vacancy growth. The outcome variable, constructed from Burning
     Glass data, is the growth rate of total vacancies between 2014 and 2018, multiplied by 100. We approximate this growth rate with the change in the inverse hyperbolic
     sine of the number of vacancies posted by the establishment in 2013-15 and 2016-18. The regressor, establishment AI exposure in 2010, is the mean of occupation AI
     exposure, over the 6 digit SOC occupations for which the establishment posts vacancies in 2010-2012, weighted by the number of vacancies posted per occupation.
     Establishment AI exposure is divided by the standard deviation, weighted by 2010-12 vacancies. In Panel A, the measure of occupation AI exposure is from Felten et
     al. (2019). In Panel B, the measure of occupation AI exposure is SML, from Brynjolfsson et al. (2019). In Panel C, the measure of occupation AI exposure is from
     Webb (2020). All columns exclude establishments in NAICS sectors 51 (Information) and 54 (Business Services). The covariates included in each model are reported
     at the bottom of the table. Column 1 contains only establishment AI exposure. Columns 2 and 3 include fixed effects for the decile of firm total vacancies in 2010-12
     to which the establishment's firm belongs. Columns 2-4 include commuting zone fixed effects. Columns 2-3 include 3 digit NAICS industry fixed effects. Column 4
     includes firm fixed effects. In each regression, observations are weighted by total vacancies in 2010-2012. Standard errors are clustered by firm. One, two and three
     asterisks denote significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level.
                           Table A6: Effects of AI Exposure on Implied Establishment Non-AI Employment Growth, 2010-2018

                                                                     Growth of Establishment Non-AI Employment, 2010-2018
                                      (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)               (5)              (6)               (7)              (8)
                                                                            Panel A: Felten et al. Measure of AI Exposure
      Establishment AI                -7.24          -8.91              -5.62          -4.86            -6.36         -4.80                   -4.57           -9.11
      Exposure, 2010                 (4.66)           (4.53)           (3.61)           (1.39)          (3.59)         (1.39)                (5.32)            (2.00)
      Observations                 1,075,474        1,075,474         954,519         1,075,474        954,519       1,075,474              324,901           341,525
                                                                               Panel B: Webb Measure of AI Exposure
                                                                            
      Establishment AI             -12.54           -13.59             -7.53             -0.19      -12.17            0.68                  -7.47               -1.29
      Exposure, 2010                 (3.52)           (3.49)            (2.48)          (0.81)        (3.25)         (0.93)                  (3.66)            (1.37)
      Observations                 1,159,789        1,159,789         1,021,673       1,159,789    1,021,673       1,159,789                337,758           355,529
                                                                               Panel C: SML Measure of AI Exposure
      Establishment AI                2.13             1.45              1.56           -1.27         4.06         -2.80                      -0.72             -2.38
      Exposure, 2010                 (3.13)           (3.04)            (2.58)         (0.94)        (2.83)         (1.05)                   (4.36)            (1.47)
      Observations                 1,159,789        1,159,789         1,021,673      1,159,789     1,021,673      1,159,789                 337,758           355,529
      Sample:
      Posts in 2018:
51




      Covariates:
      Share of Vacancies in
      Sales & Admin, 2010
      Fixed Effects:
      Firm Size Decile
      Commuting Zone
      3 digit Industry
      Firm

     This table presents estimates of the effects of establishment AI exposure on implied establishment non-AI employment growth. The outcome variable, constructed
     from Burning Glass data, is the growth rate of establishment non-AI employment between 2010 and 2018, multiplied by 100. We measure establishment employment
     growth using the procedure for cumulating vacancies into a stock of employment, as described in the main text. We approximate this growth rate with the change in
     the inverse hyperbolic sine of the number of vacancies posted by the establishment in 2010-12 and 2016-18. The regressor, establishment AI exposure in 2010, is the
     mean of occupation AI exposure, over the 6 digit SOC occupations for which the establishment posts vacancies in 2010-2012, weighted by the number of vacancies
     posted per occupation. Establishment AI exposure is divided by the standard deviation, weighted by 2010-12 vacancies. In Panel A, the measure of occupation
     AI exposure is from Felten et al. (2019). In Panel B, the measure of occupation AI exposure is SML, from Brynjolfsson et al. (2019). In Panel C, the measure
     of occupation AI exposure is from Webb (2020). All columns exclude establishments in NAICS sectors 51 (Information) and 54 (Business Services). The final two
     columns exclude establishments that do not post positive vacancies in 2018. The covariates included in each model are reported at the bottom of the table. Column
     1 contains only establishment AI exposure. Columns 2, 3, 5 and 7 include fixed effects for the decile of firm total vacancies in 2010-12 to which the establishment's
     firm belongs. Columns 2-8 include commuting zone fixed effects. Columns 3, 5 and 7 include 3 digit NAICS industry fixed effects. Columns 4, 6 and 8 include firm
     fixed effects. Columns 5 and 6 control for the share of 2010-12 vacancies in each establishment, belonging to the broad occupations of either sales or administration.
     In each regression, observations are weighted by total vacancies in 2010-2012. Standard errors are clustered by firm. One, two and three asterisks denote significance
     at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level.
                                        Table A7: Effects of AI Exposure on Firm Non-AI Vacancy Growth, 2010-2018

                                                                          Growth of Firm Non-AI Vacancies, 2010-2018
                                                           (1)                   (2)                   (3)                   (4)                    (5)
                                                                         Panel A: Felten et al. Measure of AI Exposure
                                                                 
                  Firm AI Exposure,                    -14.06               -12.09             -5.94          -5.85                                -6.92
                  2010                                   (5.40)              (5.25)           (8.09)         (9.54)                               (7.79)
                  Observations                          401,399             401,399          320,628         99,109                              320,628
                                                                             Panel B: Webb Measure of AI Exposure
                                                                 
                  Firm AI Exposure,                    -23.16                -22.74          -4.95          0.56                                -14.39
                  2010                                   (4.98)                (4.88)       (5.65)         (6.76)                                (6.82)
                  Observations                          431,195               431,195      339,512        102,917                               339,512
                                                                              Panel C: SML Measure of AI Exposure
                  Firm AI Exposure,                       7.38                 7.59          3.68           -3.05                                14.71
                  2010                                   (4.65)                (4.49)       (5.36)         (6.00)                                 (6.72)
52




                  Observations                          431,195               431,195      339,512        102,917                                339,512
                  Sample:
                  Posts in 2018:
                  Covariates:
                  Share of Vacancies in
                  Sales & Admin, 2010
                  Fixed Effects:
                  Firm Size Decile
                  3 digit Industry


     This table presents estimates of the effects of firm AI exposure on firm non-AI vacancy growth. The outcome variable, constructed from Burning Glass data, is the
     change in the inverse hyperbolic sine of non-AI vacancies posted by the firm, between 2010-12 and 2016-18, multiplied by 100. The regressor, firm AI exposure in
     2010, is the mean of occupation AI exposure, over the 6 digit SOC occupations for which the firm posts vacancies in 2010-2012, weighted by the number of vacancies
     posted per occupation. Firm AI exposure is divided by the standard deviation, weighted by 2010-12 vacancies in the firm. In Panel A, the measure of occupation
     AI exposure is from Felten et al. (2019). In Panel B, the measure of occupation AI exposure is SML, from Brynjolfsson et al. (2019). In Panel C, the measure of
     occupation AI exposure is from Webb (2020). All columns exclude establishments in NAICS sectors 51 (Information) and 54 (Business Services). The covariates
     included in each model are reported at the bottom of the table. Column 1 contains only firm AI exposure. Columns 2-5 include fixed effects for the decile of firm
     total vacancies in 2010-12. Columns 3-5 include 3 digit NAICS industry fixed effects. Column 5 controls for the share of 2010-12 vacancies in each firm, belonging to
     the broad occupations of either sales or administration. Column 5 restricts the sample to firms with positive vacancies in 2018. In each regression, observations are
     weighted by total firm vacancies in 2010-2012. Standard errors are clustered by firm. One, two and three asterisks denote significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level.
                     Table A8: Effects of AI Exposure on Establishment Non-AI Vacancy Growth, Average Establishment Weights


                                                                      Growth of Establishment Non-AI Vacancies, 2014-2018
                                                                        (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)
                                                                          Panel A: Felten et al. Measure of AI Exposure
                                     Establishment AI               -10.69           -4.89             -3.42        -4.08
                                     Exposure, 2010                   (2.45)          (2.22)          (2.21)         (1.17)
                                     Observations                   1,075,474        954,519         954,519       1,075,474
                                                                             Panel B: Webb Measure of AI Exposure
                                     Establishment AI                  -2.89           1.71         3.98            -1.14
                                     Exposure, 2010                   (1.94)          (1.85)       (2.09)          (0.94)
                                     Observations                   1,159,789       1,021,673    1,021,673       1,159,789
                                                                             Panel C: SML Measure of AI Exposure
                                     Establishment AI                  -2.60          1.63          3.41           0.75
                                     Exposure, 2010                   (1.90)         (1.77)        (2.09)         (0.85)
                                     Observations                   1,159,789      1,021,673     1,021,673      1,159,789
53




                                     Covariates:
                                     Share of Vacancies in
                                     Sales, Admin. in 2010
                                     Fixed Effects:
                                     Firm Size Decile
                                     Commuting Zone
                                     3 digit Industry
                                     Firm


     This table presents estimates of the effects of establishment AI exposure on establishment non-AI vacancy growth. In each regression, observations are weighted by
     average vacancies in 2010-2012 and 2016-2018. The outcome variable, constructed from Burning Glass data, is the growth rate of non-AI vacancies between 2010
     and 2018, multiplied by 100. We approximate this growth rate with the change in the inverse hyperbolic sine of the number of vacancies posted by the establishment
     in 2010-12 and 2016-18. The regressor, establishment AI exposure in 2010, is the mean of occupation AI exposure, over the 6 digit SOC occupations for which
     the establishment posts vacancies in 2010-2012, weighted by the number of vacancies posted per occupation. Establishment AI exposure is divided by the standard
     deviation, weighted by 2010-12 vacancies. In Panel A, the measure of occupation AI exposure is from Felten et al. (2019). In Panel B, the measure of occupation AI
     exposure is SML, from Brynjolfsson et al. (2019). In Panel C, the measure of occupation AI exposure is from Webb (2020). All columns exclude establishments in
     NAICS sectors 51 (Information) and 54 (Business Services). The final two columns exclude establishments that do not post positive vacancies in 2018. The covariates
     included in each model are reported at the bottom of the table. Column 1 contains only establishment AI exposure. Columns 2, 3, 5 and 7 include fixed effects for
     the decile of firm total vacancies in 2010-12 to which the establishment's firm belongs. Columns 2-8 include commuting zone fixed effects. Columns 3, 5 and 7 include
     3 digit NAICS industry fixed effects. Columns 4, 6 and 8 include firm fixed effects. Columns 5 and 6 control for the share of 2010-12 vacancies in each establishment,
     belonging to the broad occupations of either sales or administration. Standard errors are clustered by firm. One, two and three asterisks denote significance at the
     10, 5 and 1 percent level.
