                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND EARNINGS INEQUALITY:
                       A NEW FACTOR CONTENT APPROACH

                                        Rodrigo Adão
                                        Paul Carrillo
                                       Arnaud Costinot
                                       Dave Donaldson
                                       Dina Pomeranz

                                      Working Paper 28263
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28263


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2020




We thank Thomas Bijl, Juan David Hernandez, Shanon Hsuan-Ming Hsu, Wouter Leenders,
Antoine Levy, and Miguel Vazquez Vazquez for excellent research assistance, as well as
Jonathan Vogel, Adrian Wood, our discussants Oleg Itskhoki and Ahmad Lashkaripour, and
numerous seminar participants for helpful comments. We are grateful to the Centro de Estudios
Fiscales and the Departamento de Control of the Ecuadorian Tax Authority for outstanding
collaboration. In addition, this paper has benefited from funding from the National Science
Foundation (grant SES-1559015), the CEPR and the UK Department for International
Development (DFID) (under the `Private Enterprise Development in Low-Income Countries'
program, reference MRG004 3834), and the European Research Council under the European
Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement No 758984). The
views expressed are not necessarily those of CEPR, DFID, or ERC. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Rodrigo Adão, Paul Carrillo, Arnaud Costinot, Dave Donaldson, and Dina Pomeranz.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
International Trade and Earnings Inequality: A New Factor Content Approach
Rodrigo Adão, Paul Carrillo, Arnaud Costinot, Dave Donaldson, and Dina Pomeranz
NBER Working Paper No. 28263
December 2020
JEL No. D3,F1,F6,J2

                                         ABSTRACT

We develop a new factor content approach to study the impact of trade on inequality. Our
analysis generalizes the theoretical results of Deardorff and Staiger (1988) and improves on past
empirical implementations of these results. Combined with unique administrative data from
Ecuador, our approach yields measures of individual-level exposure to exports and imports, for
both capital and labor income, as well as estimates of the incidence of such exposure across the
income distribution. We find that international trade raises earnings inequality in Ecuador,
especially in the upper-half of the income distribution. However, the drop in inequality
experienced by Ecuador over the last decade would have been less pronounced in the absence of
trade.

Rodrigo Adão                                    Dave Donaldson
Booth School of Business                        Department of Economics, E52-554
University of Chicago                           Massachusetts Institute of Technology
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue                      77 Massachusetts Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637                               Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER                                        and NBER
rodrigo.adao@chicagobooth.edu                   ddonald@mit.edu

Paul Carrillo                                   Dina Pomeranz
George Washington University                    University of Zurich
2115 G St. N.W. Suite 364                       Schoenberggasse 1
Washington, DC 20052                            8057 Zurich
pcarrill@gwu.edu                                Switzerland
                                                dina.pomeranz@econ.uzh.ch
Arnaud Costinot
Department of Economics, E52-534
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
costinot@mit.edu
1    Introduction
Some individuals participate in the world economy. They own, work for, or sell to the
supply chains of global firms that export and import. Others do not. What is the impact
of such differences in trade exposure on earnings inequality? If a country's exports and
imports were suddenly to drop to zero, because of some extreme policy or natural disas-
ter, would its distribution of earnings become more or less equal? In the absence of trade,
would the consequences of domestic shocks for inequality be magnified or dampened?
     In this paper we offer a generalization of Deardorff and Staiger's (1988) factor con-
tent approach to address these questions. It maintains what we view as the main appeal
of this approach--an intuitive supply and demand framework--while improving on its
theoretical foundations and empirical implementation. The key input fed into our anal-
ysis is a unique administrative dataset from Ecuador that merges firm-to-firm transac-
tion data, employer-employee matched data, owner-firm matched data, and firm-level
customs transaction records. Together with theory, such information allows us to mea-
sure the export and import exposures of individuals--be they workers or capital own-
ers--across the income distribution and, in turn, to infer the overall incidence of trade on
earnings inequality.
     Our main empirical finding is that international trade substantially raises earnings in-
equality in Ecuador, especially in the upper half of its income distribution. In the absence
of trade, top-income individuals would be relatively poorer. However, our empirical
analysis also implies that the drop in inequality that took place in Ecuador over the last
decade would have been less pronounced if its economy had been subject to the same
domestic shocks, but unable to trade with the rest of the world.
     Section 2 lays out the theoretical foundations of our analysis. Our starting point is
the observation that in economies with competitive factor markets, regardless of whether
good markets are competitive as well, the earnings of individuals depend on the global
demand for the factor services that they supply. While firms trade goods, not factors, in-
ternational trade has an impact on inequality only insofar as it shifts the relative demand
for the factor services embodied in those goods. This can occur through two channels:
(i ) foreign consumers and firms may demand domestic factor services in different pro-
portions than domestic consumers and firms do, an export channel, or (ii ) domestic con-
sumers and firms may change their demand for domestic factor services in response to
the availability of foreign factor services, an import channel. The overall impact of trade
on inequality then is the amount by which domestic factor prices need to adjust to bring
factor markets to equilibrium in response to these two shifts in demand.


                                             1
  The formal counterpart of this observation is a novel structural relationship between
domestic factor prices, w, and two sufficient statistics of foreign shocks, REE and w :

                                 RD (w, w ) × REE = RS,

where relative export exposure, REE, can be measured directly via Leontief's (1953) fac-
tor content of exports, w denotes foreign factor prices, RD (·, ·) is the domestic relative
factor demand system, and RS is domestic relative factor supply. This structural relation-
ship summarizes how competitive markets determine domestic factor prices, regardless
of whether an economy is open or closed, and provides the bedrock of our subsequent
analysis. It underpins how we measure export and import exposure across individu-
als--by measuring the extent to which variation in REE and w shift the demand for
their factor services--as well as how we estimate the incidence of such exposure--by cal-
culating the changes in factor prices that obtain when REE and w are sequentially taken
to their autarkic limits, REE  1 (the export channel) and w   (the import channel).
    Section 3 introduces a model of Ecuador's domestic relative factor demand that can
be built up from estimates based on firm-level micro-data. We assume that domestic con-
sumers have nested CES demand for final goods, whereas firms have nested CES demand
for intermediate goods and factors. However, this places no restriction on firm-level het-
erogeneity in demand for domestic and foreign factor services, or on firms' export be-
havior. As such, every individual's own exposure to exports and imports is similarly
unrestricted, while the incidence of such exposure can be inferred in an intuitive man-
ner from the extent to which consumers and firms reallocate expenditure in response to
changes in good and factor prices.
    Section 4 uses administrative tax data to measure these differences in trade exposure
across Ecuador's income distribution from 2009-2015. Guided by the above structural
relationship, we say that individuals are more exposed to exports if exports in the trade
equilibrium raise the relative demand for their factor services--the labor they supply to
firms, and the capital that they install in the firms they own--because those are dispropor-
tionately demanded abroad, either directly or indirectly, as in Leontief (1953). Likewise,
we say that individuals are more exposed to imports if imports in the trade equilibrium
lower the relative demand for their factor services because those are closer substitutes to
foreign factor services. In our empirical model, these differences in substitutability can be
measured directly from the covariance between factor shares embodied in different firms'
domestic final sales and (direct and indirect) import cost shares at those same firms.
    In Ecuador, we find that export exposure is broadly pro middle-class, in the sense that,


                                             2
on average, individuals in the middle of the income distribution export a higher fraction
of their factor services, mostly labor, to the rest of the world. In contrast, import exposure
tends to be pro-rich because Ecuadorian firms employing high-skill labor also import
more intermediate goods. When imports become cheaper, those firms expand, and the
relative demand for high-skill labor goes up, benefiting high-income individuals.
    To go from exposure to incidence, Section 5 estimates our model of Ecuador's do-
mestic relative factor demand. Domestic factor demand is a function of two micro-level
demand elasticities: the elasticity of substitution between domestic factors of production,
within each firm, and the elasticity of substitution between final goods, within each sector.
To deal with potential simultaneity bias in the estimation of these demand parameters, we
construct shift-share instrumental variables that leverage components of our measures of
export and import exposure that are driven by foreign shocks. Combined with the rest of
our micro-level dataset, IV estimates of these two parameters identify Ecuador's domestic
relative factor demand.
    Section 6 offers a battery of specification tests to strengthen the credibility of our em-
pirical model. This includes macro-level tests that focus directly on the structural rela-
tionship between domestic factor prices w, relative export exposure REE, and foreign
factor prices w emphasized by our theoretical analysis. Since we have estimated relative
domestic factor demand indirectly through the estimation of two micro-level elasticities
governing firm- and consumer-level responses, there is a priori no reason why the ob-
served response of domestic factor prices to changes in our two sufficient statistics should
coincide with the response predicted by our empirical model. In practice, preferences and
technology may not be nested CES, and markets may not be competitive and adjust fric-
tionlessly. Remarkably, however, under the same orthogonality conditions imposed to
estimate micro-level elasticities, we cannot reject the null that observed and predicted re-
sponses of factor prices to foreign shocks are identical, up to a first-order approximation.
    Section 7 concludes with a series of counterfactual exercises that combine measures of
the two sufficient statistics, REE and w , with our estimates of domestic relative factor
demand to compare the distribution of earnings in Ecuador with or without trade and, in
turn, to evaluate its overall incidence on earnings inequality. Quantitatively, we find that
the import channel dominates the export channel: international trade increases earnings
inequality in Ecuador, especially in the upper-half of the income distribution. This is true
both in our administrative data and in an augmented sample that includes individuals
employed in informal firms.
    Ultimately, we conclude that trade generates gains that are around 11% larger for
those at the 90th percentile than those at the median, and up to 27% larger in the case


                                              3
of Ecuador's top-percentile earners for whom capital ownership is particularly impor-
tant. Nevertheless, we also find that openness had a tendency to magnify the decline in
inequality caused by domestic shocks between 2009 and 2015. For example, in the ab-
sence of trade, the 90-10 ratio of Ecuador's earnings distribution would have decreased
by 17% instead of the 32% observed in our dataset.


Related Literature
The literature on trade and inequality is rich and varied, from applied theory work (e.g.,
Stolper and Samuelson, 1941; Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg, 2008; Helpman et al., 2010)
to reduced-form evidence (e.g., Hanson and Harrison, 1999; Attanasio et al., 2004; Autor
et al., 2013) to structural empirical approaches (e.g., Artuc et al., 2010; Galle et al., 2017;
Burstein and Vogel, 2017). A non-exhaustive list of recent surveys includes Goldberg and
Pavcnik (2007), Feenstra (2010), Harrison et al. (2011), Helpman (2018), Muendler (2017),
Pavcnik (2017), and Hummels et al. (2018).
    Our analysis is most closely related to the factor content approach to trade and in-
equality, whose empirical application was popularized in the 1990s (Murphy and Welch,
1991; Borjas et al., 1992; Katz and Murphy, 1992; Wood, 1995; Borjas et al., 1997) despite
being the subject of heated debate (Krugman, 2000; Leamer, 2000).1 The basic idea was to
use a simple supply and demand framework to analyze changes in relative factor prices,
with international trade acting as an implicit change in relative factor supply equal to
the difference between factors used in exports and imports. In this paper we develop
an alternative to the original factor content approach centered around a novel structural
relationship between domestic factor prices and two sufficient statistics of foreign shocks
that aims to maintain the same intuitive focus on factor supply and factor demand, but
improves on what we view as three important limitations of the original approach.
    On the theory side, Deardorff and Staiger (1988) provide micro-theoretical founda-
tions for the original factor content approach. In a Heckscher-Ohlin model with Cobb-
Douglas preferences and technology, they show that if all sectors are import-competing,
then net exports of factor services are sufficient statistics for computing changes in relative
factor prices resulting from a hypothetical move to autarky. Deardorff (2000) generalizes
this result to the case of CES utility and production functions with equal elasticities. Our
   1 Throughout   this paper, we use "inequality" and "earnings inequality" interchangeably. A number of
papers have also studied, both theoretically and empirically, how international trade may affect the distri-
bution of real income across individuals by differentially affecting the costs of living faced by individuals
with heterogeneous or non-homothetic preferences (Porto, 2006; Fajgelbaum et al., 2011; Fajgelbaum and
Khandelwal, 2016; Atkin et al., 2018; Borusyak and Jaravel, 2018; Faber and Fally, 2021). Our analysis has
nothing to say about such cost-of-living considerations.

                                                     4
novel structural relationship provides a non-parametric generalization of these results
that dispenses with restrictions on preferences, technology, and good market structure.2
It stresses the importance of computing the factor content of gross rather than net ex-
ports as a measure of trade exposure. Net exports are sufficient statistics only if domestic
and foreign factors are perfect substitutes, an unattractive assumption from an empirical
standpoint.3 More generally, changes in relative factor prices depend on gross factor ex-
ports (our export channel) and the elasticity of domestic factor demand with respect to
foreign factor prices (our import channel).
    On the measurement side, we use our structural relationship to construct individual
measures of export and import exposures. The original factor content approach focuses
on a small number of factors of production, typically college and non-college graduates,
and measures the factor content of exports and imports using coarse input-output matri-
ces.4 It is well known that such data may mask tremendous heterogeneity, both in terms
of factor price changes within groups as well as in terms of factor intensity within sectors,
in particular between firms that are globally engaged and those that are not (Bernard and
Jensen, 1999; Bernard et al., 2007b). In contrast, by combining data on firm-to-firm trans-
actions and firm-level international transactions (as in Huneeus, 2018, Bernard et al., 2019,
Demir et al., 2020, and Dhyne et al., 2021) with worker-firm and owner-firm matches, we
are able to construct an individual-level version of the national income and product ac-
counts and solve the previous factor content measurement issues. This granularity and
inclusion of capital earnings also opens up the possibility to study the impact of trade on
    2 In earlier work on non-parametric counterfactual and welfare analysis in neoclassical environments

Adao et al. (2017), we have followed a similar approach of focusing on aggregate factor demand, but main-
tained the assumption of perfectly competitive good markets. Since our focus in the present paper is on
relative factor prices, not welfare, we can dispense with that assumption. Hence, our general results not
only apply to recent neoclassical trade models with rich worker heterogeneity, such as Ohnsorge and Trefler
(2007), Costinot and Vogel (2010), and Grossman et al. (2017), but also to recent monopolistically competi-
tive models such as Yeaple (2005), Bernard et al. (2007a), and Fieler et al. (2018).
    3 Focusing on net exports also raises the question of how one should measure the domestic factor content

of imports. In the empirically relevant case of no domestic production of some goods, there is no direct
way to measure the domestic factors that would be needed to domestically produce imports under autarky.
Wood (1995, 2012) offers important discussions of this issue as well as potential remedies.
    4 This is the same type of data used in Leontief's (1953) original factor content computations and in

canonical Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek tests (Bowen et al., 1987; Trefler, 1993, 1995; Davis and Weinstein, 2001).
More recently, Borusyak and Jaravel (2018) use related data to construct measures of export and import
earnings exposures across college and non-college graduates. They define one of these two groups as more
exposed to exports (respectively, imports) if, in a small open economy version of a multi-sector Armington
model, a small uniform decrease in trade costs imposed (respectively, faced) by the rest of the world raises
the relative wage of that group. While we share a similar objective, our exposure measures are distinct:
our export measure emphasizes factor content accounting so proceeds without restrictions on technology,
preferences, or good market structure; neither our export nor our import measure requires the economy
of interest to be small; and, when combined, our export and import measures summarize exposure to all
foreign shocks, as captured by our two sufficient statistics, not just exposure to changes in trade costs.

                                                     5
top income inequality (Piketty and Saez, 2003; Piketty et al., 2018; Smith et al., 2019).
    On the estimation side, our structural relationship is valid both for an open and a
closed economy. This allows us, before conducting counterfactual analysis by taking rela-
tive export exposure and foreign factor prices to their autarkic limit values, to test whether
our empirical model can replicate, within sample, the observed response of domestic fac-
tor prices to changes in these two statistics. It also allows us to resolve a fundamental
inconsistency of existing applications of the original factor content approach. The elas-
ticity of substitution that enters Deardorff's (2000) formula is the elasticity of substitution
between domestic factors in a hypothetical autarkic economy, not the elasticity of substi-
tution in the observed trade equilibrium that has been estimated by Katz and Murphy
(1992) among others. Indeed, for Deardorff's (2000) formula to be valid, the elasticity of
substitution in the observed trade equilibrium should be infinite.
    Along the way, we build a bridge between the original factor content approach and
recent empirical work based on heterogeneous variation in exposure to a variety of trade
shocks (e.g., Autor et al., 2014; Hummels et al., 2014; Pierce and Schott, 2016; Dix-Carneiro
and Kovak, 2017). In contrast to more recent empirical work, and in line with the original
factor content approach, we remain interested in the overall impact of trade on earnings
inequality, rather than the impact of specific shocks. But in line with more recent empirical
work, and in contrast to the original factor content approach, we give center stage to the
observed response of factor prices to (sufficient statistics for) foreign shocks in order to
strengthen the credibility of our empirical conclusions.


2     The Simple Economics of Trade and Inequality

2.1    Factor Demand and Factor Supply
Consider a world economy with many individuals and firms located either at Home or
in the Rest of the World. Individuals are endowed with primary factors of production,
indexed by f , that they sell to firms on perfectly competitive markets. Factors are par-
titioned into those located at Home, f  F , and those located in the Rest of the World,
f  F  . Under this convention, "college graduates at Home" and "college graduates in
the Rest of the World" are therefore two distinct factors of production. L¯ f denotes the
fixed world supply of factor f  F  F  .5 Firms produce goods that they sell to indi-

    5 Economies   with elastic labor supply are nested by treating leisure as an additional non-traded good.
Roy models are also nested by treating workers with different productivity levels across sectors or occupa-
tions as distinct factors of production.

                                                     6
viduals and other firms in potentially imperfectly competitive markets. In equilibrium,
individuals maximize their utility, firms maximize their profits, and both good and factor
markets clear. Appendices A.1.1 and A.2.1 provide formal definitions of the equilibria
under perfect and imperfect competition in good markets, respectively.
   Let w  {w f } f F denote the vector of prices for domestic factors and w  {w        f } f F 
the prices for those in the Rest of the World. Factor "0" at Home is our numeraire. As
shown in Appendices A.1.2 and A.2.2, given factor prices (w, w ), utility maximization
by individuals, profit maximization by firms, and good market clearing determine the
world demand LW                                  6
                  f ( w, w ) for any factor f . Factor prices in any given trade equilibrium,
wT  {w f ,T } f F and w           
                          T  { w f ,T } f F  , then equalize world factor demand and supply,

                                                                     
                               LW                 ¯
                                f ( w T , w T ) = L f for all f  F  F .                                  (1)

   To analyze the role played by international trade in shaping domestic factor prices, we
propose to decompose world factor demand into its domestic and foreign components,

                                                                       
                                LW
                                 f ( w, w ) = L f ( w, w ) + L f ( w, w ),


where L f (w, w ) measures the total services of factor f used to produce final goods con-
sumed at Home and L                
                           f ( w, w ) measures the total services of factor f used to produce
goods that are exported to the Rest of the World. If there are no input-output linkages
between firms, L f (w, w ) and L             
                                     f ( w, w ) simply correspond to the sum across all firms of
the services of factor f directly employed to produce final goods sold for consumers in
Home and Rest of the World, respectively. If there are input-output linkages, L f (w, w )
and L         
      f ( w, w ) also include the services of factor f indirectly used to produce intermediate
goods to produce those final goods, to produce the intermediate goods to produce those
intermediate goods, etc.--as in Leontief's (1953) pioneering factor content calculations.
The formal definitions of L f (w, w ) and L               
                                                  f ( w, w ) can be found in Appendix A.1.3.
    Using the previous decomposition, we can rearrange the market clearing conditions
for domestic factors as follows.

Proposition 1. Suppose that factor markets are perfectly competitive. Then for given values of for-
eign factor prices w                                                                   W            
                    T  { w f ,T } f F and export exposures EET  { L f ( w T , w T ) / L f ( w T , w T ) } f F ,




   6 For expositional purposes, we restrict attention in the main text to the case where LW        
                                                                                           f ( w, w ) is a
function rather than a correspondence. This is consistent with the factor demand system introduced in
Section 3. The general case where LW       
                                   f ( w, w ) may be a correspondence is discussed in Appendix A.


                                                     7
the vector of equilibrium domestic factor prices wT  {w f ,T } f F solves

                       RD f (wT , wT ) REE f ,T = RS f for all f  F , f = 0,                  (2)

where RD f (w, w )  L f (w, w )/ L0 (w, w ) is domestic relative factor demand, REE f ,T  (1 -
                                                              ¯ f /L
EE0,T )/(1 - EE f ,T ) is relative export exposure, and RS f  L    ¯ 0 is relative factor supply.

    Like equation (1), equation (2) is not an accounting identity. It is a structural rela-
tionship that, for given preferences, technology, and good market structure, summarizes
how competitive factor markets determine factor prices. It stresses two sufficient statis-
tics of foreign shocks: foreign factor prices, w T ; and relative export exposures, REET 
{ REE f ,T } f F , which can be directly measured via Leontief's (1953) factor content of ex-
ports. Compared to (1), the benefit of (2) is that it only requires information about the
domestic factor demand system, L f (w, w ), which only depends on technology, prefer-
ences and market structure at Home. Irrespective of the size of Home, it does not require
knowledge of the global factor demand system, LW              
                                                      f ( w, w ), which depends on the same
considerations all around the world.


2.2   Measuring The Impact of Trade on Inequality
Proposition 1 provides the theoretical foundations for the rest of our analysis. Next, we
use it to compare domestic factor prices observed in the trade equilibrium to those that
would prevail in a counterfactual autarkic equilibrium.
    As a matter of theory, this is a simple counterfactual exercise. Under autarky, foreign
factor prices would move above their reservation values, which we denote by w = ,
whereas domestic factor prices would adjust to equalize domestic factor demand and
factor supply. In terms of relative domestic factor demand and supply, the autarkic equi-
librium therefore requires that autarky factor prices w A satisfy

                           RD f (w A , ) = RS f for all f  F , f = 0.

When moving from the trade equilibrium described in equation (2) to autarky, domestic
factor prices shift for two reasons. First, foreign demand for domestic goods and, in turn,
the domestic factor services that they embody must go to zero. This is an export channel
captured by the shift from the black relative supply curve (to the domestic market) to
the red one in Figure 1 as REE f  1. Second, domestic demand for foreign goods and,
in turn, the foreign factor services that they embody must go to zero. This is an import


                                                8
                  Figure 1: The Simple Economics of Trade and Inequality




                                w f , A /w0, A      Autarky


                          Import channel
                                           {
                          Export channel
                                           {
                                w f ,T /w0,T                             Trade
                                                                                 RD -
                                                                                    f ( ·,  )
                                                                                      1


                                                                                 RD - 1      
                                                                                    f ( ·, w T )



                                                 RS f             RS f / REE f



Notes: At the trading equilibrium, domestic and world factor prices (wT , wT ) equate relative domestic factor
supply to relative world factor demand. The effect of eliminating trade (i.e. determining w A ) can be de-
composed into an export channel ( REE f  1, at w = w                                   
                                                        T ) and an import channel (w  , at REE f = 1).



channel captured by the shift from the black relative demand curve to the red one in Figure
1 as w  .
    Formally, let ( ln w)trade  {ln(w f ,T /w f , A )} f F denote the vector of log-differences
in domestic factor prices between the autarkic counterfactual equilibrium and the orig-
inal trade equilibrium and let RD (w, w )  { RD f (w, w )} f F denote the vector of do-
mestic relative factor demand. Throughout our analysis, we assume that ln RD is contin-
uously differentiable and that the matrix of domestic price elasticities  ln RD / ln w 
{ ln RD f / ln w g }( f ,g)F ×F is invertible.7 Starting from equation (2) and invoking the
Implicit Function Theorem, we therefore obtain the following characterization of the
changes in domestic factor prices between the autarkic and trade equilibria.

Proposition 2. Suppose that ln RD is continuously differentiable with respect to (w, w ) and that
 ln RD / ln w  { ln RD f / ln w g }( f ,g)F ×F is invertible for all (w, w ). Then differences




   7 We view these as mild technical assumptions.  Although situations where goods and factors are perfect
substitutes may (locally) violate these assumptions, one can always consider environments with close, but
imperfect substitutes that satisfy them and whose implications for the impact of trade limit to those of
environments with perfect substitutes.

                                                              9
in domestic factor prices between the autarky and trade equilibria can be computed as

                                         (u=ln REET ,v=ln w                -1
                                                           T)     ln RD
                  ( ln w)trade = -                                              du
                                        (u=0,v=ln wT)
                                                                  ln w
                                                    ( ln w)exports
                                         (u=0,v=ln w                  -1
                                                    T)      ln RD           ln RD
                                   -                                                   dv
                                        (u=0,v=)            ln w            ln w
                                                         ( ln w)imports


where  ln RD / ln w  { ln RD f / ln wg }F ×F  is the matrix of foreign price elasticities.

    The formal proof can be found in Appendix A.3. Setting aside potential differences
in domestic price elasticities, Proposition 2 implies that factors that benefit the most from
opening up to trade are those that tend to be exported more--and hence have higher
values of REE f ,T --and those that are less substitutable with foreign factor services--and
hence have lower values of  ln RD f / ln w     g . We will use both observations to construct
measures of export and import exposures across individuals in Section 4. Having speci-
fied a domestic factor demand system in Section 3 and estimated it in Section 5, we will
then use Proposition 2 to compute the full incidence of trade on earnings inequality in
Section 7. Before doing so, we now briefly discuss examples of factor demand systems in
the literature and their implications for the relationship between trade and inequality.


2.3    Examples
Original Factor Content Approach. Like Stolper and Samuelson's (1941) Theorem, the
original factor content approach pioneered by Deardorff and Staiger (1988) critically re-
lies on the assumption that all imported goods are also produced at Home. Under this
assumption, domestic firms are willing to produce the quantities imported by Home at
the original trade prices, whereas domestic consumers are willing to consume their extra
output, which makes the relative domestic factor demand curve perfectly elastic in the
initial trade equilibrium. Factor prices under trade are thus equal to those that would
prevail in a hypothetical autarkic equilibrium with factor supply adjusted by net export
shares of each factor, NEE f ,T , and changes in factor prices between trade and autarky can
be computed as the changes between two autarkic equilibria with factor supply L       ¯ f and
¯ f (1 - NEE f ,T ), as described in Figure 2.8
L

   8 Net exports of factor f are equal to its gross exports, Lf , minus the amount of factor f that would be
required to produce the vector of Home's imports.

                                                    10
                              Figure 2: Original Factor Content Approach




                         ln(w f , A /w0, A )           Autarky



                        Trade Impact
                                         {
                         ln(w f ,T /w0,T )
                                                                          Trade                   Autarky Adjusted

                                                                                                                 ln( RD - 1      
                                                                                                                        f ( ·, w T ))

                                                                                                                 ln( RD -
                                                                                                                        f ( ·,  ))
                                                                                                                          1




                                                 ln( RS f )   ln( RS f / REE f ,T )   ln( RS f / RNEE f ,T )



Notes: Following Deardorff and Staiger (1988), when Home produces all imported goods and hence
RD f (wT , wT ) is perfectly elastic around the trade equilibrium, the impact of trade on factor prices is equal
to the effect in autarky, i.e. for RD f (w, ), of a hypothetical shift in RS f by the amount of the relative net
export exposure ( RNEE f ,T ). Illustrated for the Deardorff (2000) case in which RD f (w, ) is isoelastic.


    Under the additional assumption that technology and preferences are Cobb-Douglas,
as in Deardorff and Staiger (1988), or more generally CES with a common elasticity of
substitution  > 0, as in Deardorff (2000), the domestic factor demand system under
autarky, RD (w, ), is also CES with elasticity of substitution  > 0 . Hence the impact of
trade on inequality in this case is equal to

                                               ( ln w)trade = ln( RNEET )/ ,

with RNEET  {(1 - NEE0,T )/(1 - NEE f ,T )} f F .9 This is the limit of the general for-
mula for ( ln w)trade presented in Proposition 2 in an environment with nested CES pref-
erences, as the elasticity of substitution between goods from different countries is taken
to infinity. For empirical purposes, the main issue with this formula is that  is not the
elasticity of substitution between factors in the trade equilibrium. Indeed, for the original
factor content approach to be valid, the latter elasticity should be infinite. Instead,  is the
slope of RD (w, ), the red demand curve in Figure 2.

    9 Burstein and Vogel (2017) offer the following generalization of the previous formula. As a matter
of accounting, they note that the value of payments received by a given factor are always equal to the
payments made by firms to that factor. Since this accounting identity holds both under trade and autarky,
it follows that changes in the payments received by a factor between trade and autarky can always be
expressed as the changes in the payments made by firms to that factor. It also follows that if one decomposes
the latter into Deardorff's (2000) original formula and a residual, then Deardorff's (2000) formula holds
whenever that residual is zero. Compared to Burstein and Vogel (2017), who emphasize that the previous
residual is non-zero in their structural model, one can view Proposition 2 as providing a general structural
interpretation of that residual in any environment with perfectly competitive factor markets.

                                                                            11
Pure Export Channel. A pure export channel, ( ln w)imports = 0, arises whenever rela-
tive domestic factor demand is independent of foreign factor prices, RD (w, w )  RD (w).
This occurs most notably in multi-factor extensions of Melitz (2003) such as Sampson
(2014), Harrigan and Reshef (2016), and Antras et al. (2017a). When firms employ distinct
types of workers, as in Antras et al. (2017a), the export channel takes a particularly sim-
ple form. In this case, CES demand for goods implies CES demand for domestic factor
services for all values of w , not just in the limit w =  as in Deardorff (2000).10 Ap-
plying Proposition 2 to the case of a CES factor demand system, we immediately obtain
( ln w)imports = 0 and
                                ( ln w)trade = ln REET / ,                               (3)

where  denotes the elasticity of substitution between goods produced by different firms,
and hence, the different factors they employ. Compared to the original factor content
approach of Deardorff and Staiger (1988) and Deardorff (2000), it is gross rather than net
export exposure that now determines the distributional impact of trade.11


Pure Import Channel. A pure import channel, ( ln w)exports = 0, may arise either when
relative factor demand is perfectly elastic, as already illustrated in Figure 2, or when there
is no variation in export exposure across factors, REE f ,T = 1. As an example of the latter,
consider an economy where all goods are produced using the same factor intensity, with
production requiring both primary factors of production and foreign intermediate goods,
as in Burstein et al. (2013). Since all goods have the same factor intensity, export exposure
is necessarily constant across all factors. It follows that REE f ,T is equal to one and that
only the import channel is active. The magnitude of the import channel, in turn, depends
on whether foreign inputs are closer substitutes to factor f or factor 0. Following Krusell
et al. (2000), Burstein et al. (2013) assume an aggregate nested CES production function, in
which skilled workers are calibrated to be less substitutable with foreign factor services,
so that the import channel increases the skill premium.




   10 Our discussion of Antras et al. (2017a) implicitly focuses on the special case of that model with inelastic

labor supply. When labor supply is elastic, preferences over all goods, including leisure, are no longer CES.
   11 A pure export channel also arises in Matsuyama (2007). He considers an economy where goods have

different factor intensity depending on the destination in which they are sold, all goods have the same factor
intensity within a given destination, and there is no trade in intermediate goods. Under these assumptions,
relative domestic factor demand again only depends on the relative price of domestic factors. This is also
the channel emphasized in Verhoogen's (2008) partial equilibrium model.

                                                       12
3      An Empirical Model of Domestic Factor Demand
Propositions 1 and 2 give center stage to the domestic factor demand system, RD (w, w ).
We now describe an empirical version of the model in Section 2 that allows RD (w, w ) to
be estimated from firm- and individual-level micro-data. Despite the parametric restric-
tions introduced, our model remains considerably more general than the original factor
content approach: it does not require factor demand to be perfectly elastic; it does not
impose any restriction on the heterogeneity in factor intensity across firms; and it allows
arbitrary input-output linkages both between and within sectors. Most importantly, as
we will show in Section 6, our model is, despite its restrictions, successful at matching
macro-level responses of factor prices to foreign shocks.


3.1     Micro-Level Demand for Goods and Factors
Consider a parametric version of Section 2's environment in which Home's preferences
and technology are nested CES and goods and factor markets are perfectly competitive.

Consumers. All domestic consumers have the same nested CES utility function over the
goods produced by domestic firms n  Nk in different sectors k  K,

                                        U=     (Uk )k ,
                                              k K
                                                                     
                                                          1    -1    -1

                                       Uk =           nc cn
                                                               
                                                                          ,
                                                nNk


where k , nc  0 are exogenous preference parameters, with kK k = 1;  > 0 is the
elasticity of substitution between goods produced by different firms from the same sector;
and cn denotes the quantity sold by firm n to domestic consumers.12 Utility maximization
implies that the total income Dn spent by consumers on a domestic firm n is equal to

                                  k nc p1 -
                                        n Y
                          Dn =               -
                                               , for all n  Nk and k  K,                                  (4)
                                  rNk rc p1r

                                                                  ¯ f is the total in-
where pn is the price of goods produced by firm n and Y   f F w f L
come of domestic consumers. We let dnk  Dn /(rNk Dr ) denote the share of sector k's
    12 Since we allow below for trade in intermediate goods, the assumption that foreign goods do not di-
rectly enter the utility function of domestic consumers is without loss of generality. Imports of final goods,
if any, are captured by the sales of "domestic" firms that produce using zero domestic factors, zero domestic
intermediate goods, and only foreign intermediate goods.

                                                     13
domestic consumer expenditure devoted to domestic firm n  Nk .


Firms. All domestic firms have a nested CES production function over domestic factors
f  F , the goods produced by domestic firms n  N = kK Nk , and the goods produced
by foreign firms n  N  ,

                               q n =  n ( l n )  n ( m n )1-  n ,
                                       rn n                         
                                                              rn 1- n
                              mn = (  mrn ) (               mrn )     ,
                                         r N              r N
                                                1    -1    
                               l n = (   f n l f n )  -1 ,
                                                     

                                         f F


where: n ,  n , n ,  f n , rn  0 are exogenous technology parameters, with  n  [0, 1],
n  [0, 1], and rN rn = rN  rn         = 1;  > 0 is the elasticity of substitution between

domestic factors; and qn and mrn denote the total output of firm n and the quantity sold
by firm r to firm n.
   Profit maximization implies that the total expenditure X f n by a domestic firm n on a
domestic factor f is equal to

                                      1- 
                                f nw f
                     Xfn =                1- 
                                                 n Rn , for all f  F and n  N ,            (5)
                              gF  gn w g

where Rn  pn qn denotes the total revenues of firm n. The associated share of firm n's
costs from payments to factor f is x f n  X f n / Rn .
   The total expenditure Xrn by a domestic firm n on an intermediate good r, in turn, is
                       
                        (1 -  )   R ,                         for all r  N and n  N ,
                             n  n rn n
               Xrn   =                                                                     (6)
                       (1 -  )(1 -  )  R ,                    for all r  N  and n  N .
                             n       n rn n

          
We let Xn      rN  Xrn denote the total imports of foreign intermediate goods by any
domestic firm n and treat those imports as a composite of foreign factor services with
                          
price wn      vN  ( p     vn
                       v ) . From now on, we simply refer to the vector of firm-specific
import prices, w  {wn     }
                            nN , as the vector of foreign factor prices. The associated shares
of firm n's costs are denoted xrn  Xrn / Rn and xn    = X /R .
                                                           n   n




                                                     14
    Finally, zero-profits requires the firm's output price to be equal to its unit cost,

                                         n
                                        1-                                  1-  n
                                  1-                  rn n    1-  n
            pn = n            f nw f          (      pr ) ( wn )                    , for all n  N .     (7)
                       f F                     r N

                                            n                           (1-n ) (1 -  )]-(1-  n )
where n  -      1
              n (n )
                      -  n [(
                              r N ( rn ) n ) ( r N  ( rn ) rn (1 - n ))
                                        rn              
                                                                                    n
is an adjusted measure of firm n's productivity.
    Summarizing, our nested CES model does not restrict the levels of demand for any
factor. Two elasticities,  and  , are unrestricted as well and form the basis of our es-
timation in Section 5. Upper-level elasticities--across sectoral outputs in consumption,
across domestic suppliers in production, and across domestic and foreign inputs in pro-
duction--are assumed to be unitary, a feature that will be consistent with the tests de-
scribed in Section 6.


3.2    Macro-Level Demand for Factors
Relative Domestic Factor Demand. For given domestic and foreign factor prices, w 
{w f } f F and w  {wn   }                                             
                           nN , the domestic factor demand L f ( w, w ) measures the total
services of factor f used, both directly and indirectly, to produce final goods consumed
at Home. As described in Appendix A.1.3, the value of domestic demand for domestic
factors f  F is

                               {w f L f (w, w )} f F = A(w) BD (w, w ),

where A(w)  { x f n (w)}( f ,n)F ×N is the domestic matrix of factor shares, B  ( I -
M )-1 is the Leontief inverse associated with the domestic input-output matrix M 
{ xnr }(n,r)N ×N = {nr n (1 -  n )}(n,r)N ×N , and D (w, w )  { Dn (w, w )}nN is the
vector of domestic consumer expenditures.13 Substituting for consumer expenditures us-
ing equation (4) and firm factor and intermediate shares using equation (6), this implies

                                                   wf     -    f · Z ( w, w  )
                               RD f (w, w ) =                                  ,                         (8)
                                                   w0         0 · Z ( w, w  )



   13 Theparametric model of Section 3.1 corresponds to the special case of the general model of Appendix
A.1 in which each domestic good g  G is produced by a single domestic firm n  N , each firm produces a
single good, and G = N . The facts that the domestic matrix of factor shares is independent of foreign factor
prices and the Leontief inverse is independent of all prices derive from our Cobb-Douglas assumptions.

                                                     15
where · denotes the inner product of two vectors,  f  { f n }nN captures the propensity
of factor f to be employed by different domestic firms, and Z (w, w )  { Zn (w, w )}nN
captures the propensity of factors employed by those firms to be absorbed domestically:

                                                                                   1- 
                                              -1                  pr ( w, w  )
               Zn (w, w ) =  n wn
                                D
                                  (w)                       bnr
                                                                  Pk (w, w )
                                                                                         k rc .
                                                   k r Nk


This term itself depends on the elements bnr of the Leontief inverse B; the CES price
                                                                     1-       1
                                      D (w)  (
index for firm n's domestic factors, wn         f F  f n w f               ) 1- ; the CES price index in
                                                              1
firm n's sector, Pk (w, w )  (nNk nc p1 -      1- ; and the vector of firm-level prices
                                      n ( w, w ))
p(w, w )  { pn (w, w )}nN given by the solution to (7),

                  ln pn (w, w ) =                            D
                                           brn ln r +  r ln wr          
                                                               ( w ) + xr     
                                                                          ln wr .                    (9)
                                     r N


Foreign Price Elasticities. Two types of elasticities enter Proposition 2: the elasticities
of relative factor demand with respect to domestic factor prices  ln RD / ln w, which
affect both the export and import channels, and the elasticities of relative demand with
respect to foreign factor prices  ln RD / ln w , which only affect the import channel. Our
next proposition, whose proof can be found in Appendix A.4, describes the economic
considerations that shape  ln RD / ln w .

Proposition 3. For any domestic factor f  F , the elasticity of relative demand with respect to
                                is
the price of a foreign factor wn

                                 ln RD f
                                      
                                         =( - 1)( IE f n - IE0n ),
                                 ln wn

with the measure of import exposure, IE f n , such that

                         IE f n  -              s f m × (x 
                                                         ¯ nm -              ¯ nr
                                                                         drk x 
                                                                                  ),
                                     k K mNk                      r Nk


where s f m  rN x f r brm Dm /w f L f is the share of factor f 's domestic demand embodied in firm
                        b x  is the share of firm m's costs spent, both directly and indirectly,
                    ¯ nm
m's final sales and x        nm n
on firm n's imports of foreign factor services.
                                               affect the relative demand for domestic
    Changes in the price of a foreign factor wn
factors through expenditure switching by domestic consumers, which is captured by IE f n
and whose magnitude depends on the elasticity of substitution between firms . This

                                                   16
is a smoother version of the standard import competition mechanism emphasized by
Stolper and Samuelson's (1941) Theorem and the original factor content approach where
domestic and foreign firms are implicitly assumed to be perfect substitutes ( = ).
When the price of a foreign factor wn   increases, each firm m experiences a price increase

proportional to its share of total spending, both direct and indirect, on that foreign factor,
x   = b x  . In the empirically relevant case of  > 1, domestic consumers therefore
 ¯ nm    nm n
spend less on the domestic firms whose technologies are more intensive in that foreign
                                                                             -               
                                                                          ¯ nm
input than that of their industry competitors, i.e. the firms m for which x      rNk drk x ¯ nr
is high. This triggers a contraction in the demand for the domestic factors that tend to be
employed by the firms more exposed to the import price shock, i.e. the factors f for which
                             -                ) is high.
kK mNk s f m × ( x        ¯ nm  rNk drk x  ¯ nr
    In the absence of intermediate goods, IE f n takes a particularly simple form. In this
case, firms have strictly positive employment of domestic factors (s f m > 0) if, and only if,
they have zero expenditure on foreign inputs (x            = 0). Thus, import exposure reduces
                                                        ¯ nm
to IE f = kK s    ¯ f k dk , where s¯ f k  rNk s f r is the share of factor f 's domestic demand
employed in sector k and d        k is the share of expenditure on imports in that sector. That
is, factors exposed to import competition are those that tend to be employed in sectors
where spending shares on imports are higher.

Domestic Price Elasticities. Let us now turn to the matrix of domestic price elasticities
 ln RD / ln w, which determines by how much domestic factor prices must adjust in
response to a change in relative export exposure REE or foreign factor prices w to bring
back the domestic factor market to equilibrium. As shown in Appendix A.5, the domestic
price elasticities can be decomposed as follows.
Proposition 4. For any domestic factor f  F , the elasticity of relative demand with respect to
the price of a domestic factor w g is equal to

       ln RD f
               = - 1g ( f ) + ( - 1)( DEFf g - DEF0g ) + ( - 1)( DEC f g - DEC0g )
       ln w g

with the two measures of domestic exposures, DEFf g and DEC f g , such that

                       DEFf g                        D
                                           r f m × x gm ,
                                 k K mNk

                      DEC f g  -              s f m × (x
                                                       ¯ gm -              ¯ gr ),
                                                                       drk x
                                    k K mNk                     r Nk

                                     ¯ f is the share of factor f 's domestic demand employed by
where r f m  x f m ( vN bmv Dv )/w f L

                                               17
          D  x /
firm m, x gm  gm  f F x f m is the share of firm m's factor costs devoted to factor g, and
¯ gm  nN bnm x gn is the share spent, both directly and indirectly, on that factor.
x

    As one would expect, the elasticity of substitution between domestic factors  now
also plays a central role, as reflected in the first two terms - 1{ f = g} + ( - 1)( DEFf g -
DEF0g ). It controls the magnitude of expenditure switching across factors within each
firm. The third term in Proposition 4 has the same interpretation as in the case of the
foreign price elasticity of Proposition 3; it captures how changes in domestic factor prices
affect expenditure by consumers across domestic firms in a sector.
    It is important to note that although the micro-level demand for factors within each
firm is CES, the macro-level demand generically is not.14 Hence, our analysis allows for
departures from the Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives. For instance, if  > 1, then
an increase in the price of factor g leads to an equal amount of expenditure switching
towards all other factors within each firm. However, if factor f is employed in firms
that are on average more intensive in factor g, i.e. in firms m for which x gmD is relatively

high, such reallocations increase the aggregate relative demand for factor f . This is the
effect captured by DEFf g . It implies that trade may not only affect factor prices because
different factors have different export and import exposures, which we will focus on in
the next section, but also because they are more or less impacted by changes in the prices
of other domestic factors, an equilibrium feature that will be active in the empirical and
counterfactual exercises of Sections 6 and 7.


4      Export Exposure, Import Exposure, and Earnings
We now build on the theoretical results of Sections 2 and 3 to estimate the impact of
trade on inequality in Ecuador, a country whose unique administrative records provide
the requisite data. The goal of this first empirical section is to construct measures of
export and import exposure at different points of Ecuador's income distribution. Prior
to the estimation of its domestic factor demand system in Section 5, this will allow us to
evaluate whether poor or rich individuals experience larger shifts in the demand for their
factor services because of international trade and, in turn, whether they are more or less
likely to benefit from it.



    14 Theonly exception is the Cobb-Douglas case:  =  = 1. Note that this special case differs from the
environment studied in Deardorff and Staiger (1988) who assume that goods produced by domestic and
foreign firms are perfect substitutes within each sector--in our notation, this corresponds to  = .

                                                  18
4.1    Data
Our primary dataset covers the universe of Ecuador's formal economy from 2009 to 2015.
It includes all incorporated and non-incorporated firms that file a corporate tax or social
security form, or are named as a supplier in the returns of other firms. To those we match
all individuals that earn labor income from these firms, or own a share of these firms, or
both, over that same period. This gives us an average of 2.9 million individuals per year
who are engaged in 1.5 million firms.15 By its nature, this administrative data provides a
comprehensive picture of Ecuador's formal economy alone, but Section 7.2 introduces a
survey-based extension that covers informal activities as well. Here we describe the key
features of our data construction and report further details in Appendix B. While all mea-
sures described below are annual, we suppress time subscripts until they are necessary.


Corporate Income Tax Data. We use annual corporate income tax forms to measure the
revenues Rn , the total costs Cn , the exports En , and the imports Xn  of domestic firms

n  N . This allows us to compute import shares xn     = X  / R for all domestic firms.
                                                          n   n


Value Added Tax Data. We use tax records related to Ecuador's valued added tax (VAT)
system to measure spending Xrn by a domestic firm n on intermediate goods from any
other domestic domestic firm r. This allows us to compute the domestic firm-to-firm
input-output matrix M with elements xrn = Xrn / Rn , as well as the share of any firm r in
the total purchases of domestic inputs by firm n, rn = Xrn / mN Xmn . By subtracting
total sales of intermediate goods and exports from total revenues, we measure sales to
domestic consumers as Dn = Rn - mN Xnm - En .16 This allows us, in turn, to compute
domestic consumer expenditure shares across sectors, k = rNk Dr / rN Dr , as well
as across firms within sectors, dnk = Dn / rNk Dr , with each sector k  K corresponding
to one of 62 divisions that firms r  Nk report as their main activity based on the 2-digit
ISIC revision 3.1 classification.17




   15 While all such firms enter our analysis, the vast majority of these are non-incorporated and/or self-
employed individuals, as further detailed below. In the small number of cases for which firms are owned
by a holding company, we group them into a single firm.
   16 Whenever this leads to D < 0, we raise the revenues of firm n to R =
                              n                                           n   mN Xnm + En so that Dn = 0.
   17 We aggregate firms in two out of those 62 sectors, the public and financial sectors, into a single consol-

idated firm because of differences in tax treatment in those sectors. By construction, this consolidated firm
covers all state-owned firms. We also create a 63rd sector with a single consolidated residual firm whose
sales and costs are used to balance all accounting identities in the model, and a 64th unclassified sector
including all firms for which we do not have information on their main activity.

                                                      19
Social Security Data. We use social security records that link individuals to firms via
labor payments to measure spending X f n by a domestic firm n on different labor groups
f  FL,SS . We split workers into 73 labor groups. We begin with the three-level classi-
fication of education that is known for each worker--less than high school, high school
graduate, and college graduate--and then further augment that by the 24 provinces of
Ecuador in which each worker earns his or her primary income.18 This results in 72 labor
groups in the social security database. We then create an additional labor group that cov-
ers all employed individuals with missing information or those not appearing in social
security records, FL,NSS .
    From the corporate tax forms, we know the total wage payments Wn =  f FL X f n of
each firm n, with FL = FL,SS  FL,NSS . For each individual i in the social security dataset,
we also know the wage payments Win that he or she has received from each firm n, as
well as the labor group I f to which he or she belongs. For each firm n, we can there-
fore compute the share of labor payments associated with a particular factor f  FL,SS
as iI f Win / iI Win and, in turn, X f n = (iI f Win / iI Win )Wn . Payments to the
residual group of workers not in the social security system are XRn = Wn -  f FL,SS X f n .
    For each individual i, we let Yf i denote the labor payments associated with any factor
f  FL . This is either equal to zero, if i / I f , or to the sum of labor payments received by
individual i across all domestic firms, Yf i = nN (Win /  jI Wjn )Wn , if i  I f .


Firm Ownership Data. We refer to any factor of production not in FL as capital and let
FK denote the set of such factors. Further, we assume the existence of two types of capital:
"Oil" (Koil ), which is specific to the oil sector, and "Not oil" (Knot oil ), which is freely
mobile across all other sectors. We think of the former type of capital as oil resources,
an important source of exports for the Ecuadorian economy whose returns are unlikely
to be correlated with the returns to structure and equipment in other sectors. For any
firm n we measure its profits as the difference, Rn - Cn , between its revenues and costs
(payments to labor and intermediate inputs).19 If the firm hires no employees beyond the
firm's owner itself, we treat the firm's profits as labor income, X f n = Rn - Cn , accruing
to the labor group of the (essentially self-employed) owner. Otherwise, the firm's profits
accrue to Koil or Knot oil depending on the firm's sector.

   18 A province in Ecuador is roughly equivalent to a commuting zone in the United States. In terms of

area, Ecuador is about the size of Colorado. It comprises 24 provinces and 17 million individuals compared
to 17 commuting zones and 5.8 million individuals for Colorado.
   19 Whenever this leads to negative profits, we raise firm n's revenues to C in order to bring R - C to
                                                                              n                    n   n
zero. Those additional sales are then imputed to the residual consolidated firm. This procedure guarantees
the existence of the Leontief inverse matrices used below.

                                                   20
    By dividing factor spending by total revenue, we obtain the domestic matrix of factor
cost shares A with elements x f n = X f n / Rn for all domestic factors f  F = FL  FK . The
share of firm n's costs attributable to primary factors is then given by  n =  f F x f n .
    For each individual i, we then measure capital payments using a unique ownership
database that reports the personal tax IDs of each of a firm's owners, as well as their
corresponding ownership shares. Using those reported shares, we compute the share of
each individual i in the capital payments of firm n, ni . The capital payments of individual
i associated with the oil sector are YKoil i = nNoil ni X f n , whereas her capital payments
associated with the rest of the economy are YKnot oil i = n  / NOil ni X f n . The total income of
individual i is then given by Yi =  f F Yf i , with  f i = Yf i /Yi denoting the share of her
earnings associated with factor f .20


Customs Data. For estimation purposes in Section 5, we also use international trade
data from two sources: (i ) Ecuadorian firm-level customs transaction records, available
from 2009-2011; and (ii ) country-level trade from CEPII's BACI dataset, available from
2009-2015. Both datasets report trade flows at the HS6 digit level. Ecuador's main ex-
port item is crude oil, which accounts for 55% of total exports in 2009-2011. Besides oil,
Ecuadorian exports are biased towards other basic products, such as bananas (10%), fish-
ing products (9%), and flowers (4%). Ecuador's imports derive predominantly from man-
ufactured products, with the most important products being machinery and equipment
(21%), chemicals (13%), and vehicles (13%), as described in Figure B.3.


Summary Statistics. Appendix B.2.2 presents additional statistics regarding the distri-
bution of earnings among individuals in 2012, the midpoint of our sample, as well as how
their sources of earnings vary.21 Our sample reflects well the high level of income inequal-
ity in Ecuador. While annual income was $4,874 for the median individual, it was $25,881
and $187,165 for the individuals in the 90th and 99th percentiles of the income distribu-
tion.22 Also apparent is the importance of educational attainment and capital earnings
in accounting for total earnings inequality in Ecuador. The share of income of those with
less than a college degree declines substantially above the median of the income distribu-

   20 Since each individual is in only one labor group,   she has at most three positive values of  f i : that asso-
ciated with her labor group and those associated with the two types of capital. In 2012, 7.1% of individuals
had positive amounts of both labor and capital income, and this number rises to 42.6% among the top 5%
of the income distribution. In the oil sector, only 12% of total capital payments accrue to individuals in our
sample, with the rest of those payments received by public firms owned by the central government.
    21 For the purposes of calculating these statistics, we restrict attention to individuals with strictly positive

income for whom we have both location and education information.
    22 All nominal values are reported in US dollars (the official currency of Ecuador since 2000).



                                                        21
tion. Capital income is especially relevant among the highest earners: those in the top 1%
of the income distribution, on average, derive 85.3% of their income from capital.


4.2    Export Exposure Across the Distribution of Earnings
From Factor to Individual Export Exposure. For each domestic factor f  F , the for-
eign factor demand L              
                          f ( w, w ) measures the total services of factor f used, both directly
and indirectly, to produce exported goods. As described in Appendix A.1.3, the value
of foreign demand for domestic factors f  F is equal to {w f L           f } f F = ABE, where
A = { x f n }( f ,n)F ×N is the domestic matrix of factor cost shares, B = {bnr }(n,r)N ×N is
the Leontief inverse associated with the input-output matrix M = { xnr }(n,r)N ×N , and
E  { En }nN is the vector of exports. Factor f 's export exposure, defined as EE f =
L      W
  f / L f in Proposition 1, is therefore equal to


                             EE f = (        xfn         bnr Er )/(        X f n ).
                                        nN         r N                nN

In turn, we define the export exposure of an individual i  I as

                                        EEi =          f i × EE f ,                                (10)
                                                f F


where  f i = Yf i /Yi is the share of individual i's earnings associated with factor f .
    Our export exposure measure corresponds to the share of an individual's earnings that
derives, either directly or indirectly, from exports rather than domestic consumption. It
does not rely on any of the parametric assumptions introduced in Section 3--as discussed
in Section 2, it is simply the granular counterpart of Leontief's (1953) factor content of
exports. By construction, individuals with higher export exposure EEi tend to face higher
demand in the trade equilibrium relative to autarky. We therefore expect higher demand,
in turn, to lead to higher factor prices and earnings for these individuals under trade.


Results Figure 3 plots (in the solid blue line) the relationship between EEi and (total)
income in our sample in 2012.23 Export exposure in Ecuador is pro middle-class. The
average share of (direct plus indirect) exports in total earnings varies between 16% and
17% among individuals between the 10th and 50th percentiles of the income distribution.
As we move to income percentiles above the median of the income distribution, the share

  23 The corresponding figures for all other years in our sample can be found in Appendix C.2. Table C.1
also reports moments of the distribution of export exposure across individuals.

                                                    22
            Figure 3: Distribution of Export Exposure Across Individuals, 2012


                       0.17




                 EE i 0.15


                                    EE i based on total income
                       0.13         EE i based on labor income only


                              0th           25th             50th       75th         100th
                                           Percentile of total income
Notes: The blue dots report the average value of EEi , computed as in equation (10), across all individuals
in 2012 whose total income lies within each percentile of the total income distribution. The solid blue line
indicates a fitted 10th -order polynomial. The red dots (and dashed red line) are analogous but use a measure
of EEi that is computed while giving no weight to capital in individuals' income and among individuals
with positive labor income.


of exports in total income consistently falls. It is only 13.3% among those with the 10%
highest earnings in our sample.
    Figure 3 also shows (in the dashed red line) the distribution of export exposure of
labor income--that is, computed using only the export exposure of the labor type owned
by each individual, excluding capital income. The fact that the red line is consistently
above the blue line indicates that labor earnings are, on average, more exposed to exports
than are capital earnings. The difference is clearer at the top of the income distribution
because the richest individuals earn relatively larger shares from capital. However, the
small difference between the two curves indicates that the export exposure of capital is
just slightly lower than that of the labor factors of those in high-income percentiles.
    Qualitatively, the fact that the richest individuals in Ecuador are the least exposed to
exports resonates well with classical Heckscher-Ohlin predictions. Since Ecuador is scarce
in high-skilled workers relative to the rest of the world, one expects the factor services of
these workers, who are prevalent at the top of the income distribution, to be exported
less. It is worth emphasizing that this occurs even though we do not restrict exporting
firms to have the same skill-intensity as other firms in a given industry, unlike in standard
factor content computations.


                                                       23
4.3    Import Exposure Across the Distribution of Earnings
From Factor to Individual Import Exposure. To explore how import exposure varies
across the income distribution, we focus on the impact of a uniform change in foreign
                      = d ln w for all n  N . For such a shock, Proposition 3 implies that
factor prices: d ln wn

                                   d ln RD f
                                             =( - 1)( IE f - IE0 ),                                    (11)
                                    d ln w

where IE f  nN IE f n and { IE f n }nN is described in Proposition 3. To go from factor
exposure to individual exposure, we again take averages across factors, weighted by each
individual's factor income shares,

                                         IEi =          f i × IE f .                                   (12)
                                                 f F


In the empirically relevant case of  > 1, individuals with higher import exposure IEi
tend to experience a decrease in the domestic relative demand for their factors when mov-
ing from the trade equilibrium, with w < , to the autarky equilibrium, with w  .
We expect lower relative demand, in turn, to lead to lower relative factor prices and rela-
tive earnings for these individuals.


Results. Figure 4 reports the average import exposure for individuals in different per-
centiles of the income distribution.24 The downward-sloping solid blue line indicates that
low-income individuals are more exposed to import competition than are high-income in-
dividuals. Qualitatively, this contrasts with classical Heckscher-Ohlin predictions--where
high-skill, high-income individuals would be those facing more import competition--and
arises because much of Ecuador's imports are intermediate goods used by firms employ-
ing high-skill workers. Quantitatively, import exposure ranges from 0.045 at the bottom
to 0.03 at the top. For an elasticity of substitution  around 2, as we estimate in Section 5,
this implies that a 10% increase in the price of foreign factors would increase the relative
demand for low-income individuals by about 0.15%.
    Note that the red dashed curve is steeper than the blue solid curve. This reflects the
fact that capital is more exposed to import competition than the labor factors owned by
individuals at the top of the income distribution and less exposed than those owned by
individuals at the bottom. The proximity of the two curves, however, again indicates
small differences between the import exposures of workers and capital owners.
  24 Again,   Appendix C.2 reports the corresponding figures for all other years, along with summary statis-
tics of the import exposure distribution across individuals.

                                                    24
            Figure 4: Distribution of Import Exposure Across Individuals, 2012


                      0.0450




                 IE i 0.0375


                                      IE i based on total income
                      0.0300          IE i based on labor income only


                                0th           25th            50th      75th         100th
                                            Percentile of total income
Notes: The blue dots report the average value of IEi , computed as in equation (12), across all individuals
in 2012 whose total income lies within each percentile of the total income distribution. The solid blue line
indicates a fitted 10th -order polynomial. The red dots (and dashed red line) are analogous but use a measure
of IEi that is based on labor income alone, like in Figure 3.


    Overall, Figures 3 and 4 paint a nuanced picture of the exposure to international trade
across Ecuador's income distribution. Export exposure is broadly pro-poor, in the sense
that, on average, poorer individuals export a disproportionate fraction of their factor ser-
vices, as one might have expected in a country abundant in less-skilled workers. Import
exposure, on the other hand, is broadly anti-poor in the sense that cheaper imports tend to
reduce disproportionately the domestic demand for the factor services of poor individu-
als. To evaluate the overall incidence of these differences in export and import exposures,
we require an estimate of Ecuador's factor demand system, to which we now turn.


5     Estimating Micro-Level Elasticities
We now estimate Ecuador's factor demand system, which will allow us to quantify the
incidence of differences in export and import exposures across individuals. The model in
Section 3 describes an economy in which RD (w, w ) takes a nested CES form featuring
two micro-level elasticities of substitution: that between primary factors in domestic pro-
duction ( ) and that between firms' products in domestic consumption (). The analysis
in this section uses firm-level micro-data to obtain estimates of these two parameters.



                                                       25
5.1   Elasticity of Substitution Between Domestic Factors
Empirical Specification. Equation (5) implies a log-linear relationship between factor
expenditure, X f n,t , and factor price, w f ,t , within each firm n,

                                ln X f n,t = (1 -  ) ln w f ,t +  n,t + ln  f n,t ,

                                                   1- 
where  n,t  ln(  n  f n Rn /  f F  f n w f ) collects firm-year specific terms and  is the
elasticity of substitution across factors to be estimated. For the purposes of estimating
 , we let the demand shock  f n,t be a function of a factor-specific term,  f , a vector of
observables that we denote Controls f ,t and to which we return below, and a residual
productivity shock, f n,t ,

                                    ln  f n,t =  Controls f ,t +  f +      f n,t .


Combining the two previous equations, we obtain our empirical specification,

                     ln X f n,t = (1 -  ) ln w f ,t +  Controls f ,t +  n,t +  f +        f n,t ,   (13)

where firm-level factor expenditures X f n,t are given by the procedure from Section 4.1;
the wages w f ,t of each labor group f  F L are obtained by dividing total payments by the
total number of workers in that group, w f ,t = (nN X f n,t )/ L f ,t ; and the price of each
type of capital f  FK , is measured as the total factor payments w f ,t = nN X f n,t , since
we have no physical measure available for the supply of capital.25


IV Strategy. OLS estimates of  based on equation (13) suffer from the simultaneity bias
that typically arises when estimating a demand relationship. We therefore develop in-
strumental variables (IVs) based on the differential exposure of factors to foreign shocks.
    Our IVs take the commonly used "shift-share" form, based here on differential expo-
sure of factors and firms to foreign shocks at the product v level. In particular, we define
the following shift-share variables:

                                  ^ f ,t =
                                  E                EE f v × (Export Shock)vt ,                      (14)
                                             vHS
                                   ^f ,t =
                                   I               IE f v × (Import Shock)vt ,                      (15)
                                             vHS

where HS denotes the set of all 6-digit HS products.
  25 This   implies that capital supply shocks, if any, will also be part of the error term.

                                                         26
      In this notation, the "share" terms are EE f v and IE f v , respectively. These are the
product-level analogs of the factor trade exposures presented in Section 4. That is, EE f v
is the share of product v exports in factor f 's income in the initial period t0 , given by
EE f v = (nN x f n,t0 rN bnr,t0 Erv,t0 )/(nN X f n,t0 ), where Erv,t0 denotes exports of firm
                                                                                    
r in product v at time t0 . IE f v is defined analogously as IE f v = nN IE f n,t0 vn ,t0 , where
IE f n,t0 is the exposure of factor f to import price shocks in firm n at time t0 , and vn  
                                                                                             ,t0 is
the share of product v in firm n's imports at time t0 .
      Turning to the "shifters", we seek determinants of the relative export and import
growth of each variety v that are plausibly derived from global shocks. To this end, we
set (Export Shock)vt equal to the log of global total export value (from all origins and des-
tinations other than Ecuador) for each product v  HS at date t minus the average of
the same variable across all products at that date. Similarly we set (Import Shock)vt as
the global average of log unit values of imports (again, across all origins and destinations
excluding Ecuador) for each product v  HS at date t minus the average of the same
variable across all products at that date.26
      By demeaning both export and import shocks, we aim to isolate variation in shock
realization across products, as discussed in Adao et al. (2019) and Borusyak et al. (2021).
For the same reason, we include in the vector Controls f ,t each factor f 's overall exposure
to exports at date t0 , EE f = vHS EE f v , interacted with a time dummy as well as each
factor f 's overall exposure to imports at date t0 , IE f = vHS IE f v , interacted again with
a time dummy. This guarantees that our estimates are unaffected by domestic shocks that
might disproportionately affect factors that are more exposed to international trade.
      Given the controls in our specification, the exclusion restriction that underpins our IV
estimates of  is that productivity shocks in Ecuador--formally, the structural residuals
  f n,t of (13)--are uncorrelated with product-level export and import shocks, an assump-
tion that we believe is reasonable given the small size of Ecuador's economy. The logic of
our IV strategy also requires that (Export Shock)vt and (Import Shock)vt do affect the ex-
port values and import unit values of different products in Ecuador, a fact that we verify
in the zeroth-stage regressions presented in Appendix C.3.


Results. Table 1 reports our IV estimates of  . For our baseline estimate, reported in
column (1), we use a balanced panel of incorporated firms that employ at least one worker

   26 Many  others have used import and export shocks in the rest of the world as part of their shift-share
IV strategies. On the export side, our shock is similar to the measures used in Aghion et al. (2018) and
Huneeus (2018). On the import side, Hummels et al. (2014) have used growth in export supply to the rest of
the world for product-country pairs as the shifter in a firm-level shift-share IV for imported input costs. Our
focus on the unit values of imported inputs by firms is similar to Amiti et al. (2016) and Huneeus (2018).

                                                      27
                                         Table 1: Estimates of 

                              Baseline                         Alternative Specifications
                                (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)         (6)      (7)       (8)
 Estimate of                    2.09       2.15      2.13      2.02       2.06      2.11       2.10      3.29
                               (0.35)     (0.65)    (0.48)    (0.73)     (0.32)    (0.33)     (0.59)    (2.51)
    First-stage F statistic     10.1       5.1       19.4       3.0       10.4      8.7       18.3       5.2
    Factor-firm-year obs.     625,024    625,024    625,024   625,024   512,915   861,747    536,795   446,169
    Number of factors            75        75         75        75         75       75         75        75

 Alternative:                    -        Drop      Export    Import     Firms      Un-       Years     Years
                                 -        extra       IV        IV      w/ > 5    balanced    2010-     2011-
                                 -       controls    only      only     workers    panel      2015      2015
Notes: Sample of incorporated firms with positive payments for more than one factor and more than one
employee. Baseline specification uses a balanced panel from 2009-2015, uses both export and import IVs,
includes firm-year and factor fixed effects, and includes the extra controls consisting of year fixed effects
interacted with the factor's exposure at t0 to exports and imports. Observations weighted by initial factor-
firm payments (winsorized at the 95th percetile). Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by factor.


from 2009-2015; we weight observations by initial factor-firm payments; and we take t0 to
be 2009-2011, so that initial shares in our IVs and controls are averaged over that period.
This reduces the noise in the years right after the great trade collapse of 2008-2009.
    The estimated value of    ^ = 2.09 implies that factors of production are substitutes.27
This estimate is about twice as large as the Cobb-Douglas value of  = 1 assumed in
Deardorff and Staiger (1988). It is significantly higher than the U.S. plant-level elasticity
of substitution between capital and labor of 0.3­0.5 in Oberfield and Raval (2021), but it is
close to the range of existing estimates of the (aggregate) elasticity of substitution across
educational groups surveyed in Acemoglu and Autor (2011).28
    The remaining columns of Table 1 report estimates of  obtained with alternative spec-
ifications. In column (2), we see that our estimate is almost identical when we ignore the
additional controls capturing domestic shocks potentially correlated with the overall ex-
posure of firms and factors to international trade. Columns (3) and (4) report estimates
obtained when using IVs based only on export or import shocks. Although these point
estimates are similar across both types of shock IVs, the first-stage strength differs, with
export shocks being more important. In columns (5)­(6), we see that estimates are again
similar when we restrict our sample to firms with at least five workers or based on an

   27 Standard errors are clustered by factor. This reflects the variation in our IVs while accounting for

auto-correlation in residuals. Adao et al. (2019) point out that the correlation of residuals is a threat to the
performance of traditional inference procedures in shift-share specifications. Implementing their standard
error formulas is not feasible here because of the high number of fixed-effects and the impossibility of
separately computing product exposure shares, due to the high-dimension of the input-output matrix M.
   28 We come back to the relationship between the aggregate implication of our model for factor prices and

our estimates of micro-level elasticities in Section 6.2.

                                                      28
unbalanced panel of firms. Lastly, in columns (7)­(8), we report our estimates when we
restrict the sample period to years after 2011 that have not been used to compute the ini-
tial shares in the IVs. As we remove years, the first-stage tends to become weaker and
standard errors larger. This is unsurprising given the reduced sample size.


5.2    Elasticity of Substitution Between Goods
Empirical Specification. To estimate , we turn to the final demand equation (4), which
describes substitution between goods produced by different domestic firms n within each
sector k. This relates domestic expenditure, Dn,t , to the domestic price, pn,t , via

                              ln Dn,t = (1 -  ) ln pn,t +  k,t + ln nc,t ,

where  k,t  ln(k,t Yt / rNk rc p1     - ) now subsumes industry-year terms. In line with
                                    r
our estimation of the elasticity of substitution between factors, we let the good demand
shock ln nc,t be a function of a firm-specific term,  n , a vector of observables, Controlsn,t ,
to be described below, and a residual preference shock, nc,t . This leads to

                   ln Dn,t = (1 -  ) ln pn,t +  Controlsn,t +  k,t +  n +              nc,t .        (16)

    The only conceptual difference between the estimation of  and  is the measurement
of prices: we lack data on domestic prices pn,t . To address this issue, we use our model to
relate pn,t to the domestic and foreign factor prices that we do observe in our dataset. As
shown in Appendix A.6, equation (9) implies

                        ln pn,t =                       ~r
                                          brn,t  r,t ln w D              
                                                           ,t + xr,t ln wr,t + n,t .                 (17)
                                    r N


where brn,t is an element of the Leontief inverse Bt = ( I - Mt )-1 associated with Mt 
{ xrv,t }(r,v)N ×N ; w
                     ~rD is a revealed measure of the CES price index for domestic factors
                        ,t
                         D                               1                
                       ~r
in firm r such that ln w  ,t    f F x D                          D
                                      f r,t ln w f ,t +  -1 ln x f r,t ; wr,t is the price of foreign
                                                               =                                       
factor services facing firm r, which we measure as ln wr       ,t      vP vr     ,t0 ln pv,t , with vr,t0
the average share of product v in firm r's imports in an initial period t0 and with ln p           v,t the
unit value of Ecuador's imports of product v at year t; and n,t is a cost shifter determined
by firm n's technology parameters and those of its suppliers.29


  29 Our  Ecuadorian firm-level customs transaction records are only available from 2009-2011, hence our
              
choice to use vr                 
                 ,t0 rather than vr,t when computing the foreign factor prices faced by each firm.


                                                     29
   Substituting for domestic prices in (16) using (17), we finally obtain

 ln Dn,t = (1 - )                            ~r
                               brn,t  r,t ln w D              
                                                ,t + xr,t ln wr,t +  Controlsn,t +  k,t +  n +   n,t ,   (18)
                         r N

where   n,t      nc,t   + n,t is a combination of the firm-specific demand and cost shocks.

IV Strategy. For the same reason as in Section 5.1, OLS estimates of  suffer from simul-
taneity bias that can be addressed by developing IVs based on the differential exposure
of firms to foreign shocks. Equation (18) suggests two types of instruments: price-shifters
for the domestic factors used by different firms within each sector and analogous price-
shifters for their foreign factors.
     To construct domestic price-shifters, we propose to use firm-level averages of the two
factor-specific instruments described in (14) and (15). The firm-level counterparts of the
two previous export- and import-based instruments are

                                          ^ n,t =
                                          E               xD        ^
                                                           f n,t0 × E f ,t ,                             (19)
                                                    f F
                                           ^n,t =
                                           I              xD        ^
                                                           f n,t0 × I f ,t ,                             (20)
                                                    f F


where the weights correspond to the initial spending shares across domestic factors in
firm n in period t0 . To construct foreign price-shifters, we simply use the average of
product-level price shocks in the rest of the world weighted by firm n's initial import
shares,
                             ,t =  vn,t0 × (Import Shock)vt .
                                       
                          ^n
                          w                                                        (21)
                                          vHS

    Finally, we include in Controlsn,t the shares of firm n's costs at t0 spent on primary
                                 , interacted with time dummies. For our IVs to be valid,
factors and imports,  n,t0 and xn ,t
the three foreign shocks must therefore be uncorrelated with firms' preference and cost
shocks, nc,t and n,t , conditional on industry-time and firm fixed effects as well as differ-
ential initial exposures to changes in domestic and foreign factor prices.


Results. Table 2 reports the IV estimates of . Our baseline in column (1) uses the same
balanced panel of incorporated firms and the same initial period as in Table 1, but weights
observations by the initial final sales of each firm. Like in Section 5.1, the remainder of
Table 2 documents the stability of our estimates to altering these and other considerations.
   In column (1) our point estimate of   ^ = 1.96 contrasts sharply with the assumption of


                                                          30
                                         Table 2: Estimates of 

                              Baseline                         Alternative Specifications
                                (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)         (6)      (7)       (8)
 Estimate of                    1.96       1.98      1.76      1.91       1.84      2.86      1.48      1.51
                               (0.57)     (0.55)    (0.19)    (0.57)     (0.63)    (0.70)    (0.48)    (0.72)
    First-stage F statistic     13.1       14.2       1.1      19.4       8.6      15.1       10.4       4.2
    Firm-year obs.            180,992    180,992    180,992   180,992   120,050   279,183    155,136   129,280
    Number of firms            25,856    25,856     25,856    25,856     17,150   47,413     25,856    25,856

 Alternative:                    -        Drop      Export    Import     Firms      Un-      Years     Years
                                 -        extra       IV        IV      w/ > 5    balanced   2010-     2011-
                                 -       controls    only      only     workers    panel     2015      2015
Notes: Sample of incorporated firms with positive final sales and more than one employee. Baseline spec-
ification uses a balanced panel of observations from 2009-2015, uses both export and import IVs, includes
firm and sector-year fixed effects, and includes the extra controls comprising of year fixed effects interacted
with the firm's cost share spent on primary factors and imports. Observations are weighted by initial firm
final sales (weights winsorized at the 95 percetile). Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by firm.


 =  in the original factor content approach of Deardorff and Staiger (1988). This value
is also lower than the elasticity of substitution between U.S. firms in Hottman et al. (2016)
who report a median elasticity of substitution between U.S. firms, within AC Nielsen
product group categories, of 3.9. This is expected since such product groups are more
narrowly defined than the 2-digit industries used in our specification. Our estimate of 
is also lower than those indirectly inferred from average markups under the assumption
of monopolistic competition, as in Oberfield and Raval (2021) and Blaum et al. (2018).


6     Testing the Empirical Model of Domestic Factor Demand
In Section 2, we have shown that in order to estimate the impact of trade on factor prices,
knowledge of relative factor demand is sufficient. In Section 3, we have imposed spe-
cific parametric assumptions--on the primitives of tastes, technology, and product and
factor market structures--that allow us to construct the aggregate relative factor demand
RD (w, w ) by combining the rich micro data presented in Section 4 with the two elas-
ticities of substitution,  and , estimated in Section 5.30 Going from micro to macro in
this way, however, begs the question of whether the "true" relative factor demand system
in Ecuador looks anything like what our parametric model predicts. Before using our
estimates of RD (w, w ) to conduct counterfactual analysis in Section 7, we now test the
predictions of our model, both at the micro- and macro-levels.


    30 Appendix   A.7.1 shows that, as a formal matter, RD (w, w ) is identified once  and  are known.

                                                       31
6.1    Micro-Level Tests
Our micro-level tests focus on the Cobb-Douglas assumptions imposed on preferences
and technology. In Section 3, we have arbitrarily set three elasticities to one: the elas-
ticity of substitution between goods from different sectors in final demand (sector ), that
between domestic and foreign inputs in production (trade ), and that between domestic
inputs from different firms in production (input ),

                                      sector = trade = input = 1.

    One could consider instead a strictly more general nested CES model, where the pre-
vious elasticities are allowed to differ (in unique ways) from one and the associated ex-
penditure shares are hence endogenous. Directly estimating this richer nested CES model
is complicated by the fact that we do not directly observe domestic good prices, but rather
infer them through the input-output structure of our model, as described in equation (17).
Instead of a full structural estimation of these additional elasticities, we therefore propose
to test our Cobb-Douglas assumptions by focusing on the following three specifications,

                      nNk Dn,t
                   ln           =  sector ln( Pk,t / Pt ) + ln k,t ,                                       (22)
                       nN Dn,t
                          
                         xn ,t                         D
                    ln          =  trade ln(wn  ,t / Pn,t ) + ln((1 - n,t ) / n,t ),                       (23)
                       rN xrn,t
                        xmn,t                          D
                    ln          =  input ln( pm,t / Pn   ,t ) + ln mn,t ,                                  (24)
                       rN rn,t
                             x

where the prices and price indices appearing on the right-hand side are all computed
under the assumption that sector = trade = input = 1, as described in Appendix C.4.31
Under that null hypothesis, our model predicts that  sector =  trade =  input = 0.
    Like in Section 5, prices may be correlated with demand shocks, potentially biasing
OLS estimates. To solve this issue, we use again export and import shocks to construct
IVs for prices, as described in Appendix C.4. Table 3 reports our estimates of  sector ,
 trade , and  input . Despite fairly tight standard errors, we obtain a point estimate that is
not statistically different from zero at conventional levels in all three cases. Hence, within
our sample, we cannot reject the Cobb-Douglas assumptions imposed in Section 3.32
   31 The full structural estimation of 
                                           sectors , trade , and inputs would instead require the computation of
prices and price indices that are themselves consistent with the estimated values of these new elasticities.
   32 Unit-elasticities lie within the ranges of recent estimates obtained in other contexts. For example, using

U.S. data, Oberfield and Raval (2021) estimate sector to lie between 0.77 and 1.14 at the 2-digit level (more
aggregated than our sectors) and 1.19-2.12 at the 4-digit level (less so); whereas Bartelme et al. (2019) find
sector = 1.47 across 2-digit manufacturing sectors in a cross-country sample. Antras et al. (2017b) estimate

                                                      32
                                      Table 3: Micro-Level Tests

                                      Sensitivity of expenditure shares to relative prices across:
                                          sectors in        imported and         domestic input
                                        final demand       domestic inputs          suppliers
                                              (1)                 (2)                  (3)
                                                -0.19                  -0.25                     0.06
                                               (0.32)                 (0.34)                    (0.26)
 P-value ( H0 :  = 0)                          [0.56]                 [0.47]                    [0.81]
 First-stage F statistic                        14.0                    71.3                      7.4
 Observations                                   448                   19,575                  1,476,055
 Clusters                                        64                    2,840                    33,392
Notes: Samples consist of: balanced panel with positive expenditure over 2009-2015; for columns (2) and (3),
incorporated firms with more than one employee; and, for (3), transactions worth at least 1% of the buyer's
purchases. Additional controls include year fixed effects as well as, in columns: (1) sector fixed effects;
(2) firm fixed effects and year dummies interacted with the firm's cost share spent on primary factors and
imports; (3) buyer-year and supplier fixed effects, and year dummies interacted with the supplier's cost
share spent on primary factors and imports. Observations weighted (with weights winsorized at the 95
percetile) by initial sector final sales in column (1), initial firm final sales in (2), and initial buyer-seller
transactions in (3). Standard errors clustered by sector in column (1), firm in (2), and seller in (3).


6.2    Macro-Level Tests
Our macro-level tests focus on potentially deeper departures from the assumptions im-
posed in Sections 2 and 3, such as imperfect competition in factor markets, imperfect com-
petition in good markets, and imperfect factor mobility across firms or sectors. Though
such imperfections may exist in Ecuador, the relevant question for the purposes of our
analysis is whether they affect the ability of our empirical model to replicate the response
of factor prices to foreign shocks observed in the data (since it is precisely from that re-
sponse that we will build counterfactual distributions of earnings in the next section).
    To address this question, we follow the same approach as in Proposition 2. Starting
from any equilibrium at date  - 1 and differentiating the factor market clearing condition
in equation (2) implies that, up to a first-order approximation, changes in factor prices
between date  - 1 and any subsequent date  can be expressed as

                                          -1
                               ln RD                                ln RD                 
            ln w = -                              ln REE +                            ln w +       ,
                               ln w        -1                       ln w        -1

trade = 1.79 for U.S. firms' cross-country sourcing behavior, Blaum et al. (2018) estimate this parameter
to range from 1.71-2.38 for French importers, and Boehm et al. (2019) find an average estimate of 0.55 for
U.S.-based firms' sourcing from Japan in the aftermath of a natural disaster. Finally, Atalay (2017) estimates
input to be effectively zero in the case of cross-industry substitution of inputs in US manufacturing, whereas
Huneeus (2018) estimates input = 3.40 for cross-domestic firm sourcing substitution in Chile.

                                                        33
where  refers to changes between two consecutive periods, e.g.  ln w = ln w -
ln w -1 , and the vector of structural demand shocks,  , comprises both relative supply
and relative domestic demand shocks.33 Summing across all years between t0 and t, we
then obtain the domestic factor prices, ln wmodel
                                            f ,t , predicted by our model in response to a
sequence of foreign shocks, { ln REE ,  ln w     }t
                                                    =t0 , between t and t0 ,

                        t                         -1
                                    ln RD                                 ln RD
   ln wmodel
       f ,t                   -
                                    ln w
                                                         ln REE +
                                                                          ln w
                                                                                                 ln w
                                                                                                      + ln w f ,t0 , (25)
                       = t0                        -1                                      -1


where ( ln RD / ln w) -1 and ( ln RD / ln w ) -1 are constructed using our preferred
estimates of the micro-level elasticities, ^ = 2.09 and ^ = 1.96, from Section 5.
    To test our factor demand model, we can therefore estimate the testing specification

                                                 ln w f ,t =  fit ln wmodel
                                                                      f ,t  +   f ,t ,                               (26)

where the fit coefficient  fit should be equal to one under the null that our model is cor-
rectly specified.34 Since the changes in relative export exposures  ln REEt and foreign
factor prices  ln wt  that enter ln wmodel may be correlated with domestic demand shocks
                                      f ,t
                                                     model
  f ,t in Ecuador, we build the following IV for ln w f ,t ,


                                     t                       -1
                                                   ln RD                                  ln RD
               ^ model
            ln w f ,t                        -
                                                   ln w
                                                                    ln REEt +
                                                                                          ln w
                                                                                                          ln w
                                                                                                             ^t
                                                                                                                ,    (27)
                                   = t0 +1                   t0                                     t0


where REEt  {[1 - ( E           ^ 0,t /Y0,t )]/[1 - ( E
                                                      ^ f ,t /Yf ,t )]} f F is the shifter of relative export
                                           0                       0
exposure, with E     ^ f ,t given by equation (14), and w            {w
                                                                  ^t        }
                                                                          ^n ,t nNt0 is the shifter of foreign
factor price given by equation (21).
    It may seem surprising that testing of this model is possible, given the inclusion of
sufficient taste and technology heterogeneity to match all data points at the micro (and
hence macro) level. The idea behind our test is that while one can always recover domes-
tic residuals ^ f ,t such that equation (26) holds for  fit = 1, such recovered residuals do not

   33 Specifically,     we have t   ln( L                 ¯ 0 ) - ( ln RD / ln w)-1 ( ln RD / ln 
                                                 ¯ f ,t / L                                       ¯ )  ln ¯ t , with ¯t 
                                                                                 t0                  t0
{nc,t ,  f n,t , rn,t , n,t , n ,  n , n } the full vector of preference and technological shifters.
   34 There is a long tradition of such "slope" tests in the field of international trade. For example, Davis

and Weinstein (2001) use such a specification to test the predictions of the Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek model,
Costinot and Donaldson (2012) do so to test the predictions of the Ricardian model, Kovak (2013) does so
to test a regional specific-factors model, and Adao et al. (2020) do so to test the ability of different spatial
models to replicate observed responses of regional outcomes to trade shocks. A distinctive feature of our
macro-level tests is that the foreign shocks,  ln REE and  ln w                  , are themselves endogenous objects that
may be correlated with the structural error term,  .

                                                                  34
have to be orthogonal to our IV, ln w ^ model  35
                                        f ,t . The flip-side of this observation is that when
imposing the orthogonality between ln w      ^ model
                                               f ,t     and f ,t , the estimated  fit does not have to
equal one. So our test has power against the null.
    Table 4 reports our estimates of the fit coefficient  fit . Remarkably, as seen in column
(1), despite the strong parametric restrictions imposed in Section 3, we obtain              ^ fit = 1.08.
This implies that we fail to reject the null of  fit = 1 at standard levels ( p = 0.61), a
finding that continues to hold (though with a larger coefficient and standard error) when
we control for initial levels of each factor's export and import exposure interacted with
time dummies in column (2). Reassuringly, adding additional fixed effects (in columns
3-5) that probe the model's fit for different subsets of factors (across education groups,
geographical groups, and capital relative to labor) causes            ^ fit to range from 0.86 to 1.25.
    One remaining question is the extent to which this failure to reject the parametric
model simply reflects a test that lacks power. That is, although we cannot reject the macro-
level predictions of our nested CES model using our preferred estimates of micro-level
elasticities, ^ = 2.09 and ^ = 1.96, the same tests conducted using any arbitrary values
of  and  might also be successful. Figures C.3 in Appendix C.5 show that this is not
so. This analysis conducts the same macro tests as in Table 4 but at alternative values of
 and . These results clearly indicate that          ^ fit departs from one as we move away from
our baseline estimates of  and . At the 5% significance level, in specifications based on
column (1), we typically reject specifications with  > 8 or  > 6. Recall that, in contrast,
the original factor content approach assumes   .


7     The Overall Incidence of Trade on Earnings Inequality
We have established that the magnitude of the factor price responses to foreign shocks
predicted by our model are consistent with those observed in the data. This strengthens
the credibility of our parametric assumptions and their quantitative implications, at least
within the range of observed export and import shocks. With this in mind, we now turn
to a full quantification of the distributional consequences of international trade. We solve
for the changes between the observed distribution of earnings in Ecuador and the coun-
terfactual distribution that would be observed if Ecuador were under autarky, as a result
of both the export and import channels described in Proposition 2.


    35 Even though we have relied on the same exogenous source of variation to estimate our two micro-level

elasticities, ln wmodel
                  f ,t  is a non-linear function of ^ and ^ that uses the full structure of the domestic factor
system, RD, not just the linear component used in Section 5 to estimate  and  within each CES nest.

                                                      35
                                    Table 4: Macro-Level Tests

                                                           Log (observed factor price)
                                                 (1)        (2)      (3)        (4)               (5)
  Log (predicted factor price)                  1.08        1.60         1.25        1.02         0.86
                                               (0.15)      (0.62)       (0.63)      (0.16)       (0.20)
 P-value of H0 :  fit = 1                      [0.61]      [0.33]       [0.69]      [0.92]       [0.47]
 First-stage F statistic                      1840.4        195.4       180.6       290.1        122.7
 Factor-year observations                      525           525         525         525          518
 Number of factors                              75            75         75          75           74
 Includes year indicators times:
    EE f ,t0 and IE f ,t0
    Capital factors indicator
    Province indicators
    Education level indicators
Notes: Sample of 75 factors in 2009-2015. All specifications estimated with year and factor fixed effects.
Observations weighted by initial factor payments (winsorized at the 95th percentile). Standard errors in
parentheses clustered by factor.


7.1      Baseline Results
For our baseline results, we focus on the Ecuadorian economy at date t = 2012, the mid-
point of our sample. In order to quantify the overall impact of trade on inequality at that
date, we apply Proposition 2 and compute ( ln wt )trade = {ln w f ,t - ln(w f ,t ) A } f F , as
well as the export and import channels, ( ln wt )exports and ( ln wt )imports . This amounts
to integrating over a sequence of small shocks to REE and w , just as in the macro
test of Section 6.2, but now such that the shocks go from the initial equilibrium (w =
wt , REE = REE ) to the autarky counterfactual equilibrium ( w = , REE = 1) rather
                     t
than to the values observed at a later year.36 Given changes in factor prices, the propor-
tional changes in earnings of individual i between trade and autarky, (Yi,t )trade /Yi,t =
[Yi,t - (Yi,t ) A ]/Yi,t , as well as the changes in earnings associated with the export and im-
port channels, (Yi,t )exports /Yi,t and (Yi,t )imports /Yi,t , can be computed using the share of
different factors f in individual i's earnings in the initial equilibrium,  f i,t  Yf i,t /Yi,t .37
     Figure 5 plots these counterfactual earnings changes for every percentile of income
earner in our sample, always normalizing changes in the median income to zero. We
  36 A common issue in quantitative trade modeling concerns how to introduce trade imbalances in the
context of a static economy. Following standard practices discussed in Costinot and Rodríguez-Clare (2014),
we implicitly treat imbalances as lump-sum transfers between Ecuador and the rest of the world. Since
preferences are homothetic and technology has constant returns in our empirical model, the magnitude
of such transfers affects neither our estimates of Ecuador's relative factor demand nor our counterfactual

                                                    36
                           Figure 5: Trade and Earnings Inequality, Baseline Sample
        Export channel (Y i,t )exports /Y i,t           Import channel (Y i,t )imports /Y i,t           Trade impact (Y i,t )trade /Y i,t
15%         Change in total income                                                                                                              15%
            Change in labor income only
10%                                                                                                                                             10%


 5%                                                                                                                                             5%


 0%                                                                                                                                             0%


-5%                                                                                                                                             -5%
      0th        25th       50th          75th   100th 0th     25th      50th       75th    100th 0th        25th     50th       75th       100th
                 Percentile of total income                    Percentile of total income                   Percentile of total income

Notes: Blue dots correspond to the total (including both labor and capital) income change for each individ-
ual, averaged within each percentile and normalized to zero at the median percentile, between 2012 and the
counterfactual autarkic equilibrium. Positive numbers therefore reflect larger gains from trade than at the
median. Red dots do the same but for labor income only. In both cases the line indicates a fitted 10th -order
polynomial. Trade impact is the sum of the export and import channels.


begin with the total (i.e. labor plus capital) gains from trade that individuals experience
(the solid blue line). There is a clear tendency here for the export channel (left panel) to
decrease inequality, especially in the upper-half of the income distribution, since export-
channel gains from trade are smaller for the rich than they are for the middle-class. By
contrast, the import channel (middle panel) is broadly increasing throughout the income
distribution, leading to higher inequality. The incidence of both channels on earnings in-
equality are very much in line with the pro-poor and anti-poor biases, respectively, of the
export and import exposure measures displayed in Figures 3 and 4.38 The existence of
these opposing forces means that, in the case of Ecuador, an empirical analysis that might
focus on only one of these two channels would miss an important part of the distribu-
tional consequences of international trade.
    The right-hand panel of Figure 5 combines the offsetting export and import channels.
Evidently, it is the individuals in the top of Ecuador's income distribution who gain dis-

factor prices. The same is true for remittances from Ecuadorian migrants abroad.
   37 Appendix A.7.2 contains further details about the algorithm for calculating counterfactual factor price

changes and Appendix A.7.3 does the same for changes in individual earnings.
   38 To explore systematically the connection between the exposure measures presented in Section 4 and

the full impact of trade computed in this section, one can estimate the following linear regression

                                                 (Yi,t )trade
                                                              =  +  E EEi,t +  I IEi,t + i ,                                                   (28)
                                                   Yi,t

where EEi,t and IEi,t are given by the expressions in (10) and (12). The results are reported in Table C.3
of Appendix C.6. We find that our exposure measures explain most of the variation in the full changes in
earnings predicted by the full model, with a total R2 of around 0.9.

                                                                         37
proportionately more from trade since the import channel is larger in magnitude. Despite
these offsetting effects, the magnitude of the net impact can be substantial. In the top
half of the income distribution, our estimates imply income gains from trade that are 7%
larger for individuals at the 90th percentile, compared to those at the median percentile,
and 12% larger for those at the top percentile
    Figure 5 also shows the distinction between total (in solid blue) and labor-only (in
dashed red) earnings, which highlights the role played by inequalities in capital owner-
ship. A substantial contribution to differences in gains from trade derives from the strong
import channel that benefits the capitalists who are among Ecuador's richest individuals.
By contrast, the return to highest-income labor is not particularly helped by trade.


7.2    Sensitivity of Baseline Results to Inclusion of Informal Sector
Our analysis so far has considered the impact of trade on inequality within Ecuador's
formal sector--the firms and employees who appear in administrative tax, social security
and ownership records. The impact of trade on inequality in Ecuador as a whole may
be different, however, to the extent that the distribution and composition of earnings in
the formal sector does not represent well that of the overall economy which also includes
individuals in the informal sector.
    In order to examine this possibility, we augment our original administrative dataset
with a large survey (from 2011-12) that was designed to measure respondents' earnings
from all of their activities, both formal and informal. Appendix B.4 describes the survey
data in detail. It allows us to infer the share of earnings associated with the informal sector
for individuals at different percentiles of the earnings distribution, as well as the industry
and factor group associated with the source of the informal income of each individual.
Compared to formal workers, we do not observe the specific firms making these infor-
mal payments. To fill this gap, we introduce, for each sector k, a representative informal
firm that combines domestic factors in the same CES fashion as formal firms in the model
of Section 3, does not purchase either domestic or foreign inputs, and sells only to final
consumers.39 We then solve for counterfactual factor price changes under the assump-
tion that formal and informal workers are perfect substitutes within each factor group,
consistent with the treatment of informality in Meghir et al. (2015) and Ulyssea (2018).
This assumption implies that, while we allow for arbitrary differences in the earnings of

   39 Formally,   we assume that the production function of each sector's representative informal firm n is
                            1/ ( -1)/
given by qn = n ( f F  f n l f n      ) /( -1) , with  set to 2.09, the baseline value for formal firms, and the
shifters n and  f n identified in the exact same way as we did for formal firms in Appendix A.7.1.

                                                      38
  Figure 6: Trade and Earnings Inequality, Augmented Sample with Informal Sector
        Export channel (Y i,t )exports /Y i,t            Import channel (Y i,t )imports /Y i,t           Trade impact (Y i,t )trade /Y i,t
30%          Baseline sample                                                                                                                  30%
             Alternative sample with
             formal and informal factors
15%                                                                                                                                           15%



 0%                                                                                                                                           0%



-15%                                                                                                                                          -15%

       0th        25th       50th          75th   100th 0th     25th      50th       75th    100th 0th        25th     50th       75th    100th
                 Percentile of total income                     Percentile of total income                   Percentile of total income

Notes: This figure reports the total income change for each individual, averaged within each percentile and
normalized to zero at the median percentile, between 2012 and the counterfactual autarkic equilibrium.
Positive numbers therefore reflect larger gains from trade than at the median. Blue dots correspond to
income changes in our baseline sample based on the administrative dataset covering Ecuador's formal
economy. Black dots report to the same variable when we account for the income of individuals that belong
to Ecuador's informal economy. In both cases the line indicates a fitted 10th -order polynomial.


individuals employed in the formal and informal sectors, we impose that the impact of
international trade shocks on the price of factor services is the same irrespective of the
extent to which the factor is employed in the formal or informal sector.
    The informal economy in Ecuador is large, with substantial differences in formaliza-
tion rates across factors, as reported in Figures B.4 and B.5 of Appendix B.4. Figure 6,
however, shows that the inclusion of informally-engaged individuals in our analysis (the
black dashed line relative to the blue solid one) has little effect on our main qualitative
conclusions: the export channel still benefits low-income individuals relative to high-
income individuals, while the import channel does the opposite, and the overall impact
of trade is pro-rich. The main impact of introducing an informal sector is quantitative.
The export channel remains small, but the import channel is now significantly larger. As
a result, the overall effect of trade on the 90th percentile relative to that on the 10th per-
centile is 18% rather than 8% in our baseline. The largest distinction is seen among top
incomes, whose capital appears to benefit relatively more from the import channel once
we introduce non-importing (but labor-intensive) informal firms. At the top percentile,
individuals now experience gains from trade that are 27% larger than at the median.


7.3          Trends in Earnings Inequality and Trade
Up to now, we have focused on the difference between trade and autarky at a given
point in time. We have concluded that international trade was a force towards greater


                                                                          39
                       Table 5: Changes in Earnings Inequality, 2009-2015

                                                    Actual change                 Counterfactual change
                                                  in open economy                  in closed economy
  ln (50-10 income ratio)                                -0.134                              -0.074
  ln (90-50 income ratio)                                -0.185                              -0.098
  ln (99-90 income ratio)                                -0.046                              -0.097
Notes: All calculations are based on augmented sample with informal earnings included. "50-10 income
ratio" (etc.) calculated from the ratio of the income of the 50th-percentile earner to that of the 10th-percentile
earner, separately in each year and model scenario.


inequality, in the sense that the counterfactual distribution of earnings under autarky
would be more equal than the actual distribution observed under trade. A distinct, but
related, question is whether the trends in earnings inequality observed in Ecuador over
time would have been different if the Ecuadorian economy had been subject to the same
domestic shocks, but closed to international trade.
    To address this question, it is sufficient to note that log-changes in factor prices be-
tween some initial period t0 and any given date t in the counterfactual autarkic equilib-
rium, ln(w f ,t ) A - ln(w f ,t0 ) A , can be expressed as

        ln(w f ,t ) A - ln(w f ,t0 ) A = [ln w f ,t - ln w f ,t0 ] - [( ln wt )trade - ( ln wt0 )trade ].

We observe the first difference on the right-hand side directly in the data, whereas we can
compute the second difference for each year (as we did for 2012 in Sections 7.1 and 7.2).
Once counterfactual changes in factor prices ln(w f ,t ) A - ln(w f ,t0 ) A have been obtained,
changes in individual earnings can again be computed using information about the share
of each factor f owned by a given individual. We do this using the augmented sample
with both formal and informal workers described in Appendix B.4.2.
    Table 5 reports the changes in different ratios of percentiles of the distribution of earn-
ings between 2009 and 2015, both under trade, i.e. as observed in our dataset over that
time period, as well as in the counterfactual autarkic economy corresponding to each year.
Except at the very top, we see that the decrease in inequality experienced by Ecuador
would have been smaller in the absence of trade. This reflects the fact that although trade
tends to increase inequality at all dates, it does so less and less in later years of our sample.
Equivalently, this means that over the period Ecuador's economy was generating larger
increases in gains from trade at the lower end of the income distribution.




                                                       40
8    Concluding remarks
What is the overall impact of international trade on earnings inequality? Without the abil-
ity to observe a given economy both with and without access to global markets, answers
to this question inherently draw on a combination of theory and empirics.
    Inspired by the original factor content approach to trade and inequality, we have pro-
posed to tackle this classical question as one of factor supply and factor demand. For
any country, international trade amounts to a shock to the demand for its domestic factor
services, either because foreign consumers and firms demand domestic factor services in
different proportions than domestic consumers and firms do, an export channel, or be-
cause domestic consumers and firms change their demand for domestic factor services in
response to the availability of foreign factor services, an import channel.
    We have operationalized this decomposition through a novel structural relationship
that relates domestic factor prices to two sufficient statistics of foreign shocks. It implies
that individual-level exposure to exports and imports depends on the extent to which
variation in these two statistics shifts the demand for their factor services. In the case of
Ecuador, our measurements based on unique administrative data illustrate how export
exposure is broadly pro-middle class, whereas import exposure is pro-rich.
    We have then used this structural relationship to strengthen the credibility of our em-
pirical model. Despite the parametric restrictions that we have imposed and the many
real-word features of labor markets that we have abstracted from, we have shown that,
within sample, our parsimonious model replicates well the observed response of domes-
tic factor prices to our two sufficient statistics of foreign shocks.
    Finally, we have used this structural relationship to conduct counterfactual analysis by
taking the previous sufficient statistics to their autarkic limit values. In terms of incidence,
the import channel is the dominant force linking trade to inequality in Ecuador, with gains
from trade for individuals at the 90th percentile of the income distribution that are about
11% larger than the median--and up to 27% larger than the median for those at the top
income percentile. However, our results also imply that the drop in inequality observed
in Ecuador over the last decade would have been less pronounced in the absence of trade.
    Needless to say, some of these conclusions may not carry over to other contexts. The
fact that export exposure is more pronounced in the bottom half of Ecuador's income
distribution, for instance, is more likely to hold in developing countries that, like Ecuador,
specialize in low-skill-intensive goods, than in developed countries that do not. We hope,
however, that the new factor content approach developed in this paper can prove useful
in evaluating the overall impact of trade on inequality in other contexts as well.


                                              41
References
Acemoglu, Daron and David Autor, Skills, Tasks, and Technologies: Implications for Employment and
  Earnings, Vol. 4 of Handbook of Labor Economics, Elsevier, 2011.

Adao, Rodrigo, Arnaud Costinot, and Dave Donaldson, "Nonparametric Counterfactual Predic-
  tions in Neoclassical Models of International Trade," American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (3),
  633­689.

  , Costas Arkolakis, and Federico Esposito, "General equilibrium effects in space: Theory and
  measurement," 2020. Working paper.

  , Michal Kolesar, and Eduardo Morales, "Shift-Share Designs: Theory and Inference," The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2019, 134 (4), 1949­2010.

Aghion, Philippe, Antonin Bergeaud, Matthieu Lequien, and Marc J Melitz, "The heteroge-
  neous impact of market size on innovation: evidence from French firm-level exports," Technical
  Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2018.

Amiti, Mary, Oleg Itskhoki, and Jozef Konings, "International shocks and domestic prices: how
  large are strategic complementarities?," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Re-
  search 2016.

Antras, Pol, Alonso de Gotari, and Oleg Itskhoki, "Globalization, Inequality and Welfare," Jour-
  nal of International Economics, 2017, 108, 387­412.

  , Teresa C. Fort, and Felix Tintelnot, "The Margins of Global Sourcing: Theory and Evidence
  from U.S. Firms," American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (9), 2514­64.

Artuc, E., S. Chaudhuri, and John McLaren, "Trade Shocks and Labor Adjustment: A Structural
  Empirical Approach," American Economic Review, 2010, 100 (3), 1008­1045.

Atalay, Enghin, "How Important Are Sectoral Shocks?," American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
  nomics, 2017, 9 (4), 254­280.

Atkin, David, Benjamin Faber, and Marco Gonzalez-Navarro, "Retail Globalization and House-
  hold Welfare: Evidence from Mexico," Journal of Political Economy, 2018, 126 (1), 1­73.

Attanasio, Orazio, Pinelopi Goldberg, and Nina Pavcnik, "Trade Reforms and Wage Inequality
  in Colombia," Journal of Development Economics, 2004, 74 (2), 331­366.

Autor, David, David Dorn, and Gordon Hanson, "The China syndrome: Local labor market
  effects of import competition in the United States," American Economic Review, 2013, 103, 2121­
  2168.

                                                 42
  ,   ,   , and Jae Song, "Trade Adjustment: Worker-Level Evidence," Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 2014, 129 (4), 1799­1860.

Bartelme, Dominick, Arnaud Costinot, Dave Donaldson, and Andres Rodríguez-Clare, "The
  Textbook Case for Industrial Policy: Theory Meets Data," 2019. NBER Working Paper 26193.

Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen, "Exceptional Exporter Performance: Cause, Effect,
  or Both," Journal of International Economics, 1999, 47, 1­25.

  , Emmanuel Dhyne, Glenn Magerman, Kalina Manova, and Andreas Moxnes, "The Origins
  of Firm Heterogeneity: A Production Network Approach," 2019. NBER Working Paper 25441.

  , Stephen J. Redding, and Peter Schott, "Comparative Advantage and Heterogeneous Firms,"
  Review of Economic Studies, 2007, 74 (1), 31­66.

Bernard, Andrew, Bradford Jensen, Steve Redding, and Peter J. Schott, "FIrms in International
  Trade," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2007, 21 (3), 105­130.

Blaum, Joaquin, Claire Lelarge, and Michael Peters, "The Gains from Input Trade with Hetero-
  geneous Importers," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2018, 10 (4), 77­127.

Boehm, Christoph E., Aaron Flaaen, and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar, "Input Linkages and the Trans-
  mission of Shocks: Firm-Level Evidence from the 2011 Tohoku Earthquake," Review of Economics
  and Statistics, 2019, 101 (1), 60­75.

Borjas, George J., Richard B. Freeman, and Lawrence F. Katz, On the labor market effects of immi-
  gration and trade, Vol. Immigration and the work force, University of Chicago Press and NBER,
  1992.

  ,   , and    , "How much do immigration and trade affect labor market outcomes?," Brookings
  Papers on Economic Activity, 1997, 1, 1­90.

Borusyak, Kirill and Xavier Jaravel, "The Distributional Effects of Trade: Theory and Evidence
  from the United States," mimeo UCL, 2018.

  , Peter Hull, and Xavier Jaravel, "Quasi-experimental shift-share research designs," Review of
  Economic Studies, 2021. Forthcoming.

Bowen, Harry P., Edward E. Leamer, and Leo Sveikauskas, "Multicountry, Multifactor Tests of
  the Factor Abundance Theory," American Economic Review, 1987, 77 (5), 791­809.

Burstein, Ariel and Jonathan Vogel, "International Trade, Technology, and the Skill Premium,"
  Journal of Political Economy, 2017, 125 (5), 1356­1412.



                                                  43
  , Javier Cravino, and Jonathan Vogel, "Importing Skill-Biased Technology," American Economic
  Journal: Macroeconomics, 2013, 5 (2), 32­71.

Costinot, Arnaud and Andres Rodríguez-Clare, "Trade Theory with Numbers: Quantifying the
  Consequences of Globalization," in Gita Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman, and Kenneth Rogoff,
  eds., Handbook of International Economics, Vol. 4, New York: Elsevier, 2014.

   and Dave Donaldson, "Ricardo's Theory of Comparative Advantage: Old Idea, New Evi-
  dence," American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 2012, 102 (3), 453­458.

   and Ivan Werning, "Lerner Symmetry: A Modern Treatment," American Economic Review: In-
  sights, 2019, 1 (1), 13­26.

  and Jonathan Vogel, "Matching and Inequality in the World Economy," Journal of Political Econ-
  omy, 2010, 118 (4), 747­786.

Davis, Donald R. and David Weinstein, "An Account of Global Factor Trade," American Economic
  Review, 2001, 91 (5), 1423­1453.

Deardorff, Alan, "Factor Prices and the Factor Content of Trade Revisited: What's the Use?,"
  Journal of International Economics, 2000, 50 (1), 73­90.

  and Robert Staiger, "An Interpretation of the Factor Content of Trade," Journal of International
  Economics, 1988, 24 (1), 93­107.

Demir, Banu, Ana Cecilia Fieler, Daniel Yi Xu, and Kelly Kaili Yang, "O-Ring Production Net-
  works," 2020. Mimeo Bilkent University.

Dhyne, Emmanuel, Ayumu Ken Kikkawa, Magne Mogstad, and Felix Tintelnot, "Trade and
  Domestic Production Networks," Review of Economic Studies, 2021. Forthcoming.

Dix-Carneiro, Rafael and Brian K Kovak, "Trade Liberalization and Regional Dynamics," Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 2017, 107 (10), 2908­46.

Faber, Benjamin and Thibault Fally, "Firm Heterogeneity in Consumption Baskets: Evidence
  from Home and Store Scanner Data," Review of Economic Studies, 2021. Forthcoming.

Fajgelbaum, Pablo and Amit Khandelwal, "Measuring the Unequal Gains from Trade," Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2016, 131, 1113­1180.

  , Gene M. Grossman, and Elhanan Helpman, "Income Distribution, Product Quality, and In-
  ternational Trade," Journal of Political Economy, 2011, 119 (4), 721 ­ 765.

Feenstra, Robert C., Offshoring in the global economy: microeconomic structure and macroeconomic
  implications, MIT Press, 2010.

                                                   44
Fieler, Ana Cecilia, Marcela Eslava, and Daniel Yi Xu, "Trade, Quality Upgrading, and Input
  Linkages: Theory and Evidence from Colombia," American Economic Review, 2018, 108 (1), 109­
  146.

Galle, Simon, Andres Rodríguez-Clare, and Moises Yi, "Slicing the Pie: Quantifying the Aggre-
  gate and Distributional Effects of Trade," 2017. NBER Working Paper 23737.

Goldberg, Penny and Nina Pavcnik, "Distributional Effects of Globalization in Developing Coun-
  tries," Journal of Economics Literature, 2007, 45, 39­82.

Grossman, Gene M. and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, "Trading Tasks: A Simple Theory of Off-
  shoring," American Economic Review, 2008, 98 (5), 1978­1997.

  , Elhanan Helpman, and Philipp Kircher, "Matching, Sorting, and the Distributional Effects of
  International Trade," Journal of Political Economy, 2017, 125 (1), 224­264.

Hanson, Gordon and Ann Harrison, "Trade Liberalization and Wage Inequality in Mexico," In-
  dustrial and Labor Relations Review, 1999, 52 (2), 271­288.

Harrigan, James and Ariell Reshef, "Skill-biased heterogeneous firms, trade liberalization and
  the skill premium," Canadian Journal of Economics, 2016, 48 (3), 1024­1066.

Harrison, Ann, John McLaren, and Margaret McMillan, "Recent Perspectives on Trade and In-
  equality," Annual Review of Economics, 2011, 3, 261­289.

Helpman, E., O. Itskhoki, and S. Redding, "Inequality and Unemployment in a Global Econ-
  omy," Econometrica, 2010, 78 (4), 1239­1283.

Helpman, Elhanan, Globalization and Inequality, Harvard University Press, 2018.

Hottman, Colin, Steve Redding, and David Weinstein, "Quantifying the Sources of Firm Het-
  erogeneity," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2016, 131 (3), 1291­1364.

Hummels, David, Jakob R Munch, and Chong Xiang, "Offshoring and Labor Markets," Journal
  of Economic Literature, 2018, 56 (3), 981­1028.

  , Rasmus Jørgensen, Jakob Munch, and Chong Xiang, "The Wage Effects of Offshoring: Evi-
  dence from Danish Matched Worker-Firm Data," American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (6), 1597­
  1629.

Huneeus, Federico, "Production Network Dynamics and the Propagation of Shocks," 2018.
  Mimeo Central Bank of Chile.

Katz, Lawrence and Kevin Murphy, "Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply and Demand
  Factors," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1992, 107 (1), 35­78.

                                                    45
Kovak, Brian K., "Regional Effects of Trade Reform: What Is the Correct Measure of Liberaliza-
  tion?," American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (5), 1960­76.

Krugman, Paul, "Technology, trade and factor prices," Journal of International Economics, 2000, 50,
  51­71.

Krusell, Per, Lee Ohanian, Jose-Victor Rios-Rull, and Giovanni Violante, "Capital-skill Comple-
  mentarity and Inequality: A Macroeconomic Analysis," Econometrica, 2000, 68 (5), 1029­1053.

Leamer, Edward E., "What's the use of factor contents?," Journal of International Economics, 2000,
  50, 17­49.

Leontief, Wassily, "Domestic production and foreign trade; the American capital position re-
  examined," Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, 1953, pp. 332­349.

Matsuyama, Kiminori, "Beyond Icebergs: Towards a Theory of Biased Globalization," Review of
  Economic Studies, 2007, 74 (1), 237­253.

Meghir, Costas, Renata Narita, and Jean-Marc Robin, "Wages and Informality in Developing
  Countries," American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (4), 1509­1546.

Melitz, Marc J., "The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
  Productivity," Econometrica, 2003, 71 (6), 1695­1725.

Muendler, Marc-Andreas, "Trade, Technology, and Prosperity: An Account of Evidence from a
  Labor-market Perspective," 2017. WTO Staff Working Paper ERSD-2017-15.

Murphy, Kevin M. and Finis Welch, "The Role of International Trade in Wage Differentials," in
  M. Kosters, ed., Workers and their Wages, American Enterprise Institute, Washington DC, 1991.

Oberfield, Ezra and Devesh Raval, "Micro Data and Macro Technology," Econometrica, 2021.
  Forthcoming.

Ohnsorge, Franziska and Daniel Trefler, "Sorting It Out: International Trade with Heterogeneous
  Workers," Journal of Political Economy, 2007, 115 (5), 868­892.

Pavcnik, Nina, "The Impact of Trade on Inequality in Developing Countries," in "Proceedings of
  Jackson Hole Economic Symposium" 2017, pp. 61­114.

Pierce, Justin R. and Peter K. Schott, "The Surprisingly Swift Decline of US Manufacturing Em-
  ployment," American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (7), 1632­62.

Piketty, Thomas and Emmanuel Saez, "Income Inequality in the United States, 1913-1998," Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 2003, 118 (1), 1­39.


                                                     46
  ,   , and Gabriel Zucman, "Distributional National Accounts: Methods and Estimates for The
  United States," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2018, 133 (2), 553­609.

Porto, Guido, "Using Survey Data to Assess the Distributional Effects of Trade Policy," Journal of
  International Economics, 2006, 70 (1), 140­160.

Sampson, Thomas, "Selection into Trade and Wage Inequality," American Economic Journal: Mi-
  croeconomics, 2014, 6 (3), 157­202.

Smith, Matthew, Danny Yagan, Owen Zidar, and Eric Zwick, "Capitalists in the Twenty-First
  Century," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2019, 134 (4), 1675­1745.

Stolper, Wolfgang F. and Paul A. Samuelson, "Protection and Real Wages," Review of Economic
  Studies, 1941, 9 (1), 58­73.

Trefler, Daniel, "International Factor Price Differences: Leontief Was Right!," Journal of Political
  Economy, 1993, 101 (6), 961­987.

  , "The Case of the Missing Trade and Other Mysteries," American Economic Review, 1995, 85 (5),
  1029­46.

Ulyssea, Gabriel, "Firms, Informality, and Development: Theory and Evidence from Brazil,"
  American Economic Review, 2018, 108 (8), 2015­2047.

Verhoogen, Eric, "Trade, Quality Upgrading and Wage Inequality in the Mexican Manufacturing
  Sector," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2008, 123 (2), 489­530.

Wood, Adrian, North-South trade, employment, and inequality: Changing fortunes in a skill-driven
  world, Oxford University Press, 1995.

  , "Better-behaved Heckscher-Ohlin models through more consistent treatment of trade costs,"
  2012. QEH Working Paper No. 185.

Yeaple, Stephen Ross, "A Simple Model of Firm Heterogeneity, International Trade, and Wages,"
  Journal of International Economics, January 2005, 65 (1), 1­20.




                                                    47
A       Theoretical Appendix
A.1        Factor Market Equilibrium Under Perfect Competition
The goal of this appendix is to describe how to go from primitive assumptions about preferences,
technology, and market structure to the representation of the factor market equilibrium in terms of
relative factor demand, relative export exposure, and relative factor supply given in Proposition 1.
For expositional purposes, we start with the case of perfect competition in both goods and factor
markets. We then move on to the case of perfect competition in factor markets, but imperfect
competition in good markets in Section A.2.1.40


A.1.1      Decentralized Equilibrium

Consumers. Consumers are indexed by i. They live at Home, i  I , or in Foreign, i  I  . They
own local factors of production, f  F or f  F  , as well as shares of local firms, n  N or
n  N  . Regardless of where they live, individuals consume goods produced by domestic firms,
g  G , as well as goods produced by foreign firms, g  G  .
  Consumers living at Home choose their vector of consumption ci  {c gi } gGG  in order to
maximize their utility subject to budget constraint,

                    max{u(ci ; i )|
                      ci
                                             p g c gi =            ¯f i +
                                                                wf l             n ( p, p , w)ni },   (A.1)
                                      gGG                 f F               nN


where p  { p g } gGG  is the vector of local good prices, w  {w f } f F is the vector of local factor
        ¯i  {l
prices, l    ¯f i } f F is consumer i's vector of factor endowments,  ( p, p , w)  {n ( p, p , w)}nN
is the vector of domestic firms' profits, to be described below, and i  {ni }nN are consumer i's
vector of domestic and foreign firms' shares. We let C ( p, p , w; i ) denote the set of solutions to the
utility maximization problem of consumer i  I .
    Consumers living in Foreign face a similar problem. They choose their consumption ci 
{c gi } gGG  taking local good prices p  { p                                    
                                               g } gGG  , local factor prices w  { w f } f F  , and the
profits of foreign firms   ( p, p , w )  {n  ( p, p  , w  ) }                                 
                                                              nN as given. We let C ( p, p , w ; i ) denote
the set of solutions to the utility maximization problem of consumer i  I  .


Firms. Domestic firms n  N produce at Home. They choose their vectors of output for Home
consumers and firms, yn  {y gn } gG , their vector of output for Foreign consumers and firms,
y       
 n  { y gn } gG , their vector of intermediate inputs mn  { m gn } gGG  , and their vector of local




  40 For notational convenience, we ignore taxes and transfers, though those can be accommodated as
well. Trade imbalances between countries, in particular, can be introduced as lump-sum transfers that
enter households' budget constraints without further consequences for our analysis.

                                                          48
factors ln  {l f n } f F in order to maximize their profits,

             n ( p, p  , w ) =        max
                                 y n ,y 
                                                    pg ygn +  p
                                        n ,mn ,ln  n g G
                                                               g y gn - 
                                                                   
                                                                                             p g m gn -         w f l f n,   (A.2)
                                                                    gG               gGG                  f F


where n is firm n's production set. We let Z ( p, p , w; n) denote the set of solutions to the profit
maximization problem of firm n  N .
    Foreign firms n  N  face a similar problem. They choose their output for Home and Foreign,
yn  {y gn } gG  and y       
                     n  { y gn } gG  , their intermediate inputs mn  { m gn } gGG  , and their local
                                                              ( p, p , w ) taking prices, p, p , and w ,
factors ln  {l f n } f F  in order to maximize their profits n
as given. We let Z  ( p, p , w ; n) denote the set of solutions to the profit maximization problem of
firm n  N  .


Market clearing. Goods and factor markets clear,

                                         y gn =            m gn +  c gi , for all g  G ,                                     (A.3)
                                   nN              nN             i I

                                         ygn =             m gn +          c gi , for all g  G ,                             (A.4)
                                   nN              nN               i I 

                                     ygn =                 m gn +  c gi , for all g  G  ,                                    (A.5)
                                  nN               nN             i I

                                     ygn =  m gn +  c gi , for all g  G ,
                                                   
                                                                       
                                                                                                                             (A.6)
                                  nN               nN               i I

                                          lfn =     l¯f i , for all f      F,                                                (A.7)
                                    nN             i I

                                      l f n =  l¯f i , for all f            F .                                              (A.8)
                                   nN              i I


Definition. An equilibrium with perfect competition in goods and factor markets corresponds
to an allocation ({ci }iII  , {yn , y                                                        
                                          n , mn , ln }nN N  ) and prices ( p, p , w, w ) such that: (i ) ci 
C ( p, p , w; i ) if i  I and ci  C  ( p, p , w ; i ) if i  I  ; (ii ) (yn , y                       
                                                                              n , mn , ln )  Z ( p, p , w; n ) if n  N
and (yn , y                                               
             n , mn , ln )  Z ( p, p , w ; n ) if n  N ; (iii ) good markets clear, conditions (A.3)-(A.6);
and (iv) factor markets clear, conditions (A.7)-(A.8).


A.1.2    Factor Market Equilibrium

For any vector of factor prices (w, w ), we define world factor demand as

LW (w, w )  {{ L f } f F F  |({ci }iII  , {yn , y                         
                                                 n , mn , ln }nN N  , p, p ) such that

                       l f n = L f for all f  F ,             l f n = L f for all f       F  , and conditions (i )-(iii ) hold}.
                  nN                                       nN




                                                                 49
We let L¯ f  iI l  ¯f i denote the aggregate supply of any domestic factor f  F and let L
                                                                                        ¯f 
iI  l¯f i denote the aggregate supply of any foreign factor f  F  . Given our definition of a
decentralized equilibrium, (wT , wT ) is an equilibrium vector of factor prices if and only if


                                                    ¯  LW ( w T , w 
                                                    L               T ),


      ¯  {L
where L   ¯ f } f F F  is the vector of world factor supply. In the special case where world factor
demand is a function rather than a correspondence, LW (w, w ) = { LW (w, w )}, the previous
condition simplifies to
                                      LW ( w T , w       ¯                  
                                                   T ) = L f for all f  F  F ,

as described in equation (1).


A.1.3    Decomposition into Domestic and Foreign Factor Demand

For any element LW (w, w )  LW (w, w ) and any associated allocation, {ci (w, w )}iII  and
{ y n ( w, w  ), y                                                                                       
                   n ( w, w ), mn ( w, w ), ln ( w, w ) }nN N  , and good prices, p ( w, w ) and p ( w, w ), we
can express the revenues associated with the production of each good within each firm as

  R gn (w, w ) = p g (w, w )y gn (w, w ) + p                                                    
                                            g ( w, w ) y gn ( w, w ) for all g  G  G and n  N  N ,


The share of a firm's revenue associated with each good is then given by
                              
                               R gn (w, w )/               Rln (w, w )      for all n  N and g  G ,
                                                     l G
             r gn (w, w ) =
                               R ( w, w  ) /   R ( w, w  )                  for all n  N  and g  G  .
                                gn           l G gn


We can then define a domestic matrix of factor shares, A(w, w )  { x f g (w, w )}( f ,g)F ×G , and a
foreign matrix of factor shares, A (w, w )  { x f g (w, w )}( f ,g)F  ×G  , with

                                                             ( w,w  )
                                      nN rgn (w,w )w f l f n
                                     
                                         nN R gn (w,w )                  for all f  F and g  G ,
                 x f g ( w, w  ) =                                
                                      nN  rgn (w,w )w f l f n (w,w )     for all f  F  and g  G  ;
                                         nN  gn  R  ( w , w   )


a domestic input-output matrix, M(w, w )  { x gl (w, w )}( g,l )G×G , and a foreign input-output
matrix, M (w, w )  { x gl (w, w )}( g,l )G  ×G  , with

                                                              m ( w,w  )
                                       
                                        nN rln (w,w ) pg (w,w )
                                                              
                                                                gn
                                                                                for all g, l  G ,
                                               nN Rln (w,w )
                    x gl (w, w ) =                                      
                                        nN  rln (w,w ) pg (w,w )mgn (w,w )      for all g, l  G  ;
                                               nN  Rln (w,w )  




                                                              50
a domestic vector of consumer expenditures on domestic goods, D (w, w )  { Dg (w, w )} gG , and
a foreign vector of consumer expenditures on foreign goods, D  (w, w )  { Dg
                                                                            ( w, w  ) }
                                                                                        gG  , with


                              D g ( w, w  ) =     pg (w, w )cgi (w, w ), for all g  G ,
                                                 i I
                              
                             Dg ( w, w  )   =      p                                      
                                                    g ( w, w ) c gi ( w, w ), for all g  G ;
                                                 i I


and a domestic vector of exports, E(w, w )  { Eg (w, w )} gG , and a foreign vector of exports,
                  ( w, w  ) }
E  ( w, w  )  { Eg            gG  , with


          Eg ( w, w  ) =      pg ( w, w ) c gi ( w, w ) +  p g ( w, w ) m gn ( w, w ), for all g  G ,
                                                     
                                                          
                                                                                   
                             i I                                 nN
           
          Eg ( w, w  )   =    p g ( w, w                 
                                               )c gi (w, w ) +        p g (w, w )m gn (w, w ), for all g  G  .
                             i I                                 nN


    We can then express the value of domestic demand for domestic factors, {w f L f (w, w )} f F ,
and the value of foreign demand for domestic factors, {w f L        
                                                            f ( w, w ) } f F , as


                               {w f L f (w, w )} f F = A(w, w ) B(w, w ) D (w, w ),
                               {w f L                                                 
                                     f ( w, w ) } f F = A ( w, w ) B ( w, w ) E ( w, w ),


where B(w, w )  ( I - M(w, w ))-1 is the Leontief inverse associated with the domestic input-
output matrix, M (w, w ). By construction, we have

                         { w f L f ( w, w  ) + w f L         
                                                     f ( w, w ) } f F

                                            = A(w, w ) B(w, w )[ D (w, w ) + E(w, w )]
                                                                                          
                                                                         = { w f LW
                                                                                  f ( w, w ) } f F ,             (A.9)

where the second equality uses the good market clearing conditions (A.3) and (A.4).
    Likewise, we can express the value of domestic demand for foreign factors {w            
                                                                                f L f ( w, w ) } f F 
and the value of foreign demand for foreign factors {w            
                                                      f L f ( w, w ) } f F  as


                             {w                                                      
                               f L f ( w, w ) } f F  = A ( w, w ) B ( w, w ) E ( w, w ),

                             {w                                                      
                               f L f ( w, w ) } f F  = A ( w, w ) B ( w, w ) D ( w, w ).


where B (w, w )  ( I - M (w, w ))-1 is the Leontief inverse associated with the domestic input-




                                                                 51
output matrix, respectively. By construction, it again satisfies

                     {w                               
                       f L f ( w, w ) + w f L f ( w, w ) } f F 

                                   = A (w, w ) B (w, w )[ D  (w, w ) + E (w, w )]
                                                                                   
                                                                  = { w f LW
                                                                           f ( w, w ) } f F  ,       (A.10)

where the second equality uses the good market clearing conditions (A.5) and (A.6).
    Using equations (A.9) and (A.10), we can rearrange equation (1) as

                          L f (wT , w                          ¯                  
                                     T ) + L f ( w T , w T ) = L f for all f  F  F .


Letting RD f (w, w )  L f (w, w )/ L0 (w, w ), EE f ,T  L                   W            
                                                         f ( w T , w T ) / L f ( w T , w T ), REE f ,T  (1 -
                                  ¯ f /L
EE0,T )/(1 - EE f ,T ), and RS f  L    ¯ 0 , we obtain


                           RD f (wT , wT ) REE f ,T = RS f for all f  F , f = 0,


as described in Proposition 1.


A.2     Factor Market Equilibrium Under Imperfect Competition
A.2.1    Decentralized Equilibrium

We now describe the decentralized equilibrium with perfect competition in factor markets, but
imperfect competition in goods markets. We follow the same strategy as in Costinot and Werning
(2019). The utility maximization problem of consumers and the market clearing conditions are
the same as in Section A.1. The profit maximization problem of firms, however, now takes into
account the fact that while firms still take wages as given, they no longer face perfectly elastic
residual demand curves for both final and intermediate goods.


Firms. For a given vector of wages w, each firm n  N  N  chooses a correspondence n  n
that describes the set of quantities (yn , yn , mn , ln ) that it is willing to supply and demand at every
price vector ( p, p ). The feasible set (n) includes both the technological constraints faced by firm
                   

n as well as the constraints on the way it may compete, e.g. firm n may only choose one quantity
for all prices, as in the case of Cournot competition, or one price for all quantities, as in the case of
Bertrand competition.
    For each strategy profile   {n }nN N  , an auctioneer selects a price vector ( p(), p ())




                                                       52
and an allocation ({ci ()}iII  , {yn (), yn (  ), mn (  ), ln (  ) }N N  ) such that:


                                     ci ()  C ( p(), p (), w; i ) for all i  I ;
                                     ci ()  C  ( p(), p ( ), w ; i ) for all i  I  ;

                                y gn () =           m gn () +  ci () for all g  G ;
                           nN                  nN              i I

                                ygn (  )   =         m gn () +          ci () for all g  G ;
                           nN                  nN                i I 

                             ygn () =               m gn () +  ci () for all g  G  ;
                           nN                  nN              i I

                                ygn (  )   =     mgn () +  ci () for all g  G  .
                           nN                  nN                i I

    Each firm n  N then solves

                 max
                 n n
                        pg ygn () +  pg y gn (  ) - 
                                          
                                                                          p g m gn () -         w f l n (  ),
                       gG                  gG                  gGG                        f F


taking the strategies of other firms {n }n N N  ,n =n as given, while each firm n  N  solves

                max
               n n
                        pg ygn () +  pg y gn (  ) - 
                                          
                                                                          p g m gn () -         wf l f n (  ),
                      gG                   gG                  gGG                        f F


taking the strategies of other firms {n }n N N  ,n =n as given. We let eq (w, w ) denote the set of
Nash equilibria of this game.


Definition. An equilibrium with perfect competition in factor markets and imperfect competi-
tion in good markets corresponds to an allocation ({ci }iII  , {yn , y          n , mn , ln }nN N  ) and prices
( p, p , w, w ) such that: (i ) firms play a Nash Equilibrium eq  eq (w, w ); (ii ) ci = ci (eq ) for
all i  I  I  ; (iii ) (yn , y                       eq    eq          eq       eq                        
                             n , mn , ln ) = ( yn (  ), yn (  ), mn (  ), ln (  )) for all n  N  N ; (iv )
( p, p ) = ( p(eq ), p (eq )); and (v) factor markets clear, conditions (A.7)-(A.8).


A.2.2    Factor Market Equilibrium

For any vector of factor prices (w, w ), we define world factor demand as

LW (w, w )  {{ L f } f F F  |({ci }iII  , {yn , y                         
                                                 n , mn , ln }nN N  , p, p ) such that

                      l f n = L f for all f  F ,        l f n = L f for all f     F  , and conditions (i )-(iv) hold}.
                 nN                                  nN


Like in the case of perfect competition in the goods markets, (wT , wT ) is an equilibrium vector of
factor prices if and only if
                                                  ¯  LW ( w T , w 
                                                  L               T ).



                                                          53
If world factor demand is a function rather than a correspondence, LW (w, w ) = { LW (w, w )},
the previous condition can be rearranged as equation (1).


A.2.3    Decomposition into Domestic and Factor Demand

For any element LW (w, w )  LW (w, w ), we can define domestic and foreign factor demand,
L(w, w ) and L (w, w ), as we did in Section A.1. Substituting into equation (1) and rearranging,
we again obtain equation (2), as described in Proposition 1.


A.3     Proof of Proposition 2
For any value of w  {wf } f F   0 and REE  { (1 - EE0 ) / (1 - EE f ) } f F , consider the vector
of domestic factor prices w  {w f } f F  0 that solves

                              RD f (w, w ) REE f = RS f for all f  F , f = 0.

Under the assumption ln RD is continuously differentiable with respect to (w, w ) and that the ma-
trix  ln RD / ln w  { ln RD f / ln w g }( f ,g)F ×F is invertible for all (w, w ), the Implicit Func-
                                                        ~ ( REE, w ) such that
tion Theorem implies the existence of a unique function w

                               ~ ( REE, w ), w ) REE f = RS f for all f  F , f = 0.
                         RD f (w

Moreover,        ~
              ln w
             ln REE         ~ f / ln REEg }( f ,g)F ×F and
                       { ln w                                       ln w
                                                                    ln w
                                                                        ~
                                                                                  ~ f / ln w
                                                                             { ln w         g }( f , g)F ×F  satisfy


                                      ln w~         ln RD -1
                                              = -[       ] ,                                                 (A.11)
                                     ln REE         ln w
                                       ln w ~       ln RD -1  ln RD
                                             
                                              = -[       ]          ,                                        (A.12)
                                       ln w         ln w      ln w

where    ln RD
         ln w     { ln RD f / ln wg }( f , g)F ×F  . In the trade and autarkic equilibria, we know that
             f



                                     RD f (wT , wT ) × REE f ,T = RS f ,

                                             RD f (w A , ) × 1 = RS f .

Let u  {ln REE f } f F and v  {ln wf } f F  . Integrating equations (A.11) and (A.12) between
(u = 0, v = ) and (u = ln REET , v = ln wT ), we obtain

                                  (u=ln REET ,v=ln wT)         ln RD -1       ln RD -1  ln RD
          ln wT - ln w A = -                             ([         ] du + [       ]          dv).
                                 (u=0,v=)                      ln w           ln w      ln w




                                                         54
This can be rearranged as ( ln w)trade = ( ln w)exports + ( ln w)imports with

                                                  (u=ln REET ,v=ln wT)            ln RD -1
                     ( ln w)exports = -                                      [         ] dv,
                                                (u=0,v=ln wT)
                                                                                  ln w
                                                 (u=0,v=ln wT)             ln RD -1  ln RD
                     ( ln w)imports = -                               [         ] [        ]du.
                                                (u=0,v=)                   ln w      ln w

A.4    Proof of Proposition 3
In Section 3.2, we have already established that

                                            -
                                       wf        mN  f m Zm (w, w )
                 RD f (w, w ) =                                     ,
                                       w0        mN 0m Zm (w, w )
                                                                                                 1- 
                                                       -1                         pr ( w, w  )
                   Zm (w, w ) =  m wn
                                    D
                                      (w)                                  bmr
                                                                                  Pk (w, w )
                                                                                                       k rc .
                                                              k r Nk

                                                               we get
Differentiating the two previous expressions with respect to wn

                      ln RD f                         ln Zm (w, w )
                      ln wn
                              =    ( r f m - r 0 m )          
                                                          ln wn
                                                                    ,                                             (A.13)
                                mN
                ln Zm (w, w )                                         ln pr (w, w )  ln Pk (w, w )
                        
                    ln wn
                              =                zmr (1 - )
                                                                         ln wn
                                                                                   -
                                                                                        ln wn
                                                                                                                  (A.14)
                                      k r Nk


with the shares r f m and zmr given by

                         f m Zm (w, w )      x f m (k rNk bmr Dr )
                rfm                       =                          ,
                       nN  f n Zn (w, w )
                                            nN x f n (k rNk bnr Dr )
                                               pr ( w,w  )   1- 
                             bmr (w, w )       Pk (w,w )
                                                                     k rc                 bmr Dr
                zmr                                                                 =                .
                                                        pn( w,w  )    1-                k nNk bmn Dn
                       k nNk bmn (w, w )                Pk (w,w )
                                                                            k nc

We know that
                                                    r
               pr (w, w ) = r (   f r w f                     ( pm (w, w ))
                                            1- 
                                                  ) 1- ((                             mr
                                                                                           ) r ( wr
                                                                                                   1- r 1-  r
                                                                                                    )  )      ,
                                 f F                         mN

                                
                                                              1
               Pk (w, w ) = (         nc p1 -      1- 
                                          n ( w, w ))  .
                                nNk




                                                             55
                                                               we get
Differentiating the two previous expressions with respect to wn

                         ln pr (w, w )            ln pm (w, w )
                            ln wn
                                       =    x mr
                                                      ln w 
                                                                              
                                                                + 1{ n =r } x n ,           (A.15)
                                         mN                n
                         ln Pk (w, w )         ln pm (w, w )
                            ln wn
                                       =   mk  ln w .
                                            d                                               (A.16)
                                         mN    k
                                                       n


In vector and matrix notation, we can rearrange equation (A.15) as

                               ln p(w, w )      ln p(w, w )    
                                      
                                           = M         
                                                            + xn In ,
                                  ln wn            ln wn

where In denotes the column vector with entry one in row n and zero in all other entries. This
implies
                                   ln p(w, w )    
                                          
                                               = xn ( Id - M )-1 In .
                                      ln wn
Noting that ( Id - M )-1 = [( Id - M )-1 ] , we obtain

                                         ln pr (w, w )        
                                                 
                                                       = bnr xn .                           (A.17)
                                            ln wn

Substituting into equation (A.16) further implies

                                    ln Pk (w, w )
                                            
                                                  =  dmk bnm xn
                                                              
                                                                .                           (A.18)
                                       ln wn       mN     k


Proposition 3 directly follows from equations (A.13), (A.14), (A.17), and (A.18).


A.5       Proof of Proposition 4
The same algebra as in the proof of Proposition 3 now implies

                     ln RD f                                     ln Zm (w, w )
                             = -  1 g ( f ) +  ( r f m - r 0m )                ,            (A.19)
                     ln w g                  mN
                                                                     ln w g
               ln Zm (w, w )              x gm
                             = (  - 1)                                                      (A.20)
                   ln w g               f F x f m
                                                         ln pr (w, w )  ln Pk (w, w )
                              +           zmr (1 - )                  -                 ,
                                 k r Nk
                                                            ln w g         ln w g




                                                   56
as well as

                                ln pr (w, w )         ln pm (w, w )
                                              =  xmr                + x gr ,
                                   ln w g      mN
                                                         ln w g
                                ln Pk (w, w )         ln pm (w, w )
                                              =  dmk                .
                                   ln w g      mN
                                                         ln w g
                                                           k


In vector and matrix notation, the first of the two previous equations can now be rearranged as

                                           ln p(w, w )
                                                       = ( Id - M )-1 x g ,
                                              ln w g

with x g  { x gr }rN , leading to

                                     ln pr (w, w )
                                                   =  bnr x gn ,                                                          (A.21)
                                        ln w g      nN
                                     ln Pk (w, w )
                                                   =  dmk  bnm x gn .                                                     (A.22)
                                        ln w g      mN   nN         k


Proposition 4 directly follows from equations (A.19), (A.20), (A.21), and (A.22).


A.6      Derivation of Equation (17)
                                                                                                          1
                                                                         D                       1-      1- 
Denote the CES factor price index of firm r at date t as                wr ,t        f F  f r,t w f ,t         . For an arbitrary
factor f , equation (13) implies

                                   D                    1                 1
                               ln wr ,t = ln w f ,t +      ln x D
                                                                f r ,t +    ln  f r,t .
                                                        -1               1-

Averaging the previous expression across factors and using firm v's factor cost shares as weights,
we get
                                                    D           D
                                                ln wr         ~r
                                                      ,t = ln w  ,t +  r ,t ,                                             (A.23)
          D                               1                                 1
with ln w~r ,t  f F x D                          D
                      f r,t (ln w f ,t +  -1 ln x f r,t ) and  r,t         1-       f F x D
                                                                                          f r,t ln  f r,t . Substituting for the
log of the CES factor price index in equation (9) implies

                              ln pn,t =                       ~r
                                                brn,t  r,t ln w D              
                                                                 ,t + xr,t ln wr,t + n,t ,
                                          r N


with n,t  rN brn,t ( r,t + ln r,t ).




                                                               57
A.7     Counterfactual Analysis
A.7.1    Identification of Relative Domestic Factor Demand

We set units of account for domestic goods so that all prices in at date t are equal to one,

                                                     pn,t = 1 for all n  N .                                                                         (A.24)

We now show that under this normalization, relative factor demand is identified.
    Building on the analysis of Section 3.2, we can rearrange relative factor demand as

                                                           1-                                                                    -         
                                               n,t  f n,t w f                                                        k,t rc,t p1
                                                                                                                               r ,t ( w , w )
                       nN :X f n,t >0                           1-    k rNk : Dr,t >0 bnr,t                                          1-       
                                          gF : Xgn,t >0  gn,t w g                                                mNk : Dm,t >0 mc,t pm,t ( w,w )
              
  RD f ,t (w, w ) =                                     1-                                                                       -
                                                                                                                                                   , (A.25)
                                             n,t  0n,t w0                                                            k,t rc,t p1           
                                                                                                                               r ,t ( w , w )
                       nN :X0n,t >0                            1-     k rNk : Dr,t >0 bnr,t                    mNk : Dm,t >0 mc,t p1 -        
                                          gF : Xgn,t >0  gn,t w g                                                                  m,t ( w , w )



where pn,t (w, w ) is given by (9),
                                                                                                                                        
                                            r ,t
        ln pn,t (w, w ) =  brn,t ln r,t +        ln( 
                                                                                                          1-                     
                                                                                                  f r ,t w f      ) + xr ,t ln wr,t ,                (A.26)
                          r N
                                          1-        f F : X                          f r ,t >0



and bnr,t is an element of the Leontief inverse associated with Mt  { xnr,t }(n,r)N ×N .
    By equation (6), we know that { xnr,t }(n,r)N ×N and hence {bnr,t }(n,r)N ×N are independent of
(w, w ). We have already discussed the identification of {  n,t }nN and {k,t }kK in Section 4.1.
We have also shown how to identify  and  using instrumental variables in Section 5. To show
that RD f (·, ·) is identified for all f  F , it remains to show that: (i ) mc,t /rc,t is identified for all
k  K, m, r  Nk such that Dm,t , Dr,t > 0; (ii )  gn,t / f n,t is identified for all n  N , g, f  F such
that Xgn,t , X f n,t > 0; and (iii ) r,t is identified for all r  N . Under (A.24), equation (4) implies

                            mc,t   Dm , t
                                 =        for all k  K, m, r  Nk s.t. Dm,t , Dr,t > 0.
                            rc,t   Dr,t

Equation (5) implies

                                                   -1
                       gn,t    x gn,t     wg
                             =                             for all n  N , f  F s.t. Xgn,t , X f n,t > 0.
                       f n,t   x f n,t    wf

Finally, under (A.24), equation (A.26) implies

                                                                 1
                            r,t =                                             r ,t
                                                                                                    for all r  N .                                   (A.27)
                                                                     1-               ) x r ,t   
                                     ( f F :X f r,t>0  f r,t w f           ) 1-  ( w r ,t


At this point, we have established that conditions (i )-(iii ) hold. Thus, { pn,t (·, ·)}nN is identified



                                                                      58
by (9) and, in turn, { RD f ,t (·, ·)} f F is identified by(A.25).


A.7.2     Algorithm

In this appendix, we describe how we compute the log changes in domestic factor prices  ln w
associated with an arbitrary counterfactual change from (w = wt
                                                               , REE = REE ) to ( w =
                                                                          t
(w ) , REE = REE ). ( ln w) autarky corresponds to the special case ((w ) = , REE = 1),
whereas ( ln w)exports corresponds to the special case ((w ) = wt
                                                                 , REE = 1).
                                                                  0

   Our algorithm constructs discretized versions of the integrals in Proposition 2. Consider a
                                           such that
sequence j = 0, ..., J of foreign prices w( j)

                                                          1-           )1- 
                                                                - ln(wn
                                           1 ln(wn, J )                 ,t0
           ln wn ,( j) - ln wn,( j-1) =                                     for all n  N and j  1,
                                          1-                    J

and relative export exposures REE( j) such that

                                                   ln REE f , J - ln REE f ,t0
             ln REE f ,( j) - ln REE f ,( j-1) =                               for all f  F and j  1.
                                                                J

                   = ( w ) and REE                                          ^(  {ln w                      }
By construction, w( J)                           ( J ) = REE . Below we let w  j)      n,( j )
                                                                                               / wn ,( j-1) nN
      ^
and REE( j)  {ln REE f ,( j) / REE f ,( j-1) } f F denote the vector of foreign price and relative export
exposure shock.
    Without loss of generality, we set units of account for domestic factors and domestic goods so
that the following initial conditions hold: ln w f ,(0) = 0 for all f  F ; ln pn,(0) = 0 for all n  N ;
xmn,(0) = xmn,t for all m, n  N ; x f n,(0) = x f n,t for all f  F and n  N ; dnk,(0) = dnk,t for all k  K
                 
and n  Nk ; and xn          for all n  N . At each step j = 1, ..., J , given step-( j - 1) prices and
                        = xn
                   ,(0)      ,t
expenditure shares, we then construct step-( j) new equilibrium variables as follows:

    i. New domestic factor prices w( j)  {w f ,( j) } f F are such that

                                                   ln RD -1     ^ ( j) +                 ln RD                     
                      ln w( j) = ln w( j-1) - [         ]      REE                                               ^(
                                                                                                                 w  j) ,
                                                   ln w ( j-1)                           ln w          ( j -1)


        with ( ln RD / ln w)( j-1) and ( ln RD / ln w )( j-1) given by Propositions 3 and 4 and step-
        ( j - 1) expenditure shares;

   ii. New domestic good prices p( j)  { pn,( j) }nN are such that
                                                                                                                           
                                                          r ,t
                                                               ln( 
                                                                                            1-                         
                  ln pn,( j) =         brn,t ln r,t +                                f r ,t w f ,( j ) ) + x r ,t ln wr,( j) ;
                                 r N
                                                        1-        f F : X
                                                                        f r ,t >0




                                                            59
  iii. New expenditure shares are such that
                                                              1- 
                                               n,t  f n,t w f ,( j )
                                                                       for all f  F and n  N s.t. X f n,t > 0,
                                                                1- 
                         x f n,( j ) =       gF  gn,t w g,( j)
                                         0                             otherwise;

                                                        -
                                         
                                                nc,t p1
                                                      n,( j )
                                                                       for all k  K and n  Nk s.t. Dnk,t > 0,
                                                        -
                                            rNk rc,t p1
                         dnk,( j) =                   r ,( j )
                                         0
                                         
                                                                       otherwise.

By construction, as J goes to infinity, ln w( J ) - ln w(0) converges to  ln w.


A.7.3     Individual Earnings

Consider an individual i with factor endowments l        ¯i  {l¯f i } f F . In the initial equilibrium, individ-
                                          ¯f i w f ,t . In the counterfactual autarkic equilibrium, they
ual i's earnings are given by Yi,t =  f F l
                              ¯f i (w f ,t ) A . We therefore have
are given by (Yi,t ) A =  f F l

         (Yi,t )trade      (Y )            Y f i ,t ( w f ,t ) A
                      = 1 - i ,t A = 1 -                         = 1 -   f i,t exp(-( ln w f ,t )trade ),
           Yi,t             Yi,t         f
                                           Yi,t w f ,t                 f


with  f i,t  Yf i,t /Yi,t .
    Let (Yi,t )exports = Yi,t - (Yi,t ) NE and (Yi,t )imports = (Yi,t ) NE - (Yi,t ) A where (Yi,t ) NE are the
counterfactual earnings associated with the counterfactual equilibrium without differences in rel-
ative export exposure, (w = wt
                              , REE = 1). Similarly, we have


 (Yi,t )exports      (Y )            Yf i,t (w f ,t ) NE
                = 1 - i,t NE = 1 -                       = 1 -   f i,t exp(-( ln w f ,t )exports ),
    Yi,t               Yi,t        f
                                     Yi,t     w f ,t           f
(Yi,t )imports  (Y )     (Y )
               = i,t NE - i,t A = [1 -   f i,t exp(-( ln w f ,t )imports )] exp(-( ln w f ,t )exports ).
   Yi,t           Yi,t    Yi,t         f




                                                                         60
B       Data Appendix
In this appendix we provide further details about the data construction described in Section 4.1,
as well as additional descriptive statistics not reported in the main text.


B.1     Firm-level Data
This section describes our methodology for constructing firm-level variables (available from 2009
to 2015). Our sample of firms N includes the full sample of firm IDs constructed from groups
of tax IDs in the data that share the same ownership structure (in a particular sense described
below). This set also considers a residual firm that we construct to create the accounting iden-
tities in our model. We consider the tax IDs that either file income tax forms or are named as
the seller in the itemized VAT purchase annexes filed by entities filing income tax forms. All in-
corporated firms (and all branches of government and state-owned firms) file a detailed tax form
(F101) and are required to submit monthly purchase annexes independent of their revenues and or
costs. Unincorporated firms (largely self-employed individuals) file a simplified tax form (F102)
if their annual revenue exceeds the standardized deduction ($10,000). They are obligated to keep
accounting records and file monthly purchase annexes if they have yearly revenues greater than
$100,000, or yearly costs and expenses greater than $80,000, or begin economic activities with a
capital of at least $60,000.41 All other self-employed individuals (the vast majority) do not file
purchase annexes.


B.1.1    Transaction Data

We use the information in the purchase annex to measure transactions between tax IDs. For each
transaction, the data contains information on the tax ID of the buyer, the tax ID of the seller, the
amount of the transaction, the VAT paid, whether the transaction was subject to a tax rate of 12%
or 0%, and the transaction's date. In each year, we compute the annual transactions between tax
ID pairs based on the registered date. We only consider transactions that are not subject to future
amendments. We manually exclude 40 transactions that are above 1 billion dollars and are more
than three times larger than the total cost reported in the buyer's tax form since these appear to
reflect data entry errors.
    We implement three adjustments to the transaction data in order to minimize reporting errors.
First, we drop monthly transactions whose values are more than 10% higher than the buyer's
total annual cost as reported in its tax form. Second, we drop all transactions associated with tax
IDs that do not file a tax form but do file a purchase annex. Third, we assume that sellers who
appear in the purchase annex of other firms but who do not have a tax filing themselves must
    41 Many
          firms that fall below these thresholds do voluntarily file purchase annexes, but for such smaller
firms (whose aggregate presence in the economy is limited, by nature) the records on intermediate pur-
chases may be incomplete.

                                                    61
have an annual revenue below the minimum filing threshold; we therefore exclude all transactions
associated with non-tax filing sellers whose total transaction sales are above a threshold (which
we set at $20,000 to be conservative).
    Table B.1 reports the number and value of the transactions dropped in each of these three
steps (after excluding the transactions above one billion dollars). These steps retain approxi-
mately 85­90% of the (buyer-seller-year aggregated) transactions in each year, which corresponds
to around 75% of the total transaction value in the original sample.

                         Table B.1: Summary Statistics, Transactions Data

                                       2009        2010        2011        2012         2013         2014         2015

Initial number of transactions       8,677,539   9,364,890   8,613,648   11,523,376   13,082,687   14,056,320   13,639,626

Share deleted:
   due to criterion 1                 0.032       0.023       0.018        0.038        0.030        0.029        0.034
   in addition, due to criterion 2    0.100       0.101       0.123        0.085        0.077        0.074        0.106
   in addition, due to criterion 3    0.009       0.008       0.030        0.006        0.008        0.008        0.014

Share deleted due to 1, 2 or 3        0.141       0.132       0.171        0.129        0.115        0.111        0.155
     as share of total value          0.229       0.229       0.302        0.282        0.265        0.251        0.256
Valid transactions                   7,455,195   8,128,498   7,136,558   10,034,442   11,575,909   12,502,489   11,528,448

Notes: The reported number of transactions is that obtained after first summing up all transactions that
occurred within each buyer-seller pair (separately by year).



B.1.2      Grouping Tax IDs Into Firms

We start by grouping corporate tax IDs into firms based on their ownership structure. This draws
on a unique ownership annex that every incorporated firm must file, which reports the personal
and corporate tax IDs of each owner of the filing tax ID, as well as their corresponding ownership
shares of each owner.42 We merge a tax ID into a parent tax ID whenever the parent tax ID owns
more than 50% of the tax ID's shares. For each firm group, we compute all financial variables by
summing the values of the same variable across all tax IDs in the firm group. We assume that
the firm's ownership structure, as well as the firm's sector and location, is given by that of the
highest-level holding firm.
    Over the entire period, there are 14,029 corporate tax IDs in firm groups with multiple tax IDs,
which amounts to 0.33% of the total number of corporate tax IDs in our data. Table B.2 shows
that, in each year, more than 50% of the firm groups have only two tax IDs. This procedure yields
a dataset with 4,201,722 unique firm IDs (the vast majority of which reflect self-employment, as
we discuss below) that are active at least once between 2009 and 2015, which is 7,957 fewer than
before the grouping process.
  42 For   unincorporated firms, the firm's tax ID corresponds to the personal tax ID of the owner.

                                                             62
                 Table B.2: Summary Statistics, Corporate Tax ID Grouping

                                2009        2010        2011           2012            2013        2014        2015

 Grouping sample
   Group size distribution
     50th percentile             2           2             2            2               2           2           2
     75th percentile             3           3             3            3               3           3           3
     90th percentile             5           5             5            5               5           5           5
   Unique corporate tax IDs    8,113       8,113       8,113           5,197          5,426       5,706       5,874
   Unique firm IDs             2,784       2,784       2,784           2,450          2,594       2,735       2,830

 Full sample
   Unique corporate tax IDs   1,192,781   1,294,552   1,253,628      1,607,954       1,703,784   1,717,315   1,759,767
   Unique firm IDs            1,187,452   1,289,223   1,248,299      1,605,207       1,700,952   1,714,344   1,756,723
   Difference                  5,329       5,329       5,329           2,747          2,832       2,971       3,044
Notes: The "grouping sample" comprises the sample of corporate tax IDs that are part of a firm ID group of
at least size 2. The "full sample" contains all corporate tax IDs and firm IDs in our final dataset.


B.1.3      Construction of Firm-level Variables

We now describe our procedure to create the revenue and cost variables of each firm in a given
year. Our goal is to combine the information in the tax forms and purchase annexes in order to
create revenue and cost variables that are consistent with our theory. Specifically, we assume that
a firm's revenue Rn is the sum of its exports En , its final sales Dn , and its intermediate sales to
other domestic firms mN ,m =n Mnm :

                               Rn = En + Dn +                      Mnm + MnR ,                                    (B.1)
                                                   mN ,m =n, R


where MnR are sales to a consolidated residual firm that we use to account for inconsistencies in
the data.
    We construct the firm's cost items in such a way as to equalize revenues and (full factor) costs.
The firm's total cost is the sum of the firm's profit n , its labor cost Wn , its imports Xn
                                                                                            , and its

input purchases from other domestic suppliers mN ,m =n Mmn :

                                               
                                Rn = n + Wn + Xn +                           Mmn .                                (B.2)
                                                               mN ,m =n, R


This treats the firm's profits as a "cost" that is simply its payments to its owners (i.e. to a capital
factor).
    To construct each of these variables, we classify firms in into four categories according to the



                                                      63
type of information available: (1) firms reporting positive corporate revenue and/or cost in their
F101 or F102, (2) firms only reporting personal revenue and costs in their F102, (3) firms that are
identified as sellers in the purchase annex of a buying firm and do not themselves file tax forms
or a purchase annex, and (4) two consolidated firms that contain the financial and public sectors,
respectively, because these sectors have different tax reporting requirements. We now describe
our procedure for constructing the revenue and cost structure in the economy for each of these
four firm types.


Firms of Type 1 and 2. We start by defining the items in the firm's revenue stream in (B.1). For
each firm ID, we compute the sum across the firm's tax IDs of their reported (on forms F101/2)
total revenue Rtax            tax
               n and exports En . We use the purchase annex to compute sales of firm ID n to
                       PA . We then compute the variables as follows. First, we specify exports
each other firm ID m, Mnm
                                                                             tax and M
and intermediate sales as reported in the tax form and purchase annex: En = En               PA
                                                                                       nm = Mnm
for all n  N and n = R. Second, we attribute any residual revenue to final sales:


                             Dn  max 0, Rtax  tax
                                         n - En -                            PA
                                                                            Mnm   .
                                                                mN ,m = R


    We then construct the items in the firm's cost structure in (B.2). For each firm ID, we specify the
firm's payroll and imports using the sum across the firm's tax IDs of the values reported in their
                                          tax and X  = X tax, .43 We then use the definitions
tax forms of wage bill and imports: Wn = Wn        n    n
(B.1) and (B.2) to compute revenue, profits and sales to the residual firm such that the firm at least
breaks even. Specifically, we define


              ~ n  En
                    tax
                        + Dn +                    PA
                                                 Mnm -     tax
                                                          Wn      tax,
                                                               + Xn    +                    PA
                                                                                           Mmn   ,     (B.3)
                                   mN ,m =n, R                               mN ,m =n, R


and define
                        n = ~n       and   MnR = 0         if               ~n>0
                       n = 0      and    MnR = -~n         if ~ n  0, Wn + Xn
                                                                             >0                        (B.4)
                     n =       and      MnR = -~n+         if ~ n  0, Wn + Xn
                                                                             =0


where denotes a small positive constant.44 Finally, we compute Rn using the accounting relation
in (B.1).
    To understand these expressions, consider a firm whose revenue from domestic and foreign

   43 For the case of the single (and state-owned) oil producer in Ecuador, we obtain this wage bill, export,

and import information from the social security and customs datasets due to this firm's incomplete cost
information on its own tax filing early in our sample period. Further, in 2010 and 2011, because of the
firm's restructuring process, we do not observe a reliable value for the firm's final sales so we set this to
zero; such sales are a small share of the firm's total sales in other years.
   44 In practice, because of numerical rounding, we set to $10 if the maximum of revenue and costs is less

than or equal to $5, or equal to 0.1% of the maximum of revenue and costs otherwise.

                                                     64
sales is strictly above its costs from labor, imports and intermediates. In this case, profits are de-
fined as the difference between revenue and costs, implying sales to the residual firm of zero.
Whenever the difference between revenue and costs is negative, we create additional sales to
                                                      > 0 or
the residual firm, so that profits are zero if Wn + Xn                             = 0. This adjust-
                                                                         if Wn + Xn
ment is necessary to guarantee the existence of the Leontief inverse, B  ( I - M)-1 , by imposing
the requirement that the share of the firm's costs from intermediate inputs is strictly below one,
mN ,m =n,R xmn < 1 for all n.

Firms of Type 3. Since firms of type 3 file neither a tax form nor a purchase annex, we do not
have all the cost and revenue items described above for firms of type 1 or 2. Thus, for every firm
                                    = 0 and M
n of type 3, we specify En = Dn = Xn          mn = 0 for all m  N . In addition, we define the
firm's labor cost Wn as the sum across all the firm's tax IDs of their wage bill in the social security
database. We set labor payments to zero if none of the firm's tax IDs can be found in the social
security database. This implies that ~ n  mN ,m =n,R Mnm PA - W . We then compute profits and
                                                                n
residual sales using the procedure in (B.4) and revenue using the accounting relation in (B.1).


Additional Firms (Type 4, Residual). We construct one consolidated firm for public institu-
tions and another for financial institutions. The consolidated financial firm consists of all tax IDs
reporting their main activity to be in the financial sector. The consolidated public firm consists of
all tax IDs flagged as state-owned (including branches of government that, for example, procure
goods from private firms and hence file purchase annexes) in the tax data. Because Ecuador's
state-owned oil firm accounts for all of its oil exports, we exclude it from the consolidated public
firm and treat it as an ordinary firm (though one without an owner). For both of these consolidated
firms, we construct the firm's revenue and cost following the same procedure as that adopted for
the firms of type 1 and 2.
    Lastly, we compute outcomes for the residual firm. We compute the intermediates purchases
of the residual firm using MnR as implied by the procedure above. In order to guarantee that this
firm breaks even, we specify that its final sales cover intermediate purchases, Dn = + nN MnR .


B.1.4     Summary Statistics

Sample of Firms         We now present simple summary statistics about our sample of firms, N ,
that includes firms of types 1-3 as well as the three consolidated firms (public, financial, and resid-
ual). Table B.3 reports the counts of these firm types (by year), with shares broken down by single-
person firms (those that correspond to self-employed individuals working in their own firm).45 In
addition, Figure B.1 illustrates how several of our key variables (revenues, costs, imports, exports,

  45 We  define define single-person firms as either (a) firms with labor cost of zero and no entries in the
social security database, or (b) those firms with a single employee in the social security database where
employee is also registered as the firm's owner.

                                                    65
labor payments, and capital payments/profits) are distributed across three broad types of firm:
(i) single-person firms; (ii) the three consolidated firms; and (iii) corporate firms, which comprise
all other firms. These findings indicate how incorporated firms of type 1 account for only 7% of
firm tax IDs, but are responsible for more than 75% of the aggregate revenue in our sample. Such
firms also account for essentially all of Ecuador's exports and imports. On the other hand, the vast
majority of firms in our sample are of types 2 and 3. These firms are predominantly self-employed
individuals. Depending on the year, about half of the incorporated firms filing tax forms (type
2), and 96-98% of the firms not filing tax forms (type 3), are single-person firms. Such firms ac-
count for a tiny share of exports, imports and a small share of total revenue; however, they are
responsible for a slightly higher share of final sales and profits.

                Table B.3: Summary Statistics of Firm Counts, by Firm Type

                                          2009      2010       2011      2012      2013      2014      2015

 Panel A: Firms of type 1
   Number of firms                       84,795     88,200    94,796   115,718   121,735   127,801    118,461
   Share that are single-person firms     30%        27%       24%       25%       23%       23%       23%

 Panel B: Firms of type 2
   Number of firms                       390,319   422,932   368,193   625,678   640,306   686,209    648,257
   Share that are single-person firms     62%        58%       50%       46%       46%       44%       42%

 Panel C: Firms of type 3
   Number of firms                       711,352   777,117   784,281   863,263   938,359   899,804    989,389
   Share that are single-person firms     98%        98%       96%       98%       97%       97%       97%
Notes: Firms of type 1 are those reporting corporate revenues or costs in their tax forms. Firms of type 2
are those only reporting personal revenues or costs in their tax forms. Firms of type 3 are those not filing
tax forms but mentioned as sellers in the purchase annex of other firms. Single-person firms are either (i)
firms with labor cost of zero and no entry in the social security database, or (ii) firms where the sole listed
employee is the firm's owner itself.



Firm Revenues and Costs. Table B.4 reports the distribution of revenue and cost characteris-
tics for firms of different types (for the pooled sample of firm-year combinations). Evidently, the
revenue distribution is very skewed for all firm types. Firms of type 1 are larger and obtain a
higher share of their revenue from final sales. These firms account for all the exports and imports,
but this is concentrated in just a few firms ­ for instance, more than 90% of the firms of type 1 do
not export or import. For firms of types 2 and 3, most of the revenues come from intermediate
sales. These firms also have costs that are comprised heavily of profits (i.e. capital payments, as
around half are self-employed individuals that do not have any reported input purchases).



                                                      66
                                                       Figure B.1: Aggregate Outcomes by Firm Category

                                                         Total Revenue                                                Exports Revenue
                                   200                                                            25

                                                                                                  20
                                   150
                                                                                                  15
                                   100
                                                                                                  10

                                   50
                                                                                                   5

                                     0                                                             0



                                                Domestic Final Sales Revenue                                            Imports Cost
                                                                                                  30
     Value in billion US dollars




                                   75

                                                                                                  20
                                   50


                                                                                                  10
                                   25


                                     0                                                             0



                                                           Labor Cost                                                        Profit
                                   20
                                                                                                  60

                                   15
                                                                                                  40
                                   10

                                                                                                  20
                                     5


                                     0                                                             0
                                         2009   2010    2011   2012    2013   2014   2015              2009   2010    2011   2012     2013   2014   2015
                                                                                               Year

                                                                      Corporate Firms       Single-person Firms      Other Firms


Notes: Single-person firms are either (i) firms with labor cost of zero and no entry in the social security
database, or (ii) firms where the sole listed employee is the firm's owner him/herself. Corporate firms are
all firm IDs not classified as single-person firms. "Other firms" consists of the consolidated financial firms,
the consolidated residual firms, and the consolidated public firms.




                                                                                            67
                         Table B.4: Summary Statistics, Firm-level Data

                                                     Percentiles of distribution
                                10th     25th      50th     75th        90th           95th          99th

 Panel A: Firms of type 1
   Revenue, USD                5,000    37,945   150,392    437,512    1,298,116    2,699,628    13,686,760
   Share of revenue derived from:
     Final sales           0.00          0.10      0.62       0.97        1.00         1.00          1.00
     Interm. sales         0.00          0.00      0.16       0.73        0.99         1.00          1.00
     Exports               0.00          0.00      0.00       0.00        0.00         0.00          0.80
     Residual sales        0.00          0.00      0.00       0.00        0.30         0.97          1.00
   Share of costs derived from:
     Wages                  0.00         0.00      0.07       0.23        0.48         0.67          1.00
     Interm. purchases      0.00         0.09      0.42       0.75        0.94         1.00          1.00
     Imports                0.00         0.00      0.00       0.00        0.00         0.26          0.74
     Capital (profits)      0.00         0.03      0.25       0.66        1.00         1.00          1.00

 Panel B: Firms of type 2
   Revenue, USD                1,451    2,926      9,644     26,220      59,342       88,587       214,726
   Share of revenue derived from:
     Final sales           0.00          0.00      0.32       0.97        1.00         1.00          1.00
     Interm. sales         0.00          0.00      0.10       0.81        1.00         1.00          1.00
     Exports               0.00          0.00      0.00       0.00        0.00         0.00          0.00
     Residual sales        0.00          0.00      0.00       0.00        1.00         1.00          1.00
   Share of costs derived from:
     Wages                  0.00         0.00      0.00       0.49        1.00         1.00          1.00
     Interm. purchases      0.00         0.00      0.00       0.00        0.00         0.00          0.00
     Imports                0.00         0.00      0.00       0.00        0.00         0.00          0.00
     Capital (profits)      0.00         0.51      1.00       1.00        1.00         1.00          1.00

 Panel C: Firms of type 3
   Revenue, USD                  23      104        510       2,346       5,764        9,012        17,300
   Residual sales share         0.00     0.00      0.00       0.00        0.00         0.00          0.98
   Profits share                1.00     1.00      1.00       1.00        1.00         1.00          1.00
Notes: Each row reports features of the distribution (pooling across all firm-year observations that appear in
the tax data, for the given firm type) of the indicated variable. Firms of type 1 are those reporting corporate
revenues or costs in their tax forms. Firms of type 2 are those only reporting personal revenues or costs in
their tax forms. Firms of type 3 are those not filing tax forms but mentioned as sellers in the purchase annex
of other firms.




                                                      68
B.2     Payments to Factors and Individuals
In order to connect firm payments to factors of production and individual factor endowments, we
use two databases: the social security employer-employee database (IESS) that allows us to match
workers to each firm, and the ownership survey that allows us to match owners to each firm.
Our sample of individuals I includes all individuals with positive income in the social security
and ownership dataset that are associated with a firm in our sample (excluding the consolidated
financial, residual and public firms). We assign workers to provinces based on the location of their
main employer defined as the firm ID from which the individual earns most of her income.46 We
also create a residual agent that receives labor and capital payments that certain firms make to
entities (foreign owners or the government) that are not individuals in our sample.


B.2.1       Data Construction

Firm Shares of Payments to Individuals. We start by constructing firm payments to labor
factors as follows. For every individual i  I , we define the firm's labor payment share to i as
  L = W IESS /W IESS , where W IESS is the value of annual earnings reported by firm n in the social
xin      in     n             in
                              IESS is firm n's total payroll reported in the IESS. A fraction of such
security database for i, and Wn
individuals cannot be matched to the Civil Registry, which contains the demographic indicators
                                                                                    L = 1-     L
that we later require, so we assign such individuals to a residual labor agent as x Rn     iI xin
                                                                       L is also set equal to
where I denotes individuals in the Civil Registry. The payment share x Rn
one for firms that have positive labor payments in their tax firms but no employees in the social
security dataset, as well as for the three consolidated firms in our sample. We consider every
single-person firm n to be a self-employed individual and reclassify the firm's profits as labor
payments to the individual-owner; that is, Wn = n , n = 0, and xin
                                                                L = 1 for the individual-

owner i. Finally, we construct the matrix of share of firm-individual labor payment shares as
x L  { xin
        L}
           (i,n)I×N .
    We then proceed similarly for the case of capital payments to individuals. For every individual
i  I , we measure ni as the ownership share of individual i in firm n. For a single-person firm,
we set ni = 1 for the individual-owner. We compute the ownership share of the residual agent as
nR = 1 - iI ni . These capital ownership shares yield the matrix of shares of capital payments
to different individuals in our sample,   {ni }(i,n)I×N .


Firm Shares of Payments to Factors. We define labor factors in terms of education-province
pairs, and an additional residual labor type. We compute the firm's payments to each factor using
the personal information of its employees in the Civil Registry. Specifically, we define D L
                                                                                           f i as a

   46 Thefirm's location (as reported in its tax filing) will reflect that of its headquarters, which may not
correspond to the location of every establishment in a multi-establishment firm. Section B.4.1 compares
factor payments derived from the administrative data discussed here to that in a nationally representative
earnings survey, which provides reassurance that such measurement error is unlikely to be large.

                                                     69
dummy variable that equals one if individual i belongs to the group associated with factor f and
the row vector with the dummy variable for different individuals as D L      L
                                                                      f  { D f i }i I . For the resid-
ual type, the vector has entries equal to one for all individuals in our sample with missing personal
information in either the Civil Registry or IESS, as well as the residual agent i = R. We then com-
pute the firm payment shares to each labor factor as { x f n }nN = D L  L
                                                                     f x diag ( {Wn / Rn }nN ) for
each f  F L .
     Similarly, we compute the firm payments to different capital types. For each firm n, we com-
      K = 1 if firm n is in sector s, and define the row vector containing this dummy for all
pute Dsn
          K  { DK }
firms as Ds     sn nN . We consider two sectors s: Oil and Non-Oil. Finally, we compute firm

                                                         f diag ( { n / Rn }nN ) for each f  F .
payment shares to each capital factor as { x f n }nN = D K                                    K



Individual Factor Earnings. The last step is to construct individuals' earnings and earnings
from each factor service that they supply. Let Yf i denote i's income associated with factor f ,
and Yi be i's total income Yi =  f F Yf ,i . For labor factors f  F L , Yf = {Yf ,i }iI is sim-
ply the vector of individual labor payments times the dummy vector indicating which individ-
uals are associated with each group defining factor f (education-province pair or residual): Yf =
DL         L                                   K
 f diag ( x {Wn }nN ). For capital factors f  F , Y f = {Y f ,i }i I is the product of the matrix of
payments individuals get from different firms,  diag({n }nN ), and the dummy vector indicat-
                                                                        f : Y f = D f diag ( { n }n )(  ) .
ing whether firms are associated with the oil or the non-oil sectors, D K          K

Finally, we compute, for each individual, the income share associated with each factor,  f ,i 
Yf ,i /Yi .


B.2.2         Summary Statistics

We now present summary statistics regarding our sample of individuals and factors. In the first
part of Table B.5, we report the number of individuals in our sample. Across years, the number of
individuals in our sample grows reflecting mostly the increase in formalization rates in Ecuador.
In 2012, the administrative dataset has approximately 3 million individuals with positive income,
accounting for approximately half of Ecuador's employed and/or business-owning population
(according to the 2011-12 earnings survey that we describe in Section B.4). We have information
on education and province for roughly 90% of the individuals with strictly positive income. The
second panel displays statistics for our baseline sample of individuals with strictly positive income
and whose labor income can be mapped to an education-province pair. In 2012, there are 2.6
million such individuals in our baseline sample, with 30% of them employed in single-person
firms. The last part of the table reports the annual income at different parts of the distribution.
In 2012, the median income was around $4,900. The earnings distribution in this administrative
dataset contains many individuals with very low apparent earnings (e.g. 10% with $276 or less in
2012), but this is largely driven by single-person firms and likely reflects a part-time or seasonal
involvement in such activities. The earnings distribution derived from survey data reflecting all


                                                    70
types of earnings, described in Section B.4, does not have this same feature.
    Figure B.2 reports the share of payments to different factor types by income percentile. It
shows that the capital income share is especially important at the top of the distribution, account-
ing for 38% and 64% of income in the 95 and 99 percentiles, respectively. The plot also shows
that individuals with higher education levels are more likely to be at higher income percentiles.
Excluding capital income, low-education individuals correspond to 10%­15% of income above
the 90th percentile of the distribution, but they account for almost 50% of the income below the
10th percentile. For high-education individuals this pattern is reversed: this group generates less
than 10%­15% of income in the bottom 10 percentiles and almost 50% of income in the top 10
percentiles.

       Table B.5: Summary Statistics of Sample Characteristics Across Individuals

                                     2009        2010            2011       2012        2013        2014        2015

 Panel A: Full sample of individuals in administrative dataset

   Total number of individuals     2,414,839   2,659,772    2,892,445     3,321,591   3,519,453   3,643,140   3,614,968
      with positive income         2,256,513   2,460,699    2,678,308     3,002,078   3,194,608   3,298,603   3,287,431
                                     (93%)       (93%)        (93%)         (90%)       (91%)       (91%)       (91%)
      with complete information    2,009,715   2,211,525    2,362,355     2,676,243   2,718,062   2,720,276   2,580,246
                                     (83%)       (83%)        (82%)         (81%)       (77%)       (75%)       (71%)

 Panel B: Baseline sample of individuals

   Total number of individuals     1,981,214   2,150,372    2,291,093     2,612,867   2,669,436   2,681,576   2,565,771
      in single-person firms        696,101    728,293          587,872   789,889     777,024     720,956     713,160
                                     (35%)      (34%)            (26%)     (30%)       (29%)       (27%)       (28%)

 Panel C: Percentiles of income in baseline sample (Yi ), USD
   10th                               280        286             306        276         269         306         218
   50th                              4,025      4,224            4,466     4,874       5,350       5,795       6,003
   90th                             22,043      22,900          23,252     25,991      26,916      28,225      28,443
   99th                             166,190    165,239          224,958   187,165     180,949     180,741     177,894

Notes: Panel A is based on all individuals in our administrative dataset. Panels B and C are based on our
baseline sample of individuals in the administrative dataset who have strictly positive income and whose
labor income can be mapped to an education-pronvince pair.




B.3       International Trade Data
We rely on two sources of international trade data. The first is Ecuador's custom records, which
measure firm-level exports and imports in each HS6 product and by the partner country of desti-




                                                           71
        Figure B.2: Share of Aggregate Factor Payments by Factor Category, 2012


          Share of income by factor category
                                               100%


                                               75%


                                               50%


                                               25%


                                                0%
                                                      0th           25th             50th         75th           100th
                                                                      Percentiles of total income
                                                            Low education   Mid education   High education   Capital


Notes: Based on baseline sample of individuals in the administrative dataset who have strictly positive
income and whose labor income can be mapped to an education-pronvince pair.


nation or origin.47 This dataset covers the universe of Ecuador's exports and imports in 2009-2011.
We focus on Ecuador's trade with its 50 largest trade partners, and aggregate all other countries
into a group representing the rest of the world. Figure B.3 describes the composition of Ecuador's
exports and imports in 2009-2011, based on this customs database.
   Our second source of trade data is CEPII's BACI dataset, which reports bilateral trade flows
worldwide (for 2009-15 and beyond) at the HS6 level. We use this dataset to construct proxies
for foreign shocks in export demand and import prices, as described in Section 5. Specifically, for
each HS6 product and year, we compute the total value and average unit value of the imports
of all countries in the dataset, excluding Ecuador as both importer and exporter. The log of total
world imports is our measure of the product export shock, and the average of the log import unit
value is our measure of the import price shock.


B.4    Earnings Survey Data
This subsection describes the earnings survey data that we use to supplement our baseline anal-
ysis. Section B.4.1 describes Ecuador's National Survey of Income and Expenditures from Urban

  47 Ecuador's custom records track products using the 6-digit NANDINA system, which is similar to the
2007 HS 6-digit classification system. We drop trade flows in the case of the 1.4% of NANDINA codes that
we cannot match to HS codes.

                                                                                72
                                         Figure B.3: Composition of Ecuador's Exports and Imports, 2009-2011

                                20                                                                                                                              20
Exports in billion US dollars




                                                                                                                                                                     Imports in billion US dollars
                                15                                                                                                                              15



                                10                                                                                                                              10



                                 5                                                                                                                              5



                                 0                                                                                                                              0
                                        2009                    2010                  2011        2009                     2010                       2011
                                                               Year                                                        Year
                                                                                                  Agricultural products           Mineral products
                                               Agricultural products   Mineral products
                                                                                                  Machinery/electrical products   Chemical products
                                               Manufactured products
                                                                                                  Vehicular products              Other manufactured products



Notes: Trade flows by product category computed from firm-level custom records in 2009-2011.


and Rural Households (ENIGHUR), a detailed survey carried out in 2011-2012 that we incorpo-
rate into our analysis in Section 7.2. Section B.4.2 describes Ecuador's National Employment,
Unemployment and Underemployment Survey (ENEMDU), a shorter survey that was carried out
quarterly throughout 2009-2015, which we use in Section 7.3. Both surveys were administered by
Ecuador's National Institute of Statistics and Censuses (INEC).


B.4.1                                   ENIGHUR Survey

Ecuador's ENIGHUR survey, collected information from 39,617 households during the period be-
tween April 2011 and March 2012. Its objective was to measure the distribution, amount and struc-
ture of household income and expenses. This dataset is representative at the national level and
covers Ecuador's formal and informal economy. It has information about 153,444 respondents,
who resemble Ecuador's total population (15.24 and 15.47 million in 2011 and 2012, respectively)
when we take into account the frequency sampling weights available in the survey.48 We limit our
sample to the group of respondents that were 15 years or older at the moment of being surveyed,
and keep only those with positive earnings who are currently working.49 This results in a sample
size of 60,465 respondents, representative of around 6 million working individuals in Ecuador.
                                 Importantly, the survey reports each respondent i's demographics, monthly earnings, and

                                48 In
       what follows, all aggregate statistics that we employ are weighted by these sampling weights.
                                49 A
       respondent is defined as currently working if s/he either: (i) worked (as an employee or in the
operation of a business that the respondent wholly or partially owns) at least one hour last week; (ii) did
not work last week but did an activity to help the household (like helping in a family business); or (iii) did
not work last week, but had a job or business to which s/he was surely going to return after a temporary
absence (such as an illness or vacation).

                                                                                             73
workplace characteristics for each occupation o (including both employment, self-employment,
and operating a business that the respondent owns a share of) in which they were engaged during
the week prior to their survey week.50 We classify each occupation o for each respondent i as for-
mal in the following cases: when o (i ) refers to employment at a firm (not a domicile), if that firm
either has a taxpayer ID (a Registro Único de Contribuyentes, or RUC) or has more than 100 em-
ployees, and i reports receiving some social security contributions from their employer; when o (i )
refers to employment in domestic work, if the respondent reports receiving some social security
contributions from their employer; when o (i ) refers to employment in a branch of government;
and when o (i ) refers to operating a firm in which the respondent is a partial owner, if that firm
has a RUC or has more than 100 employees. Otherwise, we classify o (i ) as informal.
    We then classify o (i ) according to its factor group f in the same way as in the baseline admin-
istrative data. If o (i ) refers to either employment at a firm, or self-employment at respondent i's
own firm but where i hires no paid employees, then we classify the factor type as labor of the type
corresponding to the respondent's education-province. Otherwise, if o (i ) refers to the operation
of a firm that the respondent partially or wholly owns, and that hires employees, we classify the
factor type as oil or non-oil capital depending on the sector in which the firm operates. The survey
has 544 original (i.e. unweighted) respondents in the median factor group, 138 respondents in the
smallest, and 4,049 in the largest.
    Based on these definitions and the information on annualized earnings by occupation, we
denote Yi, f ,F as individual i's total annual earnings, summed across all occupations o (i ), from each
factor type f and formality status F.51 Then we calculate total earnings as Yi   f ,F Yi, f ,F and
factor earnings shares as i, f ,F  Yi, f ,F /Yi . Finally, we calculate the total informal factor earnings
within each sector. These ingredients enter the counterfactual calculations reported in Section 7.2.
    While our analysis in Section 7.2 uses data on formality from the administrative database and
data on informality from the ENIGHUR survey, it is useful to compare their measures of the for-
mal earnings of each factor. Figure B.4 does this for 73 factor groups (72 labor groups plus Non-oil
capital, since Oil capital is never represented in the survey) using the 2011 administrative data.
The fit among the labor groups is high (the R2 from the line of best-fit for Figure B.4 is 0.78), so it
appears that, despite the possibility of survey misreporting and sampling errors, the administra-
tive and survey datasets are capturing similar notions of formal earnings across the labor factor
distribution. However, the capital point is a clear outlier, with far more total capital earnings in
the administrative dataset than in the (formal earnings segment of the) ENIGHUR survey. This

   50 The survey questionnaire asks all of the details we require about the respondent's "main" and "sec-

ondary" occupation. For "all other occupations" (of which fewer than 1% report having any) the question-
naire does not allow us to classify the occupation(s) as formal or informal, so we code these as informal.
   51 Employment earnings include (annualized rates of) wages, overtime and bonuses in the past month

as well as total amounts of additional payments (paid leave, retroactive payments, etc.) received in the past
year. The earnings of business owners are calculated as the firm's profits (over the past year for agricul-
tural businesses, and over the past half-year for non-agricultural businesses) adjusted for the respondent's
ownership share.

                                                     74
            Figure B.4: Comparison of Administrative and Survey Factor Earnings




                         ENIGHUR annual formal factor payments (log)
                                                                       24




                                                                       20




                                                                       16
                                                                            16                    20                         24
                                                                                 Administrative data factor payments (log)

Notes: Filled dots correspond to labor factor groups (education-province pairs) while the empty dot rep-
resents the non-oil capital factor, and the black line indicates y = x. The x-axis reports the (log) value of
total earnings in each factor group (i.e. Y f = iI Yi, f ) as measured in the administrative data in 2011. The
y-axis reports the analogous measurement from the ENIGHUR survey in regards to formal earnings.


should be expected given the active definition of capital earnings that is implicit in the earnings
survey, as well as the likelihood of a survey failing to capture top earnings, especially among
capital owners.
    Finally, Figure B.5 reports the share of earnings within each factor group that is earned from
the formal economy. The median factor group derives earnings that are 60.4% formal, but there
is considerable dispersion across factors in their formal income shares (the minimal share is 7.1%
and the maximum is 87.1%). There is no systematic relationship between a factor's total (that is,
formal plus informal) survey earnings and its formal income share. However, Figure B.5 shows
that there does exist a clear (positive) relationship when the formal income share is compared to
per capita earnings across factor groups.52


B.4.2      ENEMDU Survey

While the ENEMDU survey was conducted quarterly, its fourth quarter editions were more ex-
plicitly designed to be representative at the province level (and typically larger) than those in the
rest of the year, so we use only the fourth quarter information. This results in a number of respon-
dents (with positive earnings, over the age of 15) ranging from 25,712 to 42,017 depending on the
year.
    This survey shares many features with the ENIGHUR survey described above, so we discuss
here only any differences that have implications for our analysis. First, all ENEMDU respondents
report their earnings in the past month. Second, unlike the ENIGHUR survey, the ENEMDU
   52 We   calculate per capita factor group earnings on the basis of survey respondents' main occupations.

                                                                                                 75
                                                                Figure B.5: Formal Share of Earnings by Factor Group

                                           100%                                                                                                                       100%
Formal factor payments as share of total




                                           75%                                                                                                                        75%




                                           50%                                                                                                                        50%




                                           25%                                                                                                                        25%




                                            0%                                                                                                                        0%
                                                  17       18        19         20        21        22        7.5          8.0         8.5         9.0         9.5
                                                       ENIGHUR annual total factor payments (log)             ENIGHUR annual per capita total factor payments (log)


Notes: Filled dots correspond to labor factor groups (education-province pairs) while the empty dot repre-
sents the non-oil capital factor. The figure on the left reports on the x-axis the (log) value of total earnings
in each factor group (i.e. Y f = iI Yi, f ) as measured in the survey data, whereas the one on the right
reports the (log) per capita earnings in each factor group (i.e. Y f divided by the frequency-weighted number
of respondents whose main occupation corresponds to factor group f ) as measured in the survey data. The
common y-axis reports the share of the factor group's total earnings that are obtained formally.


survey does not disaggregate business costs so we cannot use reports of positive wage costs to
identify businesses that hire employees (and hence are owned by a capital factor); we use the
respondent's occupation description instead.53 Third, the ENEMDU survey does not report the
ownership share of business owners, so we assume that they earn all of their firm's profits.54
Finally, ENEMDU provides slightly less information with which to classify employee income as
formal or informal.55
                                             While these differing survey characteristics may result in differing measures of factor earnings
in ENEMDU and ENIGHUR, we find that such differences are minimal in practice. Across factor
groups, the correlation between total earnings inferred from the 2011 ENEMDU survey and those
from the 2011-12 ENIGHUR survey is 0.96. Similarly, the correlation between the two surveys'
inferred number of individuals whose primary occupation lies within each factor group is 0.97.
And the correlation between their inferred share of factor earnings that is formal is 0.96.

                                            53 That
           is, when the occupation is categorized as "patron" the survey questionnaire intends this to refer
to a business that typically hires others. By contrast, when the occupation is listed as "self-employed" this
refers to a business that has no salaried employees.
   54 In the ENIGHUR survey, which does report ownership shares, the share of total profits accruing to the

respondent, aggregating across all respondents and occupations, is 96%.
   55 For employee occupations our previous formality classification requires that both the employee's

firm has formal characteristics and that the employee appears to be enrolled in the social security system.
Information on the latter is incomplete in ENEMDU. In particular, for main occupations only the total
amount of employer deductions (due to social security payments, income tax payments, etc.) is reported, so
we assume that any positive total amount implies social security enrollment. For secondary occupations no
such information is reported, so we remove the social security requirement from our formality classification
in such cases.

                                                                                                         76
C     Empirical Appendix
C.1     Summary Statistics
Table C.1 reports summary statistics of the distribution of capital income shares, export exposure
and import exposures across individuals in Ecuador from 2009-2015.

        Table C.1: Summary Statistics of Income and Exposure Across Individuals

                                                               Percentiles of distribution
                                         Mean           10th     50th      90th      99th      99.9th

         Capital income share            0.078       0.000       0.000    0.003     1.000      1.000
 2009    Export exposure (EEi )          0.158       0.088       0.138    0.281     0.455      0.455
         Import exposure ( IEi )         0.041       0.014       0.031    0.097     0.111      0.122

         Capital income share            0.082       0.000       0.000    0.020     1.000      1.000
 2010    Export exposure (EEi )          0.169       0.088       0.142    0.287     0.479      0.479
         Import exposure ( IEi )         0.045       0.011       0.032    0.105     0.128      0.148

         Capital income share            0.088       0.000       0.000    0.121     1.000      1.000
 2011    Export exposure (EEi )          0.164       0.095       0.139    0.292     0.445      0.445
         Import exposure ( IEi )         0.043       0.003       0.028    0.105     0.127      0.139

         Capital income share            0.110       0.000       0.000    0.770     1.000      1.000
 2012    Export exposure (EEi )          0.155       0.084       0.128    0.258     0.474      0.474
         Import exposure ( IEi )         0.038       0.011       0.027    0.087     0.108      0.123

         Capital income share            0.112       0.000       0.000    0.799     1.000      1.000
 2013    Export exposure (EEi )          0.150       0.073       0.133    0.274     0.586      0.586
         Import exposure ( IEi )         0.036       0.013       0.028    0.082     0.101      0.112

         Capital income share            0.116       0.000       0.000    0.862     1.000      1.000
 2014    Export exposure (EEi )          0.158       0.076       0.142    0.292     0.577      0.577
         Import exposure ( IEi )         0.030       0.006       0.018    0.073     0.093      0.099

         Capital income share            0.118      0.000        0.000    0.898     1.000      1.000
 2015    Export exposure (EEi )          0.154      0.070        0.144    0.280     0.590      0.590
         Import exposure ( IEi )         0.023      -0.002       0.012    0.070     0.086      0.095
Notes: Baseline sample of individuals with strictly positive income. Capital income share refers to total
capital earnings.




                                                   77
C.2    Export and Import Exposure Across Years
Figure C.1 illustrates the distribution of individual-level export exposure (EEi ), as in Figure 3, for
all years, 2009-2015. Figure C.2 does the same for import exposure ( IEi ) as in Figure 4.

    Figure C.1: Distribution of Export Exposure (EEi ) Across Individuals, 2009-2015

                                     2009                                         2010
               0.1760                                      0.1835



               0.1560                                      0.1660



               0.1365                                      0.1490


                                     2011                                         2012
               0.1790                                      0.1720



               0.1585                                      0.1515



               0.1385                                      0.1310

        EE i
                                     2013                                         2014
               0.1720                                      0.1785



               0.1475                                      0.1545



               0.1230                                      0.1300
                                                                    0th    25th    50th   75th    100th
                                     2015
               0.1780


                                                                     EE i based on total income
               0.1515
                                                                     EE i based on labor income only

               0.1255
                        0th   25th   50th   75th   100th
                                               Percentile of total income




                                                     78
Figure C.2: Distribution of Import Exposure ( IEi ) Across Individuals, 2009-2015

                                2009                                         2010
          0.0530                                      0.0560



          0.0440                                      0.0460



          0.0345                                      0.0360


                                2011                                         2012
          0.0525                                      0.0465



          0.0425                                      0.0380



          0.0320                                      0.0290

   IE i
                                2013                                         2014
          0.0435                                      0.0365



          0.0360                                      0.0290



          0.0290                                      0.0215
                                                               0th    25th    50th    75th   100th
                                2015
          0.0300


                                                                IE i based on total income
          0.0215
                                                                IE i based on labor income only

          0.0135
                   0th   25th   50th   75th   100th
                                          Percentile of total income




                                                79
C.3     Estimation of Micro-Level Elasticities: Zeroth-Stage Regression
The logic of the IVs in Section 5 relies on product-level export and import shocks in the rest of the
world, (Export Shock)vt and (Import Shock)vt , having a positive effect on the log of Ecuador's total
export value and import unit value, (Export Ecuador)vt , and (Import Ecuador)vt , respectively. We
now evaluate whether this is the case through the following zeroth-stage regression:

                                     Ecuador    W
                                    Yv ,t    = Yv ,t +  v + t +    v,t ,


      Ecuador = (Export Ecuador) , (Import Ecuador) , Y W = (Export Shock) , (Import Shock) ,
with Yv ,t                      vt                 vt  v,t                vt               vt
and  v and t are product and year fixed-effects. In this specification, the coefficient  captures
the pass-through of foreign shocks to Ecuadorian variables. We estimate this pass-through using
the sample of product-year pairs for which we observe positive exports and imports for Ecuador
between 2009 and 2015.
    Table C.2 reports the results of this exercise for the total export value in Panel A and the import
unit value in Panel B. For both exports and imports, column (1) shows that a foreign shock of
1% causes an increase of roughly 0.2% in Ecuador's export total value and import unit value.
Columns (2) and (3) indicate that the pass-through coefficient is positive for both manufacturing
and non-manufacturing products.

                  Table C.2: Impact of World Shocks on Ecuadorian Trade

                                                                     (1)           (2)           (3)

 Panel A: Log of Ecuador's total export value
   Log of World total export value                                  0.204         0.224         0.131
                                                                   (0.026)       (0.031)       (0.048)
      Product-year observations                                    7,691          5,817         1,874
      Number of products                                           1,593          1,265          328
 Panel B: Log of Ecuador import unit value
   World avg. log import unit value value                           0.232         0.243         0.170
                                                                   (0.020)       (0.022)       (0.045)
      Product-year observations                                    26,319        23,238         3,081
      Number of products                                            4,058         3,555          503
 Sample of Products
   Manufacturing                                                     Yes           Yes           No
   Non-manufactuting                                                 Yes           No            Yes
Notes: Sample of HS6 products exported (Panel A) and imported (Panel B) by Ecuador in 2009-2015. De-
pendent variable is the log of Ecuador's total export value in Panel A and the log of Ecuador's import unit
value in Panel B. In each specification, we report the coefficient of the corresponding variable computed
for all countries in the world economy excluding Ecuador. All specifications include product and year
fixed-effects. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by product.


                                                    80
C.4       Micro-Level Test: Specification Details
This section presents the details of the empirical specifications used to estimate  sector ,  trade , and
 input in Section 6.1.


C.4.1      Estimation of  sector

Empirical Specification. Like in Section 5, we allow the demand residual k,t to be a function
of a sector-specific term  k , a year-specific term  t that includes both the aggregate spending and
the aggregate price index, and an unobserved preference shock                                   k ,t .   Thus, equation (22) implies

                                         ln(         Dn,t ) =  sector ln Pk,t +  k +  t +                kc,t .                    (C.1)
                                               nNk


The estimation of this specification requires measures of the CES price index in each sector, Pk,t . We
follow the same strategy used in Section 5.2 to measure the CES price index for domestic factors
in each firm. For any firm n in sector k, inverting final demand in (4) implies that

                                                                      1
                                             ln Pk,t = ln pn,t +         ln (dnk,t /nc,t ) .
                                                                      -1

Averaging this expression across firms using shares of final sales in sector k as weights, we obtain

                                                                       ~k,t +  k,t ,
                                                          ln Pk,t = ln P                                                           (C.2)

        ~k,t  nN dnk,t (ln pn,t + 1 dnk,t ln dnk,t ) and  k,t 
with ln P                                                                                     1
                                                                                                   nNk,t dnk,t ln nc,t . The combi-
                    k ,t              -1                                                     1- 
nation of (C.1) and (C.2) yields our estimating equation

                                         ln(                              ~k,t +  k +  t +
                                                      Dn,t ) =  sector ln P                              k ,t ,                    (C.3)
                                               nNk


with    k ,t      kc,t   +  k ,t .

IV Strategy. To circumvent the simultaneity bias in the estimation of sector in (C.3), we use
three IVs constructed from the sectoral average of the firm-level cost shifters used in the estimation
of  in Section 5.2. These are

                    ^ k ,t =
                    E                           ^ n,t ,
                                         dnk,t0 E         ^k,t =
                                                          I                        ^n,t ,
                                                                            dnk,t0 I        ^k
                                                                                            w 
                                                                                               ,t =                      ^n
                                                                                                                  dnk,t0 w 
                                                                                                                            ,t ,   (C.4)
                                nNk,t0                             nNk,t0                                nNk,t0


where dnk,t0 is the share of firm n in total final spending in sector k at the initial year t0 . The
validity of these IVs relies on the assumption that, conditional on sector and time fixed effects,
global export and import shocks are orthogonal to shocks in the final demand for the products of
different firms and sectors.


                                                                      81
C.4.2   Estimation of  trade

Empirical Specification. Like in Section 5, we allow the firm's relative demand for imported
inputs, ln((1 - n,t )/n,t ), to be a function of a firm-specific term  n , a year-specific term  t , a
control set Controlsn,t , and an unobserved technology shock         n,t .   Equation (23) therefore implies
                        
                       xn ,t                       D
                 ln           =  trade ln(wn ,t / Pn,t ) +  Controlsn,t +  n +  t +           n,t ,     (C.5)
                      nN n,tx
        is the same measure of the price of foreign factor services facing firm n used in Sec-
where wn ,t
           D is the price index of domestic inputs for firm n, which we measure as ln P D =
tion 5.2; Pn ,t                                                                        n,t
mN mn ln pm,t using the values of pm,t implied by (17); and the vector of controls Controlsn,t
include the same variables as in Section 5.2: time dummies interacted with the share of the firm's
costs spent on primary factors and imported inputs.


IV Strategy. In the estimation of (C.5), we use the global shock to the cost of firm n's imported
        ^n
inputs, w  in equation (21), as IV. Again, the validity of this instrument requires foreign shocks
           ,t
to the price of imported products to be orthogonal to technology shocks in Ecuador.


C.4.3   Estimation of  input

Empirical Specification. We allow the firm's demand for inputs from different suppliers,
ln mn,t , to be a function of a supplier-specific term  m , a buyer-year term  n,t that absorbs the
buyer's input price index, a control set for each supplier Controlsm,t , and an unobserved input
demand shock     mn,t .   Thus, equation (24) implies

                          ln xmn,t =  input ln pm,t +  Controlsm,t +  n,t +  m +     mn,t ,             (C.6)

where pm,t is still measured using (17) and Controlsm,t again includes time dummies interacted
with the share of the supplier's cost spent on primary factors and imported inputs.


IV Strategy. We address the simultaneity bias in the estimation of (C.6) by instrumenting ln pm,t
                                                  ^ n,t , I
with the same firm-level IVs used in Section 5.2: E       ^n,t and w
                                                                   ^n in equations (19)­(21). This
                                                                      ,t
strategy is valid under the same assumptions necessary for the estimation of .




                                                      82
C.5     Macro-Level Test Under Alternative Micro-Level Elasticities
Figure C.3 describes how estimates of ^ fit vary when alternative values of  and  are used to
construct ln wmodel
              f ,t .


  Figure C.3: Macro-Level Test Under Alternative Values of Micro-Level Elasticities

                           Model Fit for Different Values of         Model Fit for Different Values of 
                           Controls in Column (1) of Table 4         Controls in Column (1) of Table 4
                       8

                       6

                       4

                       2

                       0
                           0     5     10     15     20      25      0      5    10     15     20     25


                           Model Fit for Different Values of         Model Fit for Different Values of 
                           Controls in Column (2) of Table 4         Controls in Column (2) of Table 4
                       8

                       6

                   ^ 4
                    fit

                       2

                       0
                           0     5     10     15     20      25      0      5    10     15     20     25


                           Model Fit for Different Values of         Model Fit for Different Values of 
                           Controls in Column (5) of Table 4         Controls in Column (5) of Table 4
                       8

                       6

                       4

                       2

                       0
                           0     5     10     15     20      25      0      5    10     15     20     25
                                                          Parameter value


Notes: Each panel reports the fit coefficient ^ fit and the 95% confidence interval implied by the estimation
                  model
                ^ f ,t computed under alternative values of the elasticity of substitution across factors in
of (26) with ln w
production,  , and the elasticity of substitution across firms in consumption, . The left-hand panels vary
 at  = 1.96, and the right-hand panels vary  at  = 2.09, the baseline parameter values used in Table 4.
Red points denote those same baseline values. Based on sample of 75 factors in 2009-2015. All specifications
include year and factor fixed effects. Observations are weighted by initial factor payments (with weights
winsorized at the 95 percentile). Standard errors clustered by factor.




                                                                83
C.6     Connecting Exposure Measures to Counterfactual Responses
We now aim to assess how the export and import exposure measures from Section 4, EEi,t and IEi,t ,
relate to the counterfactual changes in earnings predicted for each individual, (Yi,t )trade /Yi,t . We
do this by means of the linear regression

                                 (Yi )trade
                                            =  +  E EEi +  I IEi + i ,                               (C.7)
                                   Yi

using the sample of all individuals i (in 2012). Table C.3 reports our estimates, beginning in col-
umn (1) with the regression coefficients corresponding to total income. Both exposure measures
have signs that are in line with the local predictions of Proposition 2 and Proposition 3 (for  > 1)
and the total contribution of the two exposure measures is high (with an R2 = 0.90). The same
is true for labor income on its own, reported in column (3). In order to explore the relative ex-
planatory contributions of EEi,t and IEi,t to this high overall fit, columns (2) and (4) report the
Shapley decomposition of the R2 in columns (1) and (3), respectively. It is clear, in both cases, that
significantly more fit can be accounted for in this sense by the import exposure measure.

    Table C.3: Distribution of the Gains from Trade and Individual Exposure, 2012

                                            Proportional change                 Proportional change
                                              in total income                     in labor income

                                            Coefficient     Shapley             Coefficient     Shapley
                                            estimates        % R2               estimates        % R2
                                                (1)           (2)                   (3)           (4)

 Export exposure (EE)                           1.228         7.5%                 1.319          8.1%
                                              (0.001)                             (0.001)
 Import exposure ( IE)                         -8.161        92.5%                 -8.216        91.9%
                                              (0.002)                             (0.001)
 R2                                             0.90        100.0%                  0.93        100.0%
 Obs.                                        2,612,867                           2,413,683
Notes: Columns (1) and (3) report the results of the estimation of (C.7) for the changes, between the trade
and the counterfactual autarkic equilibrium, in total and labor income, respectively. Columns (2) and (4)
report the Shapley decomposition of the R2 for each specification. Robust standard errors in parentheses.




                                                    84
