                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      WHAT WERE THE ODDS? ESTIMATING THE MARKET'S PROBABILITY OF
                          UNCERTAIN EVENTS

                                         Ashley Langer
                                         Derek Lemoine

                                      Working Paper 28265
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28265


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020




We are grateful to David Brown, David Card, Gautam Gowrisankaran, Hidehiko Ichimura, Diego
Kaenzig, David Schreindorfer, and Tiemen Woutersen for feedback, to Justin Wolfers for
conference discussion, to the University of Arizona's Eller Center for Management Innovations
in Healthcare and Institute of the Environment for financial support, and to Wendan Zhang and
Frances Slater for research assistance. We also thank seminar participants at Arizona State
University, ASSA 2020, HEC Montreal, TREE, University of Arizona, University of California
Berkeley, and Yale. We gratefully acknowledge an allocation of computer time from the
University of Arizona's High Performance Computing (HPC) facility. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Ashley Langer and Derek Lemoine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
What Were the Odds? Estimating the Market's Probability of Uncertain Events
Ashley Langer and Derek Lemoine
NBER Working Paper No. 28265
December 2020
JEL No. C58,G13,L71,Q43

                                         ABSTRACT

An event study generates only a lower bound on the full effect of an event unless researchers
know the probability that investors assigned to the event before it occurred. We develop two
model-free methods for recovering the market's priced-in probability of events. These methods
require running event studies in financial options to complement the standard event study in stock
prices. Validating both approaches, we estimate that the 2016 U.S. election outcome had a 12%
chance of occurring. This probability is consistent with contemporary polling, bookmaker, and
prediction market estimates. Demonstrating the usefulness of our approaches, we show that many
OPEC meetings' outcomes were well-anticipated. OPEC retained substantial influence on world
oil prices even as the U.S. increased oil production.


Ashley Langer
Department of Economics
University of Arizona
McClelland Hall 401
Tucson, AZ 85721
and NBER
alanger@email.arizona.edu

Derek Lemoine
Department of Economics
University of Arizona
McClelland Hall 401EE
Tucson, AZ 85721
and NBER
dlemoine@email.arizona.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28265
