                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       SUPPLY-SIDE VARIATION IN THE USE OF EMERGENCY DEPARTMENTS

                                         Dan Zeltzer
                                         Liran Einav
                                        Avichai Chasid
                                        Ran D. Balicer

                                     Working Paper 28266
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28266


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2020




We thank the Editor and two anonymous referees for many useful comments, and Joseph Rashba
for excellent research assistance. Dan Zeltzer acknowledges funding from the Foerder Institute
for Economic Research at Tel Aviv University. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Dan Zeltzer, Liran Einav, Avichai Chasid, and Ran D. Balicer. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Supply-Side Variation in the Use of Emergency Departments
Dan Zeltzer, Liran Einav, Avichai Chasid, and Ran D. Balicer
NBER Working Paper No. 28266
December 2020
JEL No. I11

                                         ABSTRACT

We study the role of person-specific and place-specific factors in explaining geographic variation
in emergency department (ED) utilization using detailed data on 150,000 patients who moved
regions within Israel. We document that about half of the destination-origin differences in the
average ED utilization rate across districts translates to the change (up or down) in movers'
propensity to visit the ED. In contrast, we find no change in the probability of having an
unplanned hospital admission (that is, via the ED), implying that the entire change in ED use by
movers is driven by ED visits that do not lead to hospital admission. Similar results are obtained
in a complementary event study, which uses hospital entry as a source of variation. The results
from both approaches suggest that supply-side variation in ED access affects only the less severe
cases--for which close substitutes likely exist--and that variation across ED physicians in their
propensity to admit patients is not explained by place-specific factors, such as differences in
incentives, capacity, or diagnostic quality.

Dan Zeltzer                                     Avichai Chasid
The Eitan Berglas School of Economics           Clalit Health Services
Tel Aviv University                             Tel Aviv
P.O.Box 39040                                   Israel
Tel Aviv 6997801                                Avichai4@gmail.com
Israel
dzeltzer@tauex.tau.ac.il                        Ran D. Balicer
                                                Department of Epidemiology
Liran Einav                                     Faculty of Health Sciences
Stanford University                             Ben Gurion University
Department of Economics                         Beersheba
579 Jane Stanford Way                           Israel
Stanford, CA 94305-6072                         rbalicer@clalit.org.il
and NBER
leinav@stanford.edu
1       Introduction
Admitting a patient to the hospital from the emergency department (ED) is one of the
more expensive routine healthcare decisions (Sabbatini, Nallamothu and Kocher, 2014). It
directly influences the probability of hospital stays, which account for a large share of total
healthcare spending.
    Both ED utilization and admissions through the ED exhibit large variation over time
and across space, and the sources of that variation remain unclear. To better understand
this variation, it is important to acknowledge the interrelated nature of patients' decisions to
visit the ED and emergency physicians' decisions as to which ED patients to admit. Either
of these margins may exhibit regional variation. The decision to visit the ED for urgent
care may be influenced by place-specific factors, such as distance to the nearest ED and
the presence of nearby urgent care centers and retail clinics (Alexander, Currie and Schnell,
2019; Allen, Cummings and Hockenberry, 2019). The decision to admit patients from the ED
may be influenced by place-specific factors, such as the distribution of cases arriving at the
ED, hospital diagnostic quality, capacity, and incentives for filling unoccupied beds. Both
decisions may also be driven by patient-specific factors, such as preferences for walk-in care
over scheduled care and population morbidity that affects the need for urgent and emergent
care. Patient-specific factors generally correspond to what we think of as "demand" and
place-specific factors to what we think of as "supply."
    In this paper, we analyze the relative importance of supply- and demand-side factors in
driving ED use and ED admission decisions. Separating demand and supply factors is an
important first step for both understanding the nature of the variation in such use and for
assessing the need for and potential impact of policies aimed at changing the variation.
    To implement this exercise, we study the response to changes in ED access using two
complementary empirical approaches. Our primary approach uses the variation in ED uti-
lization across space. To separate the variation in ED utilization that is due to place-specific
factors from variation due to patient-specific factors, we use within-patient variation in ED
utilization as patients move, arguably for non-healthcare reasons, across regions that vary
in their access to EDs.1 In a secondary approach, we use an event-study design, which takes
advantage of the entry of a new hospital (and thus a new ED) into a large market, thus
increasing ED access sharply over time.
    We implement our empirical strategy using detailed and comprehensive longitudinal med-
ical data from about half of the Israeli population. The data come from Clalit Health Ser-
    1
    Our approach is similar to that used by Finkelstein, Gentzkow and Williams (2016, 2018, 2019); Cutler
et al. (2019); Agha, Frandsen and Rebitzer (2019) among others.



                                                   1
vices, the largest of four Health Maintenance Organizations (HMOs) in Israel that provide
universal, standardized, tax-funded health insurance to all residents. We study migration
across Israel's nine districts, which are geographic units comparable to US counties, with
an average population of about one million residents per district and a fairly wide range of
annual ED use rates (the share of covered individuals who visit the ED in a given year),
ranging from 20% to over 30%. ED visits account directly for 3% of all healthcare spend-
ing, and indirectly, as a portal for unplanned admission, for more than a quarter of total
spending. Our main sample consists of all 150,000 adult beneficiaries (aged 25 and older)
who moved across districts between 2011 and 2017.
    The use of the Israeli setting is quite attractive for this purpose. While health insurance
coverage broadly resembles that of Medicare in the United States, annual churn rates are
lower than 1%, so we can track the entire enrollee population over many years, with min-
imal attrition. Moreover, Clalit provides uniform coverage and fairly homogeneous clinics
across the country, so health insurance coverage does not change when patients move, and
unobservable provider characteristics are less likely to drive the nature of variation across
districts. Finally, movers in our sample are relatively young, thus mitigating concerns that
may arise with older population (e.g., Medicare) that moves might be driven by changes in
health status.
    Moving across districts is disruptive and likely affects short-run patterns of healthcare
utilization. For this reason, as is now standard in the literature, our primary empirical
strategy does not compare movers to non-movers but instead relies on estimating the extent
to which the change in movers' ED use around the time of a move correlates with the
destination-origin difference in ED use. Intuitively, if all ED use is driven by place-specific
factors, we expect it to be perfectly correlated with this difference. Conversely, if it is
entirely driven by individual demand, we expect this correlation to be zero. Because we
observe both moves from high to low ED-use areas and vice versa, we can separately and
flexibly control for trends in ED utilization that are common to all movers and thus account
for any disruption associated with the move itself.
    Our main results reveal that the destination district's ED use rate has an important
impact on the change in ED utilization of the mover. After moving to a district with an
annual ED use rate that is one percentage point higher (lower) than the origin district, movers
are about half a percentage point more (less) likely to visit the ED per year. Remarkably,
all of the correlation between an individual ED use rate and the origin-destination difference
in average ED use rates is concentrated in ED visits that did not result in admission to the
hospital. In contrast, for visits that resulted in an admission, we find no correlation between
individual rates and the destination-origin difference in ED utilization rate.


                                              2
     Taken together, the results suggest that at least half of the geographic variation in ED
use is attributable to supply-side factors, but that such factors influence only cases that are
discharged home, which are likely less severe. Conversely, the entire variation in ED visits
that result in a subsequent hospital admission is attributable to demand-side factors. Using
data on non-ED healthcare utilization, we present additional evidence consistent with the
fact that these incremental low-severity ED visits are associated with a reduction in the
utilization of other, presumably substitutable healthcare services.
     We exploit the fact that in the Israeli context we observe comprehensive data on the
affiliation of patients and providers, as well as detailed data on patients, to document that
distance from the patient's "home clinic" to the nearest hospital and the propensity of
primary care providers to refer patients to the ED are important channels that drive our
main results. Both channels change upon a move, and (as we show) impact mainly outpatient
ED use: patients living (or moving) closer to a hospital, or those with (or switching to) a
high-propensity-to-refer physician are more likely to visit the ED, but not more likely to be
admitted from the ED.
     In a complementary approach, we exploit a distinctly different, albeit imperfect source
of variation in ED access: the impact on ED use and admissions that results from the
opening of a new general hospital in a previously under-served city. Like patient migration,
hospital entry also leads to a sharp change in supply-side factors because it significantly
reduces the distance and travel time to the nearest ED for the "treated" population of nearby
residents (while also improving access to other inpatient services). We use a difference-in-
differences framework to account for potential time trends by comparing outcomes of the
treated population against outcomes of "untreated" patients residing in similar cities that
did not experience a change in ED availability. Conforming with our earlier results, we find
that an ED opening that occurs when a general hospital enters a local market results in a
sharp increase in the monthly probability of an ED visit of nearby residents compared to
residents of comparable cities. Furthermore, once again, the increase in ED use following the
supply-side change is entirely concentrated in visits that do not result in hospital admission.
     Taken together, the results consistently suggest that supply-side variation in ED ac-
cess affects only the less severe ED cases--for which alternative settings might be a good
substitute--but not the more severe cases that result in an admission.2 In contrast, our
finding that the entire effect is driven by ED visits that are less severe suggests that prior
   2
     The finding that supply-side variation explains a substantial share of ED utilization is consistent with
prior evidence that suggests a scope for substituting ED with other types of urgent care providers in low
severity cases, using research designs that are based on the variation in entry and opening hours of retail
clinics and urgent-care centers (Alexander, Currie and Schnell, 2019; Allen, Cummings and Hockenberry,
2019; Llovera et al., 2019).



                                                     3
evidence of large variations in admissions through the ED may reflect mostly demand-side,
not supply-side, factors. Specifically, our evidence militates against explanations of variation
in ED admissions in terms of factors that vary geographically. In particular, the findings do
not fit with the idea that the mere decision to visit the ED is an important driver of inpatient
hospital utilization rates and the findings do not lend support to the idea that admission de-
cisions (from the ED) depend on hospital differences in available capacity, diagnostic quality,
or financial incentives.
     A large body of existing work has documented substantial variation in ED use and ad-
missions, both across and within countries. For example, Shoff, Caines and Pines (2018) find
that the ED admission rate of Medicare beneficiaries in 2012 varied tremendously across US
counties; Abualenain et al. (2013) and Sabbatini, Nallamothu and Kocher (2014) document
large variation in hospital-level admission rates; Dawson, Weerasooriya and Webster (2008)
document variation across Canadian provinces; and Van Parys (2016) documents variation
in admission rates among ED physicians in Florida. By separating supply- and demand-side
factors, our analysis extends our understanding of the potential nature of this variation.
Indeed, in the concluding section, we discuss the potential policy implications of our results.
     The rest of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 presents our data source and setting.
Section 3 presents our main sample and empirical strategy using patient migration. Section 4
presents our main results decomposing ED utilization rates to place and person effects, and
Section 5 explores some channels that drive these results. Section 6 presents additional
results analyzing the impact of hospital entry on ED use. Section 7 concludes and discusses
some potential policy implications.


2     Setting and Data
2.1    Institutional Background
Our data come from Clalit Health Services, one of Israel's four non-profit HMOs that provide
universal tax-funded healthcare coverage from birth onward to all Israeli residents, in accor-
dance with the National Health Insurance Law (1995). Coverage broadly resembles that of
Medicare parts A, B, and D, and includes hospital admissions, outpatient services, physician
consults, drugs, and durable medical equipment. The set of services covered under the uni-
versal coverage tier is reviewed and expanded every year by a professional committee that
ranks new technologies to match a predetermined budget increase. The universal coverage
tier is fully subsidized (HMOs receive risk-adjusted capitated payments from the government
for each individual they enroll) but includes copay rates that are updated annually by the


                                               4
Ministry of Health.3 ED visits, which are the focus of our analysis, require a copay, with
certain exemptions.4 At the time of our observation period, the copay was NIS 900 (about
$240) during the day and NIS 200 (about $55) between 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.5
    All four HMOs offer identical universal coverage but use distinct provider networks to do
so, with the exception of hospitals, which admit all Israeli patients regardless of their choice
of HMO. All four HMOs also offer optional supplemental coverage for items not covered
by the universal tier, such as second-opinion specialist consults and additional paramedical
treatments for children. The supplemental coverage requires subscribers to pay an additional,
regulated, age-rated premium. In principle, enrollees can switch HMOs every other month
and maintain their universal coverage, but the annual switching rate is extremely low (less
than 1%), so each HMO covers a very stable population of enrollees.
    Clalit is the largest of these four HMOs, covering approximately 4.5 million enrollees of
all ages, or just over one half of the entire Israeli population. It is an integrated provider and
insurer, providing most of the services it finances, and reimbursing pre-authorized services
purchased from external providers. Its enrollees are admitted to all of Israel's thirty general
hospitals, eight of which Clalit directly owns and operates.6 Clalit employs over 11,000
physicians and 10,000 nurses, operates over 1,500 clinics across the country, and provides
multiple outpatient services. Most of Clalit's physicians are salaried. Enrollees also have
access to urgent care centers (UCCs) that provide after-hours walk-in care for urgent but
non-emergent conditions. Most UCCs are operated by external providers, charge a copay of
about NIS 90, and close before midnight.
    Clalit is organized around nine districts, which follow geographic boundaries and are
all subject to general operational guidelines from Clalit management. Patients consume
the majority of their healthcare within the boundaries of their home district. Specifically,
patients use local services in about 95% of the cases for primary care visits and diagnostic
tests, more than 80% for specialist visits, and more than 70% for outpatient and inpatient
services.
   3
     Copay rates differ by service, with a service-specific quarterly out-of-pocket maximum. There are no
copays for inpatient services.
   4
     ED visits that result in admission are exempt. In addition, copay exemption applies for patients who
were referred to the ED by a physician or for one of several specific emergent conditions, such as traffic
accidents, work- or school-related injuries, new bone fractures, and injuries that require stitches.
   5
     Prices and payments are denoted in current New Israeli Shekels (which had an average exchange rate of
3.7 NIS per USD during the observation period).
   6
     Hospitals are reimbursed per diem, except for a set of procedures (such as surgeries), for which hospital
reimbursement is based on a procedure-related grouping of services. Patients can also utilize services from
external providers, which in non-emergent cases require pre-authorization. Our data include detailed claims
information for all these services.




                                                      5
2.2     Data
Clalit maintains detailed and comprehensive claim-level data associated with all the services
it provides to its universe of enrollees. The data contain demographic information about
enrollees, information that is typical of billing data in the United States, as well as additional
information about tests and test results, sometimes referred to as electronic medical records.
The data we use for this study are based on Clalit's claims data from 2010­2018.
    For our analysis, we construct health utilization variables at the patient-year level. Our
primary variable of interest is the propensity of ED visits and whether the visit resulted in
the patient being discharged or admitted to the hospital. We exclude a small number of
cases that resulted in death during the ED visit; this is not common (accounting for 0.016%
of patient-year observations among movers), so grouping them with ED visits that result in
admission does not change any of the results. We refer to ED visits in which the patient was
discharged without being admitted to the hospital as outpatient ED visits. We construct
additional health utilization variables, including healthcare spending for different categories
of services and UCC utilization.7 The main spending categories are prescription drugs and
inpatient services, which together account for two thirds of total spending.


2.3     Cross-Sectional Variation Across Districts
The focus of our study is the extent of geographic variation in ED use and how it may be
related to healthcare outcomes. In this section, we describe this variation, which will then be
used as a key input in our analysis in the next section. The geographic unit for this analysis
is a district, which is the administrative unit around which Clalit's healthcare services are
organized. There are nine such districts that cover the entire country of Israel, with an
average population of one million residents per district, so they can be thought of as similar
in size to counties in the United States. Unlike the US, all districts in Israel are roughly
similar in size, with the exception of the Eilat district, which is much smaller.8
    Similar to patterns documented in other countries, Israel's healthcare spending in general
and ED use in particular exhibit marked geographic variation. Appendix Table A1 reports
summary statistics that illustrate the variation in healthcare utilization across these districts.
For each district, Panel A summarizes annual ED use. For the population aged 25 and above,
the probability of an ED visit ranges from 20.1% to 30.8% across Israel's districts. The
fraction of ED visits resulting in an admission also exhibits cross-sectional variation, ranging
   7
     Because we do not reliably observe negotiated prices for UCC visits, we only measure their utilization.
UCC visits account for less than 1% of total spending.
   8
     Eilat is an Israeli port and resort town located in the very south of the country and is quite isolated
from other population centers.


                                                     6
from 17.6% to 39.1% of ED visits across districts. Panel B summarizes spending by service
category and shows a similar variation in spending across districts. Panel C summarizes
statistics related to two potential channels: average distance to the nearest hospital and
average referral rates to the ED by primary care physicians. We discuss these in detail in
Section 5.
    Figure 1 summarizes the regional variation of different measures of ED use and spending.
For each such measure, the figure shows its loading on each of two principal components of
the regional variation in all measures shown. There are two noteworthy observations. First,
there seems to be a clear distinction between districts with more unplanned admissions
(through the ED), drugs, specialist visits, and labs on the one hand, and districts with
heavier hospital use through planned inpatient visits and outpatient ED visits. Second,
primary care and UCC visits vary across districts and are unrelated to most services but
are negatively correlated with outpatient ED use. These services load almost entirely on the
second principal component.
    Of course, it is difficult to draw sharp conclusions from descriptive evidence for variation
in ED use and its correlation with other services, partly because it is unknown whether this
variation reflects regional differences in the patient population's morbidity or preferences, or
in provider access or choices. Next, we turn to decomposing this variation along these lines.


3     Empirical Strategy and Baseline Sample
Our primary analysis relies on a "movers" research design (in the spirit of Finkelstein,
Gentzkow and Williams, 2016), which analyzes within-individual changes in healthcare uti-
lization and outcomes before and after a move from one geographic unit (district in our
context) to another. In this section we describe the empirical strategy and the baseline
sample we assemble to take advantage of this research design.


3.1    Research Design and Empirical Specification
To decompose the variation in average ED utilization across districts into a demand-side
component that reflects regional differences in patient health or preferences and a supply-
side component that reflects differences across places, we use patient migration. To the
extent that migration is not driven by health status, studying patients who move locations
provides an opportunity to study the ED utilization of the same patients in different regions.




                                               7
Patient Migration Our main focus is an event-study analysis of changes in patient ED
use associated with the timing and direction of moves. Consider a patient i who moved from
origin district o(i) to destination district d(i). Let EDo(i) , EDd(i) denote the average ED
utilization in each district, which we estimate using the full population across all periods.9
We define the destination-origin difference in ED utilization for patient i as

                                        EDi = EDd(i) - EDo(i) .

We then estimate the following event-study equation:

                              Yit = i + y + t + t EDi + Xit  + it ,                                         (1)

where Yit is one of several measures of utilization of ED and other healthcare services for
patient i in year t measured relative to t = 0, the year when i moved; i and Xit are pa-
tient fixed effects and controls for time-varying patient characteristics (age, ACG score, and
number of chronic conditions); y are calendar year fixed effects; and t represent indicator
variables for the number of years before and after the move, which allow us to control flexibly
for the (average) disruption in healthcare utilization associated with the move.
    The parameter of interest is t , which captures, for each period relative to the move,
the relationship between mover i's utilization and the difference in average ED visit rates
between patient i's destination and origin districts. If all of the regional variation in the
outcome (e.g., ED use) is driven by patient-related factors, the estimated coefficients would
be zero. If regional variation is fully driven by supply-side factors, the estimated coefficients
would be one. An intermediate coefficient measures the extent to which regional variation
can be attributed to patient- versus location-related factors.
    The key to separate identification of person and place effects is the observed change in
utilization when patients move. Our model permits movers to differ from non-movers in
both their level of ED utilization (as fixed effects i are included) and in the trends of ED
utilization around the move (as both t and t are allowed to vary with t). The identification
assumption is that any shocks to healthcare utilization that exactly coincide with the timing
of the move are not correlated with the origin-destination differences in utilization. The
assumption might be violated if patients who receive adverse health shocks move to high
ED-utilization areas. The fact that movers are younger and healthier than the (relatively
young) general population suggests that is not commonly the case. To the extent that such
violations occur, it would cause us to overstate the role of place relative to patients.
   9
    For movers, we exclude the year of the move to avoid the need to partially attribute spending or utilization
to the origin and destination districts.


                                                       8
    To estimate the total effect of a move on the mover utilization, we aggregate the estimated
period-by-period effects obtained using equation (1) to obtain the mean difference between
post- and pre-move outcomes, weighted by sample size to account for the fact that our
panel is imbalanced. We scale this estimated total difference in mover utilization by the
mean absolute destination-origin difference in utilization. The details of this calculation are
discussed in the appendix.


3.2    Baseline Sample of Movers
The Clalit data include the residential address of each enrollee, which is regularly updated
by Israel's Population and Immigration Authority. We map each address to one of Clalit's
nine districts and construct our baseline sample by including all adult patients aged 25
and above who moved across districts exactly once during the period 2011­2017. We study
moves across--not within--districts, to exclude local moves in which access to ED and other
healthcare services does not substantially change.
    During the study period, out of the entire population of three million adult Clalit
enrollees, 150,676 enrollees moved exactly once. These enrollees constitute our baseline
"movers" sample. We exclude 78,932 individuals who moved twice or more during the study
period as well as the majority of individuals who did not move across districts during the
observation period. To guarantee that we observe utilization at least one year before and
one year after each move, we include in this sample only enrollees with continuous coverage
for at least one calendar year prior to the year of the move and for the year following the
year of the move, as long as the individuals are alive. To satisfy this requirement for pa-
tients who moved in 2011 or 2017, we extract data from 2010 and 2018 as well. Given the
low churn rate of enrollees, nearly all patients are observed throughout our nine-year study
period (2010­2018), with the average patient being observed for more than eight years. The
resulting (unbalanced) baseline sample has a total of 1.27 million enrollee-year observations.
The rate of migration is stable over the study period (Appendix Table A2).
    Movers are on average younger and slightly healthier than the overall adult population.
Table 1 compares the average characteristics of movers in our sample and the population
of non-movers, calculated over the entire study period. Panel A of this table compares
demographic and health status. The average mover is 40 years old at the time of the move--
ten years younger than the average adult Clalit enrollee who did not move. Movers have a
higher socioeconomic status than non-movers, a lower number of chronic conditions, and a
lower annual mortality rate. The fact that movers are younger and healthier suggests that




                                              9
health is less likely to be the main reason for the move.10
   Consistent with their being slightly younger and healthier, movers' annual probability of
ED use is lower than non-movers'. Panel B of Table 1 compares the average ED utilization
during the study period between the sample of movers and the non-mover population. Movers
had a lower probability of any ED visit during the year (22.5% versus 24.3% for non-movers)
and a lower rate of admission from the ED, conditional on visiting (25.8% versus 34.4% for
non-movers). However, average ED utilization rates of movers prior to migration are highly
correlated with ED use of non-movers in the origin districts: the correlation coefficient is
0.95 (0.90 when weighting by district size).
   Movers also spend less, on average, than non-movers. Panel C of Table 1 shows average
annual healthcare spending per patient by type of service for movers and for non-movers.
The average annual healthcare spending of a patient in our sample of movers is NIS 4,900,
which is lower than the average adult enrollee of Clalit who did not move (NIS 6,700 per
year). The breakdown of spending is fairly similar between movers and non-movers, with
movers devoting a slightly higher fraction of their total spending to drugs (24% versus 22%
by non-movers) and a slightly lower fraction to inpatient services (38% versus 43%). Movers
and non-movers spend a similar amount on ED services, which reflects a slightly higher share
of movers' overall lower spending (4% versus 3%).


4      Results
4.1     Decomposing ED Utilization Using Patient Migration
Figure 2 shows the distribution of the destination-origin differences in ED utilization rates
for movers--the key right-hand-side variable in the event-study analysis. This distribution
is centered at zero and is approximately symmetric, suggesting that moves from low to high
ED-utilization districts are as common as moves from high to low. This is also confirmed by
the matrix of the origin and destination of migrations (Appendix Table A3).
    As a first look at the way ED use changes around moves, Figure 3 plots the change in
any ED use rate (the average share of years with ED use post-move minus the average share
of years with ED use pre-move) against the destination-origin difference in average ED use
rates. If all geographic variation were due to supply-side factors, we would expect this plot
  10
    In a survey conducted in 2008 among a representative sample of the adult Israeli population, the top
reported reasons for moving to a new apartment were to improve housing or school quality (27%); family
reasons, including family expansion, marriage, and divorce (27%), switching from renting to owning a house or
an apartment (19%), changes in personal economic circumstances (6%), and changes in employment (4%).
Source: Central Bureau of Statistics, 2008 Social Survey. https://www.cbs.gov.il/he/publications/
DocLib/2010/seker_hevrati08/pdf/h_print.pdf. Accessed February 2020.


                                                     10
to have a slope of 1. If all variation were due to demand-side factors, we would expect this
plot to have a slope of 0. Figure 3 shows that the slope is 0.45, suggesting roughly equal
shares for both supply and demand factors. The relationship is symmetric above and below
zero.
    Figure 4 shows our main event-study results, plotting the estimates of the coefficient t
from estimating equation (1) with the probability of an ED visit during a given year as a
dependent variable. Results for all ED visits are shown in Panel A. It shows that there is a
sharp discontinuous jump at the time of the move in the probability of any ED visit, from
0 to approximately 0.5.11 Under the identification assumptions discussed in Section 3, this
jump implies that half of all ED utilization is attributable to supply-side factors associated
with the place of residence, with the remaining half attributable to demand-side factors
associated with the patient.12
    Panel B of Figure 4 shows results separately by discharge status. Remarkably, supply-
side factors that impact patient ED utilization only affect outpatient ED visits. We find no
relationship at all between the rate of patients' ED visits that result in an admission and the
place of residence; the probability of such visits is entirely attributable to patient factors.
This finding further supports the identification assumption that migration is not driven by
health status because if it were, as discussed in Section 3, we would expect coefficients to be
upward biased. Furthermore, this evidence suggests that hospitals do not indiscriminately
admit patients who visit the ED but rather that the decision to admit patients is made
consistently across regions. In sum, all of the supply-side driven variation in ED utilization
is concentrated within outpatient ED cases.
    Table 2 scales our estimates and standard errors from equation (1) to show the change
in movers' ED use that is related to an "average move"--a move across two hypothetical
regions with a destination-origin difference in ED use equal to the sample average of the
absolute value of such difference--and compare that change to the pre-move mean of each
outcome. Column (1) shows the pre-move means among movers.13 Columns (2) and (3) show
  11
     While there is a small pre-trend, it is only statistically significant several years before the move, where
we have fewer observations per year (because of our unbalanced panel). It is small and insignificant in years
where we can more precisely estimate it.
  12
     Recall that our specification flexibly controls for the time trend in a mover's ED use around the time
of the move, denoted by t . Appendix Figure A1 shows estimates of t . Indeed, separately from the above
discussed correlation with the destination-origin difference in average ED use, all moves are also associated
with an increase in ED use, which may reflect the disruption in care continuity that is associated with a
move.
  13
     Note that pre-move mean outcomes for movers are lower than their mean outcomes over the entire study
period due to both aging and time trends in utilization. For example, movers' average annual spending is
NIS 3,500 pre-move (Panel B of Table 2) and NIS 4,900 over the entire study period (Panel C of Table 1).
Our empirical specification flexibly accommodates such trends.



                                                      11
a summary of the weighted post- minus pre-move difference in ED use related to an average
move. Panel A shows estimates for ED use. The average move is associated with a change
of 1.5 percentage points in the annual probability of any ED visit (which is approximately
7% of the pre-move baseline). The increase is concentrated in outpatient ED visits. We
estimate a very small change in the probability of an ED visit resulting in admission (a -0.1
percentage point change with a standard error of 0.048; the pre-move baseline probability is
5.8%). Increased outpatient ED use is mirrored by a 1.95 percentage point decrease in the
probability of any UCC visit (approximately a third of the pre-move baseline probability of
5.2%).


4.2    Other Outcomes
Appendix Figure A2 and Appendix Figure A3 show additional event-study results relating
patient spending--overall and by type of services--to destination-origin differences in ED
use. Appendix Figure A2 shows estimates of equation (1) with spending in each service
category on the left-hand side using the same destination-origin difference in ED visit rates,
EDi , on the right-hand side. Consistent with our main result, following a move, a patient's
spending on ED becomes more similar to the average spending in the destination area. In
addition, we find that moving to an area with a higher (lower) average ED use rate is
positively correlated with spending on primary care services and negatively correlated with
spending on urgent care centers, specialist visits, and outpatient laboratory services.
    Panel B of Table 2 shows the estimated change in utilization associated with the average
place-related change in the ED utilization rate. Column (1) shows the average pre-move
spending in each category. Column (2) shows the estimated weighted mean difference be-
tween post- and pre-move estimates shown in Appendix Figure A2, scaled by the average
absolute destination-origin difference in ED use, and column (3) shows standard errors (de-
tails of this calculation are discussed in the Appendix). Appendix Figure A3 summarizes
these same results visually. For each category, the left panel of Appendix Figure A3 shows
the average annual pre-move spending among movers, and the right panel shows the esti-
mated change in utilization associated with an average move.
    Place-related differences in ED use are most strongly--and negatively--associated with
spending on unplanned admissions. They are positively associated with spending on primary
care and imaging. These findings are consistent with ED visits that complement primary
care visits and substitute for office-based consults and diagnostics. Overall, moving to an
area with higher (lower) ED use is associated with a decrease (increase) in spending overall,
as lower spending on unplanned hospital admission offsets the increased spending on ED


                                             12
and complementary services.
    We perform additional heterogeneity analyses whereby we re-estimate the event-study
model specified in equation (1) separately for moves from low to high ED-use districts and
from high to low ED-use districts (Appendix Figure A4). We also separately estimate the
same model for moves associated with above-median and below-median change in the abso-
lute destination-origin difference in ED use (Appendix Figure A5). In both cases, we find
that results hold similarly across subsamples.


5     Channels
In this section, we explore the importance of potential supply-side channels that may con-
tribute to the geographic variation in ED use. We provide evidence in support of two such
channels: distance to the nearest hospital and the level of complementary between local
physician services and ED services, as reflected by physicians' ED referral propensity. Our
strategy does not provide a definitive quantification of these factors and is certainly not
exhaustive, and we conclude by discussing additional potential contributors.


5.1    Distance
One potential channel that could affect the use of healthcare services in general and hospital
services in particular is distance. The distance between a patients' residence and the hospital
has been previously shown to affect hospital choice in the expected direction (Kessler and
McClellan, 2000; Gaynor and Vogt, 2003; Romley and Goldman, 2011; Beckert, Christensen
and Collyer, 2012; Baker, Bundorf and Kessler, 2016). In our context, a natural question
is whether variation across space in the distribution of patients' distance to hospitals may
contribute to geographic variation in ED utilization.
    To explore this possibility, we calculate, for each patient in our sample, the distance
between their assigned primary care clinic and the nearest hospital. Clalit assigns clinics
based on the patient's current place of residence, and since there are over 1,500 such clinics
and only 30 hospitals, the distance we calculate reflects well the variation in a patient's
residence relative to the nearest hospital. The average distance to the nearest hospital also
varies considerably between districts, ranging between 3 and 18 kilometers (see Panel C
of Appendix Table A1). Panel (A) of Appendix Figure A6 further shows, for the movers
sample, the distribution of pre-move distance to the nearest hospital. Two thirds of the
patients in our sample have a hospital within 10 kilometers and nine out of ten have a
hospital within 20 kilometers, but some have to travel as many as 80 kilometers. Further,


                                              13
because patients who move change their location, our data provide a unique within-patient
variation in residential distance to the nearest hospital. Panel (B) of Appendix Figure A6
shows the distribution of the change in this distance associated with a move in our sample,
which is well dispersed and fairly symmetric.
    Our strategy consists of three parts. First, we describe the relationship between the
patient's distance to the nearest hospital, which we denote by Dit , and different measures
of ED use, denoted as above by Yit . Second, we describe the relationship between the
patient's change in the distance to the nearest hospital associated with a move at t = 0,
Di = Di,t>0 - Di,t<0 , and the patient's change in ED use around the time of the move,
Yi = Avgt>0 (Yi,t ) - Avgt<0 (Yi,t ).
    Clearly, a patient's place of residence is endogenous and can potentially be correlated
with the patient's health. Although this is arguably a smaller concern for the relatively
young movers in our sample than it is for older populations, we nonetheless address this
concern in a third specification that instruments for the endogenous change of distance over
a patient's move using the difference in average distance between the origin and destination
districts. Do(i) and Dd(i) denote the average distance to the hospital across all residents at
the origin and destination districts of patient i. We define the destination-origin difference
in average distance to the hospital for patient i to be Di = Dd(i) - Do(i) . Then, we estimate
the following two-step least square model:



                                 Di = Di + Xit  + it ,
                                 Yit =  Di + Xit  + it .,                                 (2)

where Xit is a vector of patient controls. The parameter of interest is  , which captures
the change in ED use associated with an increase in distance to the hospital induced by the
move to an area where this distance is higher (lower) on average.
    Appendix Figure A7 shows the relationship between distance to the hospital and different
measures of ED utilization, before and after a move. There is a clear correlation between
distance and ED use in the expected direction: patients living closer to a hospital are more
likely to use the ED during a given year. Moreover, this correlation is entirely concentrated
in ED visits that do not result in an admission. ED visits that result in admissions exhibit
no correlation with distance. It is likely that decisions to visit the ED with high-severity
conditions (that result in admissions) are not sensitive to variation in distance, whereas the
decision to visit the ED for the diagnosis and treatment of less severe conditions is.
    Figure 5 shows the relationship between the change in distance to the nearest hospital


                                             14
and change in ED use following a move. Once again, we find a strong relationship between
distance and ED use: moving closer to (farther from) a hospital is associated with an increase
(decrease) in the probability of ED use. Yet again, this relationship is concentrated in ED
visits not resulting in an admission; the change in the probability of an ED admission is
unrelated to the change in the patient's distance to the hospital.14
    Table 3 shows the results of estimating the 2SLS model specified in equation (2). A
10km increase in the distance to the nearest hospital (induced by a move across districts)
is associated with a 2.2 percentage point decrease in the annual probability of an ED visit.
Nearly all of this change reflects a change in outpatient ED admissions not resulting in
an admission, which decrease by 2.3 percentage points. The probability of a patient being
admitted through the ED in a given year decreases by only 0.03 percentage points. Overall,
these findings suggest that spatial variation in the distribution of patients and hospitals, and
consequently in a patient's distance to the nearest hospital, contribute to the geographic
variation in ED use.


5.2     Physician Referrals
Referrals are an important source for ED visits. Office-based physicians are reported to be
making growing use of EDs to perform complex workups and expedite non-elective admis-
sions, and EDs are increasingly supporting primary care practices by performing complex
diagnostic workups and handling after-hours demand for care (Morganti et al., 2013). In the
United States, referral rates have increased over time (Barnett, Song and Landon, 2012).
    To explore whether physician referrals contribute to geographic variation in ED use, we
proceed as follows. First, we estimate the propensity of individual physicians to refer patients
to the ED. Second, exploiting the fact that more than 95% of movers change their primary
care physician after they move, we study the relationship of the change in a mover's primary
care physician propensity to refer to the ED and the mover's changed ED use around a move.
Finally, we relate the variation in physician propensity to refer and regional variation in ED
utilization using an instrumental variable approach similar to the one in equation (2).
    To estimate the variation in individual physicians' propensity to refer to the ED while
controlling for the potential variation in their case mix, we extract an auxiliary sample of
19 million visits to 4,200 primary care physicians by (mover and non-mover) Clalit patients
in 2018 and use the following fixed effects model to estimate physicians' propensity to refer
  14
     Regardless of the change in distance to the hospital, patients are 2% more likely to be admitted through
the ED post-move, relative to pre-move. This reflects a combination of aging (patients are mechanically
several years older during the post-move period) and the fact that ED use increases uniformly following a
move, in addition to the association with destination-origin difference in average ED use.



                                                     15
patients to the ED, conditional on case characteristics:15



                                        Referralij = Xi  + j + ij                                            (3)

where i indexes patients and j primary care physicians, Referral is a dummy for whether
the physician referred the patient to the ED, and Xi is a set of controls for case mix, which
includes the number of chronic conditions that the patient has, future healthcare utilization
predicted by Johns Hopkins ACG classifier (see footnote 19 for details), and the patient
gender and age. Appendix Table A4 shows descriptive statistics for the auxiliary sample
used in this estimation. Figure 6 shows the distribution of the estimated fixed effect,     ^j ,
revealing substantial variation in the propensity of different physicians to refer to the ED,
even conditional on case mix. This variation exists not just within regions, but also between
them. Appendix Table A1 (Panel C) shows that average physician propensity to refer ranges
between 1.9 and 3.9 across districts.
    Using these estimates of PCP propensity to refer to the ED, we then estimate the following
model:

                                  Yi = 1 Qj (i) +  Di + Xi  + i                                              (4)

where Yi is defined as above, Qj (i) is the difference in the quantile of the patient's primary
care physician' referral propensity (j from equation (3)) before and after the move, and Di
is a control for the difference in the distance to the nearest hospital from before to after the
move.16 The parameter of interest is 1 , which measures how the mover's change in ED
utilization around the move is associated with the change between the mover's old and new
primary care physician's propensity to refer to the ED.
    Finally, to examine the contribution of primary care physicians to the regional variation
in ED use and to account for the potential endogeneity of the choice of physician over a
move, we estimate the following two-step least squares model, similar to equation (2):



                               Qj (i) = 1 Qi + 1 Di + Xit 1 + it ,
                                 Yit = 2 Qj (i) + 2 Di + Xit 2 + it ,                                        (5)
  15
     We restrict attention to physicians with at least 100 visits in 2018, resulting in exclusion of a small
number of physicians.
  16
     That is, Qj (i) = Q(^  j (i)post ) - Q(^
                                            j (i)pre ), where j (i)pre and j (i)post are patient i's primary care
physicians before and after i's move, and Q(^  j ) denotes the quantile of    ^j .



                                                       16
where Qi = Qd(i) - Qo(i) is the difference between the average propensity to refer to the ED
of all physicians in patient i's destination and origin districts. The parameter of interest here
is 2 , which captures the change in ED utilization associated with the change in a mover's
PCP referral propensity that is correlated with the destination-origin difference in average
local physicians' propensity to refer. A positive 2 implies that variation in physicians'
propensity to refer to the ED contributes to regional variation in ED use.
    Appendix Table A5 shows estimates of equation (4). A greater propensity of a mover's
new physician, relative to the mover's old physician, to refer to the ED is significantly
associated with an increase in the mover's annual probability of an ED visit. This change is
concentrated in outpatient ED visits. In contrast, the probability of an admission through
the ED is not related to the change in the mover's primary care physician's propensity to
refer to the ED. Table 4 shows estimates from equation (5). Even when instrumented by
the average change in PCP referral, a switch toward a physician with greater propensity
to refer to the ED is associated with a significant increase in the mover's ED utilization.
Once again, the effect is fully concentrated in outpatient ED visits. There is no effect of the
mover's (instrumented) physician propensity to refer to the ED on the annual probability of
an ED admission.
    Taken together, these findings suggest variation in physician propensity to refer non-
severe cases to the ED contributes to geographic variation in ED use. More broadly, evidence
from physician referrals suggests that in some areas, primary care services, which are often
viewed as substitutes for ED services, are in fact complements to them. Such complemen-
tarity is consistent with prior findings from the Oregon health insurance expansion showing
that insurance coverage increased both primary care use and ED use (Taubman et al., 2014),
and that such increases were persistent (Finkelstein et al., 2016).


5.3     Other factors
While office-based visits are complementary to ED visits, other urgent care services are po-
tential substitutes.17 Therefore, spatial variation in the availability of UCCs may contribute
to the variation in ED use. We document two findings consistent with this explanation.
First, in our main results, shown in Table 2 and discussed in Section 4, we find that an
increase in outpatient ED use is associated with a destination-origin difference in average
ED use that is mirrored by a decrease in the probability of any UCC visit. A similar pattern
  17
     For example, using the closing time of urgent care centers, Allen, Cummings and Hockenberry (2019)
show that when UCCs close, ED use increases. Myong et al. (2020) find that increased funding for federally
qualified health centers is associated with reduced ED use. Alexander, Currie and Schnell (2019) find that
opening of retail clinics is associated with a decrease in nearby ED use.



                                                   17
also emerges from our analysis of the change in the patient's distance to the nearest hospital
associated with a move. Column (4) of Table 3 shows that an increase in the distance to
the hospital is associated with an increase in the probability of using an urgent care center,
mirroring the decrease in ED use as a result of the same move documented in Column 3
of that table. These findings are consistent with the supply of urgent care centers being a
contributing factor for variation in (outpatient) ED use.
    We emphasize that the above factors do not exhaust the potential supply-side factors
that drive the observed variation in ED use. Other factors that may also contribute to this
variation include: the distance to other services, the number of primary care physicians and
specialists per capita, and ED wait times (to the extent they are not entirely demand driven),
among others.


6     Decomposing ED Utilization via Hospital Entry
In this section, we complement the previous analysis with an event-study design, in which we
estimate the contribution of supply- versus demand-side factors to ED utilization using an
alternative supply-side shock, or "treatment": the opening of a new general hospital, which
sharply improved ED access for nearby residents.
    We acknowledge that the research design of the event study we report on in this section
is imperfect. The opening of the new hospital is surely driven by increasing latent demand
for hospital services. It seems plausible that one can attribute sharp changes in ED utiliza-
tion around the entry to supply-side changes, but any estimated longer-run effect may be
confounded by changes in underlying demand.
    Yet, despite these concerns, we feel that the analysis provided in this section is useful.
It relies on a very different setting, using non-movers rather than movers, and the event of
hospital entry is correlated with sharp changes in a host of other hospital services (beyond
ED). Despite all these differences (and the imperfect research design), the qualitative results
in this section are quite similar to the results in our primary analysis; thus, in our view,
making it more likely that the results generalize well beyond our specific setting.


6.1    Data Sample and Empirical Specification
In 2017, a new general hospital was opened in Ashdod--the sixth largest city in Israel, with a
population of 220,000 in 2017--introducing to the city its first emergency department. Prior
to its opening, the closest emergency departments serving the Ashdod population (which we
refer to as "the treated population") were located in general hospitals in nearby cities, each


                                              18
located 32 km (20 miles) away. Therefore, the opening of a new general hospital resulted in
a sharp change in local availability of emergency services.
    As a comparison group, we pick the five Israeli cities most similar in their total population
size to the treated city.18 Throughout the study period, each of these cities had been served
by at least one local hospital and had not experienced hospital entry or exit. We sample the
entire Clalit patient population aged 25 and older in these cities.
    Table 5 shows summary statistics for this sample. Residents of both the treated and
comparison cities have similar mortality rates, ages, and gender composition. Compared to
Ashdod, other cities have higher average socioeconomic statuses and lower morbidity bur-
dens (measured by the Johns Hopkins Adjusted Clinical Group commercial risk classifier).19
Nonetheless, both the treated and comparison populations have similar average total annual
healthcare spending (NIS 9,200 versus NIS 8,950; the breakdown by category is also similar).
In line with Ashdod's relatively limited access to ED services, throughout the beginning of
the sample period, its residents visited the ED less and visited urgent care centers more than
residents of comparison cities.
    Using individual-level claims data on the sample of treated and comparison cities from
2015­2018 aggregated at a quarterly or monthly frequency, we estimate a difference-in-
differences specification:

                                Yit = i + Xit + Ti + t + t Ti + it ,                                        (6)

where i and t index individuals and the number of periods since hospital opening; Yit is one
of the same outcomes as in equation (1), including ED use and cost by category; i and Xit
are individual fixed effects and controls for time-varying individual characteristics (including
age and ACG resource utilization band); and Ti is a "treatment" dummy for whether the
individual lives in an area where a hospital opened.
    The parameter of interest is t , the impact of a positive shock to ED access on ED use
by nearby residents, relative to residents of other cities that did not experience such a shock.
To the extent that an increased availability of an ED induces greater ED use, we expect
an increase in ED use in the treated city post-treatment. In addition to this specification,
  18
     We chose the Israeli cities ranked third to eighth in Israel by 2017 total population size (ranging between
200,000 and 280,000 residents). These cities are: Haifa, Rishon LeZion, Petah Tikva, Netanya, and Be'er
Sheva. We did not include in the comparison group Jerusalem and Tel Aviv (ranked first and second), which
are substantially bigger, and the cities ranked ninth through eleventh (with populations of between 150,000
and 200,000 residents), which are all part of the Tel Aviv metropolitan area.
  19
     The ACG system is used by both commercial insurers and non-commercial healthcare organizations
worldwide (as well as by Clalit) to describe or predict a population's past or future healthcare utilization
and costs. For more information, see the Johns Hopkins ACG System Version 11.0 Technical Reference
Guide (2014).


                                                      19
which we use to produce event-study plots, we also estimate another variant substituting the
monthly dummies with one dummy for all periods t after the hospital opening for reporting
the overall effects in a more succinct tabulated form. The identification assumption is that
trends in the treated and other cities would have been common if not for the shock we observe.
Given that planning and constructing a hospital is a multi-year process, it seems plausible
that the exact opening day is determined by factors such as construction and licensing and
not in exact anticipation of local healthcare utilization (even if it is correlated with long-run
healthcare needs of the local population).20


6.2     Results
As may be expected, the hospital opening led to a sharp increase in the treated city's ED
use, moving it from the bottom to the middle of the range of ED use across all comparison
cities. This change is evident in Figure 7, which shows the average monthly probability of
ED use in each of the comparison cities in our sample (the treated city in black; comparison
cities in gray).
    Panel A of Table 6 summarizes the estimated impact of hospital entry on ED use, from
estimates of equation (6) at a quarterly frequency; disaggregated estimates are shown in
Appendix Figure A8. The improved access brought by the opening of a local ED was associ-
ated with a sharp increase in the probability of ED visits by nearby residents. Post-treatment,
treated residents were 27.5% more likely to visit the ED in a given month (a 0.7 percentage-
point increase in the probability of a treated patient's visiting the ED each month, over the
pre-period baseline of 2.5%).
    Remarkably, consistent with our earlier findings from patient moves described in Sec-
tion 4, the increased ED use associated with hospital entry is entirely concentrated in out-
patient ED cases, the probability of which increased by almost 50% following the event.
The use of urgent care centers--an ED substitute for less severe cases--decreased by more
than 10%. In contrast, there was virtually no change in the share of patients with ED visits
resulting in an admission (a 0.01 percentage point increase over the pre-treatment baseline
of 1.17%, with a standard error of 0.02 percentage points).
    Panel B of Table 6 shows estimates of equation (6) with spending on each category
and in total as the outcome (Appendix Figure A9 shows the same data as the table in a
visual form; Appendix Figure A10 shows disaggregated estimates.) Average spending on
ED services sharply increased among the treated population immediately after the opening
(by 72%) and remained high throughout our sample period, which includes four quarters
  20
    The planned hospital construction was announced in 2002, and the bidding for its construction closed
in 2011, six years before its inauguration.

                                                  20
after the opening. Other spending categories that saw large increases were planned and
unplanned inpatient services, which increased by 27% and 12%, respectively. Such increases
are consistent with increased availability of inpatient services as a result of the hospital's
opening. Overall, the hospital's opening was associated with a 9.1% increase in total average
spending.
    It is important to highlight that, naturally, a hospital opening reflects a different type
of shock to access than a patient move, which we analyzed in the previous section. While a
move is associated with a change in the composition (and distance to) multiple health services
available to movers, a hospital opening is primarily associated with a sharp change in access
to emergency and inpatient services to nearby residents. Therefore, there is no reason the
two changes should have the same association with spending. Indeed, our findings suggest
that they differ in this regard.
    All results are robust to the definition of the comparison group, as shown in Appendix Figure A11
and Appendix Figure A12, which show estimates of equation (6) using five different samples
obtained by separately pairing the treated city with each one of the comparison cities.


7    Conclusion
We document large geographic variation in ED use in Israel in 2011­2017, similar to that
observed in other countries. Using longitudinal data covering a large population, we study
the role of supply- and demand-side factors in explaining this variation using two approaches
that exploit two distinct supply-side shocks to ED access: patients who moved to an area
with a different ED use rate and residents who had a nearby hospital opening. Overall, we
find that about half of this variation can be attributed to supply-side factors and the rest to
demand-side factors. Namely, we estimate that the probability of visiting the ED changed
sharply after a move and following a hospital (and ED) opening.
    In contrast, the variation in unscheduled admissions through the ED is entirely explained
by person-specific demand factors. In particular, the (unconditional) probability of a patient
being urgently admitted through the ED in a given year did not change upon a move or
following hospital entry. The fact that the marginal cases--those most affected by supply-
side factors--are of low severity is unsurprising because there are many reasons for less
severe cases to be the most responsive to variation in ED access. What is, perhaps, more
surprising is that even though a patient's probability of utilizing the ED is affected by
supply-side factors, the admission threshold is not. That is, if unplanned admissions are
driven by demand-side factors alone, as we find, it does not appear that ED physicians in
low versus high ED-access locations have different criteria associated with admitting patients.

                                              21
This finding militates against a host of explanations that attribute the observed variation
in ED admissions to place- or hospital-specific factors. For example, unless the following
forces exactly offset each other in our sample, our main finding is inconsistent with different
hospitals having different admission thresholds due to varying capacity, quality of on-site
diagnostic, or financial incentives.
    Analyzing potential channels, we show that three factors: the average distance of patients
to the nearest hospital, the propensity of local physicians to refer (otherwise similar) cases to
the ED, and the availability of urgent-care centers all contribute to the spatial, supply-side
variation in ED use. While these channels are not exhaustive, they do highlight the fact
that substitutes and complements for ED services, such as community-based urgent care
and office-based primary care, determine in part the variation in ED use.
    Taken together, our results highlight the dual purpose of Emergency Departments (in
Israel, but presumably more broadly): a gateway to hospital admissions for more severe cases
and an outpatient facility focused on treating less severe cases. The evidence we presented
shows, repeatedly, that ED access has essentially no impact on healthcare utilization for
patients who are sick enough; their demand is inelastic and they will arrive at the ED and
be admitted regardless of how far it is or how likely their primary care physician is to refer
patients to the ED. In contrast, less severe cases respond to supply conditions in predictable
ways, and may substitute to alternate services (UCC, community care, or no care at all),
when ED access is more limited.
    While not entirely surprising, these results present clear insights for policy. First, consider
the policy concern that easier access to ED would lead to an inefficient increase in hospital
admissions, and subsequent medical spending. Our results suggest that this is not the case.
They suggest that variation in ED use, while important in itself, may be concentrated on
the lower end of the severity spectrum, and as such does not necessarily affect variation
in hospital admission. Therefore, efforts to influence admissions from the ED should be
considered separately from efforts to reduce ED use for low-severity cases.
    Second, consider public concerns about crowded EDs and long waiting times. Our results
accentuate that low-severity ED visits have high elasticity of substitution with other services,
and with the spatial distribution of patients, making it likely that a relatively straightforward
way to reduce crowding at EDs, and allow them to focus on the more severe cases, is to
increase the availability of substitute services, such as UCCs, which would capture demand
for less severe cases.
    Finally, our results may inform discussion about the (infrequent) decision to open or
close new hospitals. They suggest that severe enough cases are inelastic, and thus would
likely find their way to the ED regardless of how dense the hospital network is, suggesting


                                                22
that a new hospital or an expansion of an existing hospital would have a similar effect.
In contrast, denser hospital networks may induce demand for less severe cases, thereby
increasing healthcare utilization and spending, without noticeable effects on measurable
health outcomes (such as admissions or mortality). Naturally, this conclusion holds within
the density levels observed in Israel and in other developed countries. How sparse a hospital
network could be before these results change--a question that may be critical for more
developing countries or more rural areas--is an important question for further work.


References
Abualenain, Jameel, William J Frohna, Robert Shesser, Ru Ding, Mark Smith,
 and Jesse M Pines. 2013. "Emergency department physician-level and hospital-level
 variation in admission rates." Annals of Emergency Medicine, 61(6): 638­643.

Agha, Leila, Brigham Frandsen, and James B Rebitzer. 2019. "Fragmented division
 of labor and healthcare costs: Evidence from moves across regions." Journal of Public
 Economics, 169: 144­159.

Alexander, Diane, Janet Currie, and Molly Schnell. 2019. "Check up before you check
 out: Retail clinics and emergency room use." Journal of Public Economics, 178: 1­18.

Allen, Lindsay, Janet R. Cummings, and Jason Hockenberry. 2019. "Urgent Care
 Centers and the Demand for Non-Emergent Emergency Department Visits." NBER Work-
 ing Paper No. 25428.

Baker, Laurence C, M Kate Bundorf, and Daniel P Kessler. 2016. "The effect of
 hospital/physician integration on hospital choice." Journal of Health Economics, 50: 1­8.

Barnett, Michael L, Zirui Song, and Bruce E Landon. 2012. "Trends in physician
 referrals in the United States, 1999-2009." Archives of internal medicine, 172(2): 163­170.

Beckert, Walter, Mette Christensen, and Kate Collyer. 2012. "Choice of NHS-
 Funded hospital services in England." The Economic Journal, 122(560): 400­417.

Cutler, David, Jonathan Skinner, Ariel Dora Stern, and David Wennberg. 2019.
 "Physician beliefs and patient preferences: A new look at regional variation in health care
 spending." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 11(1): 192­221.

Dawson, Heather, Jaya Weerasooriya, and Greg Webster. 2008. "Hospital admis-
 sions via the emergency department: Implications for planning and patient flow." Health
 Care Quarterly, 11: 2­20.

Finkelstein, Amy, Matthew Gentzkow, and Heidi L Williams. 2019. "Place-based
  drivers of mortality: Evidence from migration." NBER Working Paper No. 25975.



                                             23
Finkelstein, Amy, Matthew Gentzkow, and Heidi Williams. 2016. "Sources of geo-
  graphic variation in health care: Evidence from patient migration." The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 131(4): 1681­1726.

Finkelstein, Amy, Matthew Gentzkow, and Heidi Williams. 2018. "What drives
  prescription opioid abuse? Evidence from migration." SIEPR Working Paper 18-028.

Finkelstein, Amy N, Sarah L Taubman, Heidi L Allen, Bill J Wright, and Kather-
  ine Baicker. 2016. "Effect of Medicaid coverage on ED usefurther evidence from Oregons
  experiment." N Engl J Med, 375(16): 1505­1507.

Gaynor, Martin, and William B Vogt. 2003. "Competition among hospitals." National
 Bureau of Economic Research.

Kessler, Daniel P, and Mark B McClellan. 2000. "Is hospital competition socially
 wasteful?" The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(2): 577­615.

Llovera, Ingrid, Kirsten Loscalzo, Jia Gao, Timmy Li, Martina Brave, Lance
  Becker, and Isabel Barata. 2019. "Increased access to urgent care centers decreases
  low acuity diagnoses in a nearby hospital emergency department." The American journal
  of emergency medicine, 37(3): 486­488.

Morganti, Kristy Gonzalez, Sebastian Bauhoff, Janice C Blanchard, Mahshid
 Abir, Neema Iyer, Alexandria Smith, Joseph V Vesely, Edward N Okeke, and
 Arthur L Kellermann. 2013. "The evolving role of emergency departments in the United
 States." RAND Health Quarterly, 3(2).

Myong, Catherine, Peter Hull, Mary Price, John Hsu, Joseph P Newhouse,
 and Vicki Fung. 2020. "The impact of funding for federally qualified health centers on
 utilization and emergency department visits in Massachusetts." Plos one, 15(12): e0243279.

Romley, John A, and Dana P Goldman. 2011. "How costly is hospital quality? A
 revealed-preference approach." The Journal of Industrial Economics, 59(4): 578­608.

Sabbatini, Amber K, Brahmajee K Nallamothu, and Keith E Kocher. 2014. "Re-
  ducing variation in hospital admissions from the emergency department for low-mortality
  conditions may produce savings." Health Affairs, 33(9): 1655­1663.

Shoff, Carla, Kadin Caines, and Jesse M Pines. 2018. "Geographic variation in predic-
  tors of emergency department admission rates in US Medicare fee-for-service beneficiaries."
  The American Journal of Emergency Medicine.

Taubman, Sarah L, Heidi L Allen, Bill J Wright, Katherine Baicker, and Amy N
  Finkelstein. 2014. "Medicaid increases emergency-department use: evidence from Ore-
  gon's Health Insurance Experiment." Science, 343(6168): 263­268.

Van Parys, Jessica. 2016. "Variation in physician practice styles within and across emer-
 gency departments." PLoS One, 11(8).


                                             24
          Figure 1: Main Principal Components of Cross-District ED Use and Spending

                                      Imaging
        0.50                            q




                           q

               Planned Inpatient

               q
                   ED Visit (Discharged Home)
        0.25                                                                                       Labs
                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                         q
                                                                                      Specialist Visit
                                                                 q
                                                                                                  Drugs      q

                                                       Outpatient                                                q
                                                                                   Unplanned Inpatient
 PC2




        0.00

                                                                              ED Visit (Admitted)    q




       -0.25                                               UCC
                                                           q




       -0.50                                Primary Care
                                                q




                               -0.2                  0.0                     0.2                     0.4
                                                           PC1
Notes: Figure shows, for the sample of three million covered adults, the loading of different ED use and spend-
ing categories on the two main principal components of between-district variation in ED use and spending on
different service categories. The figure is based on the data on district means shown in Appendix Table A1
with variables standardized prior to the analysis. The two main principal components explain 75.1 percent
of the total variation in shown measures. UCC stands for the fraction of residents with any urgent care
center visit. ED Visit stands for the fraction of all residents with at least one emergency department visit,
by visit outcome (home or hospital).




                                                      25
                            Figure 2: Destination-Origin Differences in ED Utilization Rates




                   20,000
Number of Movers




                   10,000




                       0

                              -0.10          -0.05             0.00           0.05              0.10
                                      Destination-Origin Difference in ED Utilization Rate
Notes: The figure shows, for the sample of 150,676 movers, the distribution of the difference between each
mover's origin and destination districts' average ED visit rate. Averages for each district are calculated for
the entire population over the entire study period (excluding the year of the move for movers). An average
move involves an absolute origin-destination difference in the ED use rate of 2.6 percentage points. See
Appendix Table A1 for additional information on the distribution of ED visit rates across districts. See
Appendix Table A3 for additional information on the distribution of origin and destination of moves.




                                                          26
Figure 3: Change in Movers' ED Use by Size of Destination-Origin Difference in ED Visit
Rates

                                                                         Slope = 0.45
                                                                                                         q
                                       0.04



                                                                                                     q
                                       0.03                                                   q
           Change in ED Use on Move




                                                                                      q



                                                                                          q
                                       0.02
                                                                     q
                                                                           q


                                       0.01




                                                         q
                                       0.00                      q


                                                 q
                                      -0.01
                                              -0.06      -0.03                 0.00               0.03       0.06
                                                      Destination-Origin Difference in Average ED Use
Notes: The figure shows the change in movers' ED use by the size of the destination-origin difference in
average district ED visit rates. We group movers by deciles of ED, namely the destination-origin difference
in average ED use. For each decile, the x-axis shows the average of ED and the y-axis shows the average
post-move ED use (average annual probability of ED visit) minus the average pre-mover ED use. The
slope shown is for the linear fit line of the ten plotted points. The sample is all movers (N = 1,274,445
patient-years).




                                                                         27
Figure 4: Change in Movers' ED Use Related to the Destination-Origin Difference in ED
Visit Rates
                                                                                                                                 (A) All ED Visits



                    Prob. of Any ED Visit During The Year (Coef.)
                                                                     0.75

                                                                                                                                                                       q                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                     0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                     0.25


                                                                     0.00                                                        q            q
                                                                                                                                                      q




                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                             q

                                                                                                         q




                                                                    -0.25       q




                                                                    -0.50


                                                                    -0.75
                                                                                -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1                                                           0       1       2       3           4           5           6           7
                                                                                                                                         Year Relative to Move

                                                                                             (B) Separately by ED Discharge Status
                                                                                               ED Visit                                                                    ED Visit
                    Prob. of Any ED Visit During The Year (Coef.)




                                                                                        Resulting in Admission                                                     Not Resulting in Admission
                                                                     0.75
                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                               q       q   q




                                                                     0.50                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q


                                                                                                                                                                                                   q



                                                                     0.25
                                                                                    q


                                                                            q                    q   q       q
                                                                                         q                                                    q

                                                                     0.00                                        q
                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                               q


                                                                                                                                                  q        q                           q


                                                                                                                                                                               q


                                                                                                                                                                       q   q


                                                                    -0.25
                                                                                                                                                                   q




                                                                    -0.50


                                                                    -0.75
                                                                            -7-6-5-4-3-2-1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 -7-6-5-4-3-2-1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
                                                                                                                                         Year Relative to Move

Notes: The figure shows event-study estimates of the fraction of movers' ED use that is associated with the
destination-origin difference in ED visit rates, namely, t from equation (1). Year 0 is the year of the move.
The coefficient of the year before the move is normalized to 0. The sample is all movers (N = 1,274,445
patient-years).




                                                                                                                                                      28
Figure 5: Change in ED Utilization and the Change in Distance to the Nearest Hospital
Around a Move

                                                                                                                 Change in ED                                                    Change in ED
                                                 Change in All
                                                                                                                 Visits Resulting                                                    Visits Not
                                                   ED Visits
                                                                                                                  in Admission                                                Resulting in Admission
                         0.04                q



                                    qq
                                         q
                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                 q                                                                                                                           qq
                                                     q                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                 q
Change in Annual Rate




                                                             q                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                 q                           q
                                                         q                                                                    qq                                         q
                         0.02                                                                       q        q                       q
                                                                                                                                             q                                            qq
                                                                 qqq                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                       q                                qq
                                                                                                                         qq                          q
                                                                                                                     q                                               q                         q
                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                   q

                                                                                                                                                                                                               q           q
                                                                                q                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                        q                                                                                                              q               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                         0.00
                                                                                    q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q

                                                                                                q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                        -0.02                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q


                                             5               10            15               20                   5            10             15                  20                   5            10                  15                  20
                                                                            Change in Distance to the Nearest Hospital
Notes: The figure shows the relationship between the change in a mover's distance to the nearest hospital
and the change in their ED use rates. The x-axis shows ventiles of the change in a mover distance to the
nearest hospital: their distance to the nearest hospital before the move minus their distance to the nearest
hospital after the move (see Section 5 for details). The y-axis shows, for each of these bins, the average
change in ED use rates, defined as the average ED use rate in the years after the move minus the average ED
use rate in the years before the move (the year of the move is excluded). The different facets show results for
all ED visits, and separately by discharge status. The sample is all movers (N = 1,274,445 patient-years).




                                                                                                                         29
Figure 6: The Distribution of Physician Propensity to Refer to the ED, Adjusting for Case
Characteristics


                       1000




                        750
Number of Physicians




                        500




                        250




                         0

                              -0.1       0.0                     0.1                     0.2
                                     Physician's ED Referral Propensity
Notes: The figure shows the distribution of primary-care physician propensity to refer cases to the ED,
captured by the physician fixed effect estimated using equation (3), which adjusts for case characteristics.
The underlying sample used in the estimation contains 19 million primary care visits of 4,200 doctors in
2018. The sample and method are described in more detail in Section 5.




                                                    30
            Figure 7: Monthly ED Utilization Before and After Hospital Opening
                                                                                      (A) All ED Visits

                                                              0.05



                    Fraction of Residents with Any ED Visit   0.04
                               During the Month

                                                              0.03



                                                              0.02



                                                              0.01



                                                              0.00
                                                                     2015           2016           2017          2018



                                                                             (B) ED Visits by Discharge Status

                                                                              ED Visit                       ED Visit
                                                                       Resulting in Admission        Not Resulting in Admission
                    Fraction of Residents with Any ED Visit




                                                              0.05


                                                              0.04
                               During the Month




                                                              0.03


                                                              0.02


                                                              0.01


                                                              0.00
                                                                 2015       2016   2017    2018    2015   2016   2017   2018



Notes: For the treated city (solid black) and five comparison cities (gray), the figure shows the fraction of
residents with one or more ED visits during each month. The gray vertical shade highlights November 2017,
the month in which the index city opened its first ED. Before that time, it had been served only by the
emergency departments in adjacent cities. Comparison cities were served by at least one local emergency
department throughout the study period. The sample consists of 41,031 treated and 343,332 untreated
patients (N=17,870,139 patient-months)




                                                                                              31
                       Table 1: Characteristics of Movers and Non-Movers

                                                                      Movers      Non-Movers
                                                                         (1)           (2)

             A. Demographics and Health Status
              Age (mean)                                                   40.6              50.8
              Female (percent)                                             49.5              52.4
              High SES (percent)                                           52.1              32.7
              Number of Chronic Conditions (mean)                          2.28              3.41
              ACG High Resource (percent)                                   6.8              12.4
              Annual Mortality Rate (percent)                              0.42              1.22
             B. Annual Emergency Department Use
               Percent with ED Visit, by Visit Outcome
                 Any Outcome                                              22.5             24.3
                 Discharged Home (Outpatient ED)                          18.8             18.8
                 Admitted (Inpatient ED)                                   6.9              9.3
                 Died                                                    0.016            0.057
               Fraction of ED Visits Resulting in Admission               25.8             34.3
               Percent with UCC Visit                                      5.5              5.4
             C. Annual Spending, By Category (mean, NIS)
               Total (All Categories)                   4,946                            6,689
                 Emergency Department                     200                              190
                 Prescription Drugs                     1,173                            1,441
                 Inpatient - Unplanned                  1,222                            1,796
                 Inpatient - Planned                      670                            1,113
                 Outpatient Services                      564                              862
                 Primary Care Visits                      221                              293
                 Specialist Visits                        243                              266
                 Imaging Services                         275                              302
                 Laboratory Services                      196                              175
                 Other                                    175                              243
             Number of Observations (Patient-Year)  1,274,445                       20,085,457
             Number of Patients                       150,676                        2,723,196
Notes: Descriptive statistics comparing our main sample of patients who moved and patients who did not
move during 2011­2017. Panel A shows demographic and health status information. High SES is the top
tercile of zipcode-based socioeconomic status scores. ACG High Resource is a dummy for high predicted
healthcare utilization. Panel B shows ED use--having any visits during the year and the number of visits
conditional on any visits, by discharge status. Panel C shows healthcare utilization by service category. Non-
mover spending was calculated using a random subsample of 100,000 patients. See Section 2.2 for detailed
sample and variable definitions.




                                                     32
Table 2: The Change in ED Use and in Spending Related to Destination-Origin Difference
in ED Use

                                                                       Change Related to
                                                         Pre-Move      Average Absolute
                                                                                                  S.E.
                                                           Mean       Origin-Destination
                                                                      Difference in ED Use
                                                             (1)                (2)                (3)

  A. Annual Emergency Department Use
   Any ED Visit                                              0.207                     0.0152 0.00080
     Any ED Visit Not Resulting in Admission                 0.175                     0.0175 0.00075
     Any ED Visit Resulting in Admission                     0.058                    -0.0010 0.00048
   Any UCC Visit                                             0.052                    -0.0195 0.00049
  B. Annual Spending (by Category)
      Emergency Department                                   162.5                       21.9        1.3
      Primary Care Visits                                    209.3                        7.2        0.5
      Imaging Services                                       180.9                        5.6        1.9
      Other                                                  128.1                       -2.2        3.2
      Prescription Drugs                                     882.2                       -7.2       28.7
      Specialist Visits                                      199.4                       -9.4        0.8
      Inpatient - Planned                                    447.1                      -10.3       17.6
      Outpatient Services                                    347.4                      -10.5       17.6
      Laboratory Services                                    155.4                      -10.9        1.6
      Inpatient - Unplanned                                  775.8                      -85.9       23.5
    Total (All Categories)                                  3494.5                     -105.0       54.5
Notes: Table shows estimates of the change in movers' ED use, following a move. Column 1 shows the
average pre-move mean of each outcome. Columns 2 shows estimates of the change in ED use that is related
to an "average move"--a move across two hypothetical regions with a destination-origin difference in ED use
equal to the sample average of the absolute value of such difference. These estimates were obtained using
equation (1), collapsed to the difference between all post- and pre-periods (weighted by sample size) and
scaled to show the effect on spending associated with the average absolute origin-destination difference in
ED utilization in our sample, which is 2.6 percentage points. Details of these calculations are discussed in
the Appendix. Column 3 shows estimated standard errors, clustered by patient. Panel A shows estimates
for the probability of ED and UCC use. Panel B shows estimates for spending on different types of services.
Spending is denominated in New Israeli Shekels (NIS). The sample is all movers (N=1,274,445 patient-years).




                                                    33
Table 3: IV Estimates of the Change in ED Use Associated with a Change in Distance to
the Nearest Hospital

                                                                         Dependent variable:
                                          Change in      Change in ED Visits        Change in ED Visits     Change in UCC
                                          ED Visits   Not Resulting in Admission   Resulting in Admission       Visits
                                             (1)                 (2)                           (3)               (4)

 Change in Distance to Nearest Hospital   -0.0222            -0.0234                     -0.0032              0.0289
                                           (0.0015)           (0.0015)                    (0.0010)            (0.0009)


 ACG Resource Utilization Band               Yes                 Yes                           Yes               Yes
 Number of Chronic Conditions                Yes                 Yes                           Yes               Yes
 Age Group                                   Yes                 Yes                           Yes               Yes
 Gender                                      Yes                 Yes                           Yes               Yes

Notes: The table shows estimates of equation (2) for the change in a mover ED and UCC utilization associated
with a change in their distance to the hospital on a move. Change in Distance to Nearest Hospital is defined
as the distance after the move minus the distance before the move (See Section 5 for detailed definitions).
Different columns show results from estimating equation (2) separately for different utilization measures.
The first-stage estimates from regressing individual change in distance on destination-origin difference in
average distance is 1.036 (s.e. 0.005); the F statistic is 1721. The sample includes 149,262 movers, excluding
a small number of movers for which location information is missing. Standard errors in parentheses.  p < 0.1;

  p < 0.05;  p < 0.01.




                                                            34
Table 4: IV Estimates of The Change in ED Use Associated with a Change in PCP Referral
Propensity

                                                                      Dependent variable:
                                      Change in      Change in ED Visits         Change in ED Visits     Change in UCC
                                      ED Visits   Not Resulting in Admission    Resulting in Admission       Visits
                                         (1)                 (2)                            (3)               (4)

 Change in PCP Referral Propensity    0.0142              0.0162                       -0.0004             -0.0184
                                      (0.0008)            (0.0008)                     (0.0005)             (0.0005)

 Change in Distance to the Hospital    0.0009               0.0013                    -0.0013               -0.0004
                                      (0.0010)             (0.0010)                   (0.0006)              (0.0006)


 ACG Resource Utilization Band          Yes                  Yes                            Yes               Yes
 Number of Chronic Conditions           Yes                  Yes                            Yes               Yes
 Age Group                              Yes                  Yes                            Yes               Yes
 Gender                                 Yes                  Yes                            Yes               Yes

Notes: The figure shows estimates of equation (5) for the relationship between a mover's change in utilization
and the change in their PCP propensity to refer to the ED. For each mover in each year, we calculate the
primary care physician referral propensity, based on estimates of equation (3). We then averaged these
measures, separately for the years before and the years after the move, and calculated the change in this
propensity, defined as the average propensity in all years after a move minus the average propensity in all
years before a move. Change in PCP Referral Propensity is the ventile of these changes, scaled between 1
and 20. Change in Distance to the Nearest Hospital is the difference in the mover's distance to the nearest
hospital before the move minus their distance to the nearest hospital after the move (see Section 5 for details)
in multiples of 10 kilometers. The different columns show estimates of equation (5) separately for different
utilization measures. The first-stage estimates from regressing individual change in PCP referral propensity
(ventile) on destination-origin difference in average such propensity is 0.00010 (s.e. 0.00003); the F statistic
is 277. The sample includes 146,928 movers, excluding a small number of movers whose physicians had fewer
than 100 visits in 2018. Standard errors in parentheses.  p < 0.1;  p < 0.05;  p < 0.01.




                                                          35
                 Table 5: Summary Statistics: Treated and Comparison Cities

                                                              Treated City       Comparison Cities
                                                                   (1)                  (2)

            A. Demographics and Health Status
             Age (mean)                                                   54.8                 54.8
             Female (percent)                                             53.7                 53.9
             High SES (percent)                                           25.8                 43.4
             Number of Chronic Conditions (mean)                          4.48                 4.05
             ACG High Resource (percent)                                  19.4                 16.0
             Annual Mortality Rate (percent)                              1.62                 1.60
            B. Annual Emergency Department Use
              Percent with ED Visit, by Visit Outcome
                Any Outcome                                               21.6                 25.4
                Discharged Home (Outpatient ED)                           15.6                 19.6
                Admitted (Inpatient ED)                                    9.7                  9.9
                Died                                                     0.058                0.070
              Fraction of ED Visits Resulting in Admission                40.5                 34.0
              Percent with UCC Visit                                      13.6                  5.9
            C. Annual Spending, By Category (mean, NIS)
              Total (All Categories)                      9,193                              8,956
                Emergency Department                        171                                212
                Prescription Drugs                        2,165                              2,185
                Inpatient - Unplanned                     2,249                              2,219
                Inpatient - Planned                       1,729                              1,421
                Outpatient Services                       1,149                              1,284
                Primary Care Visits                         319                                278
                Specialist Visits                           366                                357
                Imaging Services                            420                                438
                Laboratory Services                         215                                226
                Other                                       387                                328
            Number of Observations (Patient-Year)       160,116                          1,340,494
            Number of Patients                           41,013                            343,332
Notes: Descriptive statistics for the sample of patients who resided in treated (experiencing hospital entry)
and comparison cities (with no hospital entry) during 2015­2019. See Section 6 for sample definitions.
Panel A shows demographic and health status information. High SES is the top tercile of zipcode-based
socioeconomic status scores. ACG High Resource is a dummy for high predicted healthcare utilization.
Panel B shows ED use--having any visits during the year and the number of visits conditional on any
visits, by discharge status. Panel C shows healthcare utilization by service category. For comparability with
Table 1, the numbers shown are annual, aggregated at the patient-year level. To better reveal time trends,
our analysis below aggregates the same data at the patient-month level.




                                                     36
            Table 6: Change in ED Use and in Spending Related to ED Opening

                                                                                     Estimated Impact of
                                             Estimated                Pre-Treatment
                                                                                     Entry as Perecent of
                                             Impact of        S.E.    Mean Dep. Var
                                                                                     Pre-Treatment Mean
                                           Hospital Entry              (for Treated)
                                                                                          Dep. Var
                                                (1)           (2)          (3)                (4)

 A. Monthly Emergency Department Use
  Any ED Visit                                     0.0070 0.0003                 0.0255              27.5
    ED Visit Not Resulting in Admission            0.0075 0.0003                 0.0150              49.8
    ED Visit Resulting in Admission                0.0002 0.0002                 0.0117               1.3
  Any UCC Visit                                   -0.0015 0.0002                 0.0141             -10.4
 B. Monthly Spending (by Category)
     Emergency Department                               8.6     0.3                11.9              71.9
     Prescription Drugs                                 3.7     5.4               175.5               2.1
     Imaging Services                                   2.5     0.5                33.1               7.7
     Laboratory Services                               -0.5     0.3                17.7              -2.6
     Other                                             -0.8     1.0                31.5              -2.5
     Outpatient Services                               -4.3     3.8                94.6              -4.6
     Inpatient - Planned                               35.7     6.1               134.6              26.5
     Primary Care Visits                               -0.5     0.1                27.1              -1.7
     Specialist Visits                                  0.9     0.2                29.9               3.0
     Inpatient - Unplanned                             21.4     7.1               179.3              11.9
   Total (All Categories)                              66.7    13.5               737.2               9.0
Notes: Table shows estimates of the change in ED use due to ED opening. Column 1 shows estimates
of equation (6) for the impact of the hospital opening on ED use and healthcare spending of ("treated")
nearby residents relative to residents of comparison cities that did not have any new hospital open during
the study period. Column 2 shows standard errors for these estimates, clustered by patient. Column 3
shows the average pre-treatment outcome for residents of the treated city. Column 4 shows the magnitude
of the impact (from column 1) as a percent of the pre-move baseline (from column 3). The sample consists
of 41,031 treated and 343,332 untreated patients (N=17,870139 patient-months).




                                                      37
Appendix
Weighted Difference Calculation
This section details the calculation of weighted mean differences and standard errors of
outcomes from before and after the move.
   Let nt be the number of movers that are observed at event time t (years relative to their
move), and let ^ be the vector of estimated coefficients from equation (1). The estimated
mean difference between post- and pre-move periods is the dot product:

                                        Y = w ,                                        (A1)

where wt equals -nt / s<0 ns for t < 0, nt / s>0 ns for t > 0, and zero for the year of the
move. Because the total number of observations in the pre and post periods are not exactly
equal, wt = -w-t , but by construction,      t>0 wt = -      t<0 wt = 1. Standard errors are
                                                          ^
obtained by weighting the estimated covariance matrix  accordingly, w     ^ w.
    The resulting weighted average reflects the effect of a change from no one using the ED
to everyone using the ED each year. To scale the effect, we calculate the average absolute
destination-origin difference in ED use:

                              ED =          |EDd(i) - EDo(i) |,                        (A2)
                                        i

and multiply both to obtain the effect of an average move: Y · ED.




                                             38
                                                         Appendix Figure A1: Change in Movers' ED Use Following a Move


                                                 0.050                                      q
Prob. of Any ED Visit During The Year (Coef.)




                                                 0.025                                          q




                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                          q




                                                                                                              q



                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                         q
                                                 0.000                                 q


                                                                                   q

                                                              q
                                                          q        q         q
                                                                        q




                                                -0.025




                                                -0.050
                                                         -7   -6   -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0   1    2    3   4   5      6   7
                                                                                  Year Relative to Move
Notes: The figure shows event-study estimates of the change in movers' ED use following a move, namely, t
from equation (1). Year 0 is the year of the move. The coefficient of the year before the move is normalized
to 0. The sample is all movers (N = 1,274,445 patient-years).




                                                                                       39
Appendix Figure A2: Change in Movers' Spending and Utilization Related to Destination-
Origin Difference in ED Visit Rates

                                                             Total                                                                   ED                                                               Drugs
                                                                                                  1000                                                                 8000
                             10000                                                                                                            q   q   q
                                                                                                                                          q                   q
                                     q   q   q
                                                 q   q
                                                         q                                                                                                q       q    4000
                                                                                             q
                                 0                           q       q   q   q                     500                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                 q
                                                                                 q   q                                                                                    0           q
                                                                                                                                                                                          q   q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                          q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q

                                                                                         q                                                                                                                                        q
                            -10000                                                                   0               q   q   q   q                                            q   q
                                                                                                         q   q   q                                                    -4000

                                     -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7                                -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7                                 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

                                             Unplanned Inpatient                                                     Planned Inpatient                                                Outpatient Services
                             10000                                                                                                                                     2500
                                     q                                                            4000   q   q                                                                        q
                              5000                                                                               q                                                                                q           q               q
                                                                                                                                                  q               q       0                           q
Annual Cost (Coefficient)




                                         q                                                                           q   q   q            q   q                                   q       q   q                           q
                                             q                                                                                                                                                            q       q
                                                 q       q                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                     q                                               0                           q
                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                          q                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                 0                           q
                                                                     q   q                   q                                                                q               q
                                                                             q
                                                                 q
                                                                                 q
                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                      -2500
                                                                                     q
                            -5000                                                                -4000
                                                                                                                                                                      -5000
                                     -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7                                -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7                                 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

                                                     Primary Care                                                            Specialist                                                           Imaging
                                                                                                                         q                                              600
                               300                                       q   q                                               q
                                                                     q           q   q   q
                                                                                             q       0           q   q           q
                                                                                                             q
                               200                                                                       q                                                              300                                           q           q
                                                                                                                                     q                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                               100                                                               -200                                                                                                     q               q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                 q                                                                            q   q   q
                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                          0       q
                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                              q       q                               q
                                                     q                                                                                    q                                               q
                                 0       q   q   q       q
                                                             q
                                                                                                 -400                                                         q               q
                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                     q                                                                                                                                -300
                             -100
                                                                                                 -600
                             -200                                                                                                                                     -600
                                     -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7                                -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7                                 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

                                                             Labs                                                                UCC                                                                  Other
                               300                                                                  30
                                                                                                                 q
                                             q
                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                     q   q
                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                        500
                                                                                                         q
                                         q       q   q   q                                           0                           q                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                 0   q                       q                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                              q   q   q       q
                                                                                                                                                                          0                           q
                                                                                             q                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                 q
                                                                                                  -30                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q           q
                             -300                                    q   q
                                                                             q
                                                                                 q
                                                                                     q   q                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                      -500
                                                                                                  -60                                         q
                                                                                                                                                  q   q
                             -600                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                              q   q
                                                                                                  -90                                                                 -1000
                                     -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7                                -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7                                 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
                                                                                                                 Year Relative to Move
Notes: Estimates of equation (1) for different spending measures. Estimates reflect the change in annual
healthcare spending associated with destination-origin difference in ED utilization rate. Year 0 is the year
of the move. The coefficient of the year before the move is normalized to 0. Spending is denominated in NIS
(except for UCC, where the y-axis scale is percentage point). Total is the total annual spending on all service
types. Standard errors are clustered by patient. The sample is all movers (N = 1,274,445 patient-years).




                                                                                                                         40
 Appendix Figure A3: Baseline Spending and Changes in Movers' Spending Related to
Destination-Origin Difference in ED Visit Rates


                    ED                                                                                  q



          Primary Care                                                                              q



               Imaging                                                                              q



                 Other                                                                          q



                 Drugs                                                                      q



             Specialist                                                                     q



      Planned Inpatient                                                                     q



    Outpatient Services                                                                    q



                  Labs                                                                     q



   Unplanned Inpatient                                                  q



                          0     250    500     750               -100           -50             0           50
                              Average Spending                       Change in Spending
                                Before Move                       Related to an Average Move
Notes: The figure shows average pre-move annual spending and estimates of the change in spending follow-
ing a move that is related to each mover's destination-origin difference in ED utilization rate, by type of
service. For each service category, the left bar plot shows the average spending among movers, pre-move.
The right panel shows for each service category, the average change in individual spending related to the
origin-destination difference, estimated using equation (1) and collapsed to the difference between all post-
and pre-periods, weighted by sample size. This effect is scaled to show the effect on spending associated with
the average absolute origin-destination difference in ED utilization in our sample, which is 2.6 percentage
points. The details of these calculations are discussed in the Appendix. Spending is denominated in New
Israeli Shekels (NIS). The error bars reflect 95 percent confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered
by patient. The sample is all movers (N=1,274,445 patient-years).




                                                      41
 Appendix Figure A4: Change in Movers' Spending and Utilization Related to Positive
Versus Negative Destination-Origin Differences in ED Visit Rates

                                  Negative Difference                             Positive Difference

                   ED                                      q                                       q



          Primary Care                                 q                                       q



               Imaging                                 q                                       q



                 Other                             q                                           q



                 Drugs                q                                                                q



             Specialist                            q                                       q



      Planned Inpatient                        q                                                       q



    Outpatient Services                    q                                                   q



                  Labs                             q                                           q



   Unplanned Inpatient                         q                                    q


                           -200     -100               0       100   200   -200     -100       0           100   200
                                                              Change in Spending
                                                           Related to an Average Move
Notes: The figure shows an analysis of heterogeneity of estimates of the model in equation (1) for the
relationship between destination-origin difference in ED use and mover spending. The figure shows moves
that involve a negative (right panel, N = 620, 613 patient-years) and positive (left panel, N = 653, 832
patient-years) destination-origin difference in average ED use. Each panel shows for each service category,
the average change in individual spending related to the origin-destination difference, estimated using
equation (1) and collapsed to the difference between all post- and pre-periods, weighted by sample size.
This effect is scaled to show the effect on spending associated with the average absolute origin-destination
difference in ED utilization in our sample, which is 2.6 percentage points. The details of these calculations
are discussed in the Appendix. Spending is denominated in New Israeli Shekels (NIS). The error bars reflect
95 percent confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered by patient.




                                                               42
 Appendix Figure A5: Change in Movers' Spending and Utilization Related to Large Versus
Small Destination-Origin Differences in ED Visit Rates

                               |Difference| < Average                     |Difference| > Average

                   ED                                  q                                        q



          Primary Care                             q                                        q



               Imaging                             q                                        q



                 Other                         q                                         q



                 Drugs                 q                                                    q



             Specialist                        q                                        q



      Planned Inpatient                    q                                             q



    Outpatient Services                            q                                    q



                  Labs                         q                                        q



   Unplanned Inpatient                 q                                          q


                           -200    -100            0       100   200   -200    -100      0          100   200
                                                          Change in Spending
                                                       Related to an Average Move
Notes: The figure shows an analysis of heterogeneity of estimates of the model in equation (1) for the
relationship between destination-origin difference in ED use and mover spending, for moves with a smaller-
than-average (left panel, N = 506, 024 patient-years) and greater-than-average (right panel, N = 768, 421
patient-years) absolute destination-origin difference in average ED use. Each panel shows for each service
category, the average change in individual spending related to the origin-destination difference, estimated
using equation (1) and collapsed to the difference between all post- and pre-periods, weighted by sample size.
This effect is scaled to show the effect on spending associated with the average absolute origin-destination
difference in ED utilization in our sample, which is 2.6 percentage points. The details of these calculations
are discussed in the Appendix. Spending is denominated in New Israeli Shekels (NIS). The error bars reflect
95 percent confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered by patient.




                                                           43
    Appendix Figure A6: Level and Change in Movers' Distance to the Nearest Hospital
                                                         (A) Before the Move

                                  40000




                                  30000
               Number of Movers




                                  20000




                                  10000




                                     0
                                          0              25               50        75
                                                   Distance to Nearest Hospital (km)

                                                    (B) Change During a Move
                                  50000



                                  40000
               Number of Movers




                                  30000



                                  20000



                                  10000



                                     0
                                                   -50                0        50           100
                                              Change in Distance to Nearest Hospital (km)

Notes: The figure shows, for the sample of 150,676 movers, the distribution of the patients' distance to
the nearest hospital. Panel A shows the distribution of this distance before the move. Panel B shows the
distribution of the change in this distance following a move. Section 5 discusses in detail the definition of
our distance measure.



                                                                 44
          Appendix Figure A7: ED Utilization and Distance to the Nearest Hospital
                                                                                                                   (A) Pre Move

                                                                                                                          ED Visits                                                            ED Visits
                                                           All ED Visits                                                 Resulting in                                                        Not Resulting
                                                                                                                          Admission                                                          in Admission

                                               q

                                                   q
                                                           q
                                                                                     qq                                                                                          q
                   Average Annual Rate



                                                       q               q       qqq
                                                               qq                            qq
                                                                           q                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                         0.2                                                          q       qq                                                                             q
                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                         q               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                 q               qqqqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                     q       q                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq




                                         0.1
                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                   q                    qq          q
                                                                                                                       qqqqqqqq                         qqq
                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                             q




                                         0.0
                                                               5               10            15               20             5      10                  15               20                      5               10               15            20
                                                                                              Distance to the Nearest Hospital

                                                                                                                   (B) Post Move

                                                                                                                          ED Visits                                                            ED Visits
                                                           All ED Visits                                                 Resulting in                                                        Not Resulting
                                                                                                                          Admission                                                          in Admission
                                               q

                                                   q
                                                           q                                      q
                                                       q                                 q                                                                                       q
                                                               q       q
                                                                                    qq       qq               qq
                                                                                                      q
                   Average Annual Rate




                                                                           qq                                                                                                        q
                                                                   q                                      q                                                                                  q
                                                                                q                                                                                                        q
                                         0.2                                                                                                                                                     q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qqq               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q       q              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                             q                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                     q                                      q




                                         0.1                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                   q                        q       q                    q
                                                                                                                       qqq                                  q
                                                                                                                             qqqq               q       q           qq       q
                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                        q




                                         0.0
                                                               5               10            15               20             5      10                  15               20                      5               10               15            20
                                                                                              Distance to the Nearest Hospital

Notes: The figure shows the average annual ED visit rates by the patients' distance to the nearest hospital.
For each mover, we calculated the distance to the nearest hospital before and after the move (see Section 5
for details) and binned these distances into twenty ventiles. The x-axis shows the patient distance ventile.
The y-axis shows the average annual ED use rates for patient in each ventile. Panels (A) and (B) show
results from before (N= 706,800 mover-years) and after the move (N = 562,406 mover years). The different
facets show results for all ED visits, and separately by discharge status.




                                                                                                                                 45
               Appendix Figure A8: The Impact of Hospital Opening on ED Use
                                                                                                                                                               (A)



                   Prob. of Any ED Visit During the Quarter (Coef.)    0.02                                                                                                                                                                    q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q




                                                                       0.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q




                                                                       0.00                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                           q



                                                                                                                          q                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                      q                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                   q

                                                                                                              q


                                                                                                  q




                                                                      -0.01
                                                                                                                      -8                                               -4                                          0                                               4
                                                                                                                                  Quarter Relative to Opening

                                                                                                                                                               (B)
                                                                                             ED Visit                                                                                  ED Visit
                   Prob. of Any ED Visit During the Quarter (Coef.)




                                                                                      Resulting in Admission                                                                   Not Resulting in Admission

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q




                                                                      0.02                                                                                                                                                                             q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q




                                                                      0.01



                                                                                                                                                                                                       q




                                                                      0.00                q
                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                   q       q
                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                   q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q

                                                                                  q
                                                                                              q                       q                                q
                                                                              q                                               q                                    q
                                                                                                      q                                        q                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                       q




                                                                                              -8                      -4                       0                       4                       -8                      -4                          0                       4
                                                                                                                                  Quarter Relative to Opening

Notes: The figure shows estimates of equation (6) of the impact of hospital entry on local ED use relative
to ED use in cities without entry. Quarter number 0 is the quarter of the ED opening. The coefficient of
quarter -1 is normalized to 0. Panel (A) shows results for any ED visit; Panel (B) shows results separately
by ED visit outcome: admission (left) and discharge home (right). The comparison group consists of cities
similar in size to the treated cities that did not have a hospital opening throughout the period. The sample
consists of 41,031 treated and 343,332 untreated patients (N=5,964,797 patient-quarters).



                                                                                                                                                                   46
Appendix Figure A9: Difference-in-Differences Estimates of the Overall Change in Spending
Related to Hospital Opening


      Planned Inpatient                                                                           q



   Unplanned Inpatient                                                                q



                    ED                                                           q



                 Drugs                                                       q



               Imaging                                                       q



             Specialist                                                  q



          Primary Care                                               q



                  Labs                                               q



                 Other                                               q



    Outpatient Services                                          q



                          0      50    100     150                   0               20               40
                              Average Spending                            Change in Spending
                              Before ED Opening                          Related to ED Opening
Notes: The figure shows average pre-treatment annual spending and estimates of equation (6) for the change
in spending associated with hospital entry, by type of service. For each service category, the left panel shows
the pre-treatment average monthly spending in Ashdod--the treated city. The right panel shows estimates of
equation (6) for the impact of hospital entry on healthcare spending of treated residents, relative to residents
of comparison cities that did not have hospital entry. The sample consists of 41,031 treated and 343,332
untreated patients (N=17,870139 patient-months).




                                                      47
                                                       Appendix Figure A10: Change in Spending Related to ED Opening

                                                                       Total                                                                    ED                                                                  Drugs
                                    400                                                                                                                                              150
                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                              30                                                     q
                                                                                                q       q
                                                                                                                                                                             q   q   100
                                    200                                                                                                                                                            q                                                     q
                                                                                                              20                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                      50               q        q
                                                                                                    q                                                                                                                                            q
                                                      q        q                            q
                                      0           q                q
                                                                                    q   q                                                                                                      q                    q            q           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                              q            q            q                                     10                                                                       0   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q    q       q
                                                                            q   q                                                   q                                                                                                    q
                                          q                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                   q
                                   -200                                                                        0       q   q            q   q   q    q       q                       -50
                                                                                                                                                         q


                                                      -8               -4               0               4                      -8               -4               0               4                     -8               -4               0               4

                                                      Unplanned Inpatient                                                       Planned Inpatient                                                      Outpatient Services
                                                                                                                                                                                     100
Quarterly Spending (Coefficient)




                                    100                                                                      100
                                                                                                q                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                   q   q
                                                                                                        q                                                                                  q
                                                                                                               0                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                         q   q        50       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                            q   q
                                      0                    q   q        q
                                                                                    q
                                                                                        q
                                                                                            q       q
                                                                                                                                                                 q   q                                              q                            q
                                                                                q                                                                                                                                                        q   q
                                                      q            q        q                                                  q                                                                                        q
                                              q   q                                                                    q                q   q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                   -100                                                                     -100   q
                                                                                                                           q        q                q   q                             0                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                          q


                                   -200                                                                     -200                                                                     -50
                                                      -8               -4               0               4                      -8               -4               0               4                     -8               -4               0               4

                                                           Primary Care                                                                 Specialist                                                                  Imaging
                                                                                                            10.0                                                                      30
                                          q
                                    5.0                                                                      7.5                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                      q                                                                                                                               20                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                         q                             q
                                              q                                         q                                                   q
                                                                                                                                    q                                q                                          q
                                    2.5                    q
                                                                   q                                         5.0       q                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q                                    q
                                                  q            q        q                                                      q                q                q
                                                                                                                                                                                      10       q   q                                     q           q
                                                                            q                                                                                                              q                            q
                                                                                q               q
                                    0.0                                             q
                                                                                            q
                                                                                                        q    2.5                        q            q                                                                       q
                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                   q                                     q                             0                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                             0.0                                             q

                                   -2.5                                                                                                                                              -10
                                                      -8               -4               0               4                      -8               -4               0               4                     -8               -4               0               4

                                                                       Labs                                                                     UCC                                                                  Other
                                     10
                                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                           q
                                              q
                                                                                                             0.0       q                        q
                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                      5               q
                                                                                                                   q                    q
                                                                                                                                                         q                                                          q
                                                  q        q       q                                                                                                                                                             q
                                          q
                                                               q        q       q
                                                                                                q   q
                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                            -0.5               q
                                                                                                                                    q       q                                          0                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                     q           q       q       q                              q                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                      0                                             q   q                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                            q
                                                                                            q               -1.0                                                                               q   q                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                     -20   q
                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                    -5
                                                                                                            -1.5
                                                      -8               -4               0               4                      -8               -4               0               4                     -8               -4               0               4
                                                                                                                   Quarter Relative to Opening
Notes: Table shows estimates of equation (6) for the impact of hospital opening on average individual
spending by nearby ("treated") residents on different types of healthcare services relative to spending by
untreated residents residing in cities that did not have a hospital entry during the study period. Spending
is denominated in NIS (except for UCC, where the outcome is a dummy for a visit, and the y-axis scale
shows percentage points). Total is the total annual spending on all service types. ED denotes spending
on emergency department visits. Standard errors are clustered by patient. The sample consists of 41,031
treated and 343,332 untreated patients (N=17,870139 patient-months).




                                                                                                                                        48
 Appendix Figure A11: Impact of Hospital Entry on ED Use, Estimated Separately Relative
to Each Comparison City
                                                                                              (A) All ED Visits
                                                                        0.03




                    Prob. of Any ED Visit During the Quarter (Coef.)
                                                                        0.02




                                                                        0.01




                                                                        0.00




                                                                       -0.01




                                                                                       -8                -4                  0                  4
                                                                                               Quarter Relative to Opening


                                                                                    (B) ED Visits by Discharge Status
                                                                                   (A) ED Visit                           (B) ED Visit
                                                                               Resulting in Admission              Not Resulting in Admission
                                                                        0.03
                    Prob. of Any ED Visit During the Quarter (Coef.)




                                                                        0.02




                                                                        0.01




                                                                        0.00




                                                                       -0.01



                                                                               -8      -4        0       4          -8           -4    0            4
                                                                                               Quarter Relative to Opening


Notes: For the treated city and each one of the five comparison cities, the figure shows the fraction of
residents with one or more ED visit during each month. The gray vertical shade highlights November 2017,
the month in which the index city opened its first ED. Before that time, it had been served only by emergency
departments in adjacent cities. Comparison cities were served by at least one local emergency department
throughout the study period.




                                                                                                        49
 Appendix Figure A12: The Impact of Hospital Entry on Spending, Estimated Relative to
Each Comparison City Separately

                                                  Total                                  ED                               Drugs
                                                                      40
                                    500
                                                                      30
                                    250                                                                       100
                                                                      20
                                      0                               10                                        0
                                   -250                                0
                                   -500                             -10                                      -100
                                          -8       -4     0     4              -8        -4      0       4          -8     -4      0      4

                                          Unplanned Inpatient                   Planned Inpatient                   Outpatient Services
                                    200                                                                       150
                                                                     200
Quarterly Spending (Coefficient)




                                    100                                                                       100
                                      0                                0                                       50
                                   -100                                                                         0
                                                                    -200
                                   -200                                                                      -50
                                   -300
                                          -8       -4     0     4              -8        -4      0       4          -8     -4      0      4

                                               Primary Care                         Specialist                           Imaging
                                                                      15                                       40
                                                                      10                                       30
                                      5                                                                        20
                                                                       5
                                                                       0                                       10
                                      0
                                                                                                                0
                                                                     -5
                                                                                                             -10
                                                                    -10
                                          -8       -4     0     4              -8        -4      0       4          -8     -4      0      4

                                                  Labs                                UCC                                 Other
                                     15
                                     10                                                                        20
                                                                       0
                                      5                                                                         0
                                      0
                                                                     -1                                      -20
                                    -5
                                   -10                                                                       -40
                                          -8       -4     0     4              -8        -4      0       4          -8     -4      0      4
                                                                           Quarter Relative to Opening
Notes: Table shows estimates of equation (6) for the impact of hospital opening on average individual
spending by nearby ("treated") residents on different types of healthcare services, relative to spending by
untreated residents of each of the comparison cities, which did not have a hospital entry during the study
period. Spending is denominated in NIS (except for UCC, where the outcome is a dummy for a visit, and the
y-axis scale shows percentage points). Total is the total annual spending on all service types. ED denotes
spending on emergency department visits. Standard errors are clustered by patient.




                                                                                    50
                                          Appendix Table A1: District-Level ED Utilization and Spending

                                                                                                        District
                                                                             1       2       3      4        5        6      7       8       9      All
          A. Annual Emergency Department Use
           Percent with Any ED Visit                                      20.1 22.4 23.4 24.1             24.5      24.9 26.4 27.8 30.8            24.2
             Discharged Home                                              15.0 16.3 18.3 17.6             18.9      19.8 21.5 23.2 28.1            18.8
             Admitted                                                      8.2   9.7   8.6 10.5            9.5       8.8   8.9   8.8   7.2          9.1
             Died                                                        0.067 0.054 0.041 0.060         0.046     0.056 0.049 0.070 0.091        0.055
           Fraction of ED Visits Resulting in Admission                   37.3 38.9 32.3 39.1             34.8      31.7 29.5 27.5 17.6            33.6
           Percent with Any UCC Visit                                     13.2   4.3   9.3   2.9           0.9      10.8   1.9   2.0   0.8          5.4
          B. Annual Spending, By Category (mean, NIS)
            Total (All Categories)                                       6,490 6,249 6,768 7,968 6,334 5,697              6,774   5,950   6,622   6,470
              Emergency Department                                         159   165   193   193   189   191                220     240     371     193
              Prescription Drugs                                         1,308 1,294 1,452 1,826 1,392 1,205              1,565   1,289   1,007   1,395




51
              Inpatient - Unplanned                                      1,770 1,854 1,704 2,512 1,622 1,411              1,615   1,444   1,246   1,722
              Inpatient - Planned                                        1,073   983 1,171 1,150 1,109   875              1,118   1,013   1,956   1,063
              Outpatient Services                                          931   718   918   827   815   808                922     775     807     830
              Primary Care Visits                                          285   291   279   252   280   309                257     327     241     286
              Specialist Visits                                            235   271   282   351   269   222                292     197     203     263
              Laboratory Services                                          274   267   322   340   282   310                345     274     395     299
              Imaging Services                                             182   179   178   246   161   145                193     154     152     177
              Other                                                        246   220   257   268   214   208                243     234     245     234
          C. Additional Statistics
            Average Distance to Hospital (km)                              6.4 13.3    9.1   6.6   9.4 18.0    3.1 12.4                    3.9   10.2
            Average Share of PCP visits with ED Referral (Percent)         2.2   1.9   2.1   2.3   1.9   3.4   2.9   3.2                   3.9    2.5
          Number of Observations (Patient-Year, thousands)               2,172 3,929 2,892 1,994 3,254 2,455 2,365 2,570                   159 21,791
          Number of Patients (thousands)                                   326   556   424   313   469   362   356   368                    27 3,005
     Notes: Districts are ordered from lowest (1) to highest (9) ED use. The district names are: 1. Jerusalem, 2. Haifa, 3. Center, 4. Tel-Aviv Jaffa,
     5. Sharon-Shomron, 6. South, 7. Dan, Petach-Tikva, 8. North, 9. Eilat. Distance to the hospital and share of PCP ED referrals are defined in Section 5.
                       Appendix Table A2: Distribution of Year of Move

               Calender Year of Move       Number of Movers          Share of Sample
                                                     (1)                   (2)

               2011                                         21,354               0.142
               2012                                         21,097               0.140
               2013                                         21,561               0.143
               2014                                         21,599               0.143
               2015                                         21,428               0.142
               2016                                         21,649               0.144
               2017                                         21,988               0.146
               All                                         150,676               1.000
Notes: Table shows the number of patients who moved in each calendar year during our study period of
2011­2017. Column 1 shows the number of movers. Column 2 shows their share of the total sample.




                                                52
                       Appendix Table A3: Move Origin and Destination

 Origin        Number of       Number of
                                                               Destination District (Fraction)
 District       Patients        Movers
                                                 1         2      3     4     5    6      7      8      9

 1                 333,119           14,247               0.08   0.28 0.19   0.11 0.11   0.15   0.08   0.02
 2                 563,751           17,642     0.07             0.09 0.18   0.22 0.05   0.12   0.24   0.02
 3                 432,948           20,390     0.09      0.05        0.24   0.13 0.21   0.21   0.05   0.02
 4                 324,144           25,666     0.04      0.06   0.28        0.20 0.06   0.31   0.04   0.01
 5                 477,350           18,574     0.07      0.12   0.11 0.26        0.06   0.27   0.09   0.01
 6                 369,676           14,078     0.10      0.08   0.30 0.18   0.12        0.15   0.04   0.03
 7                 366,106           21,204     0.07      0.06   0.22 0.27   0.26 0.06          0.05   0.01
 8                 376,048           16,270     0.08      0.36   0.08 0.13   0.16 0.06   0.11          0.02
 9                  29,170            2,605     0.07      0.14   0.15 0.13   0.12 0.22   0.09   0.08

  Total            3,004,676         150,676    0.06 0.10 0.17 0.17 0.16 0.08 0.17 0.07 0.02
Notes: For each origin district, the matrix shows the fraction of patients that moved to each destination
district, with each row adding up to one. Also shown are the overall number of patients (including non-
movers) and the number of movers in each district. See Section 3 for sample definitions.




                                                     53
Appendix Table A4: Characteristics of Cases Used in Estimating Physician Propensity to
Refer to the ED

                       ED Referral Rate                                     0.0247
                       ACG (mean)                                             3.63
                       Number of Chronic Conditions (Mean)                   0.574
                       Distance to Hospital (km)                              10.4
                       Female (Percent)                                       58.8
                       Age (Mean)                                             53.6
                       Number of Visits                                 19,519,925
                       Number of Doctors                                     4,205
Notes: The table shows descriptive statistics for the auxiliary sample of all visits in 2018 to physicians in
our sample. ED referral rate is the fraction of visits that ended with the physician referring the patient to
the ED. Distance to the hospital is the distance between the patient's assigned primary care clinic and the
nearest hospital. See Section 5 for detailed definitions.




                                                     54
   Appendix Table A5: The Change in ED Use Associated with PCP Referral Propensity

                                                                           Dependent variable:
                                              Change in      Change in ED Visits        Change in ED Visits     Change in
                                              ED Visits   Not Resulting in Admission   Resulting in Admission   UCC Visits
                                                 (1)                 (2)                           (3)             (4)
                                                                                                         
 Change in PCP Referral Propensity            0.0020              0.0022                         0.0002         -0.0019
                                              (0.0002)            (0.0002)                       (0.0001)        (0.0001)

 Change in Distance to the Nearest Hospital   -0.0069            -0.0076                         -0.0008         0.0099
                                               (0.0009)           (0.0008)                       (0.0005)        (0.0005)


 ACG Resource Utilization Band                   Yes                 Yes                           Yes             Yes
 Number of Chronic Conditions                    Yes                 Yes                           Yes             Yes
 Age Group                                       Yes                 Yes                           Yes             Yes
 Gender                                          Yes                 Yes                           Yes             Yes

Notes: The figure shows estimates of equation (4) for the relationship between a mover's change in utilization
and the change in their PCP propensity to refer to the ED. For each mover in each year, we calculate the
primary care physician's referral propensity, based on estimates of equation (3). We then averaged these
measures, separately for the years before and the years after the move and calculated the change in this
propensity, defined as the average propensity in all years after a move minus the average propensity in all
years before a move. Change in PCP Referral Propensity is the ventile of these changes, scaled between 1
and 20. Change in Distance to the Nearest Hospital is the difference in the mover's distance to the nearest
hospital before the move minus their distance to the nearest hospital after the move (see Section 5 for details)
in multiples of 10 kilometers. The different columns show estimates of equation (4) separately for different
utilization measures. The sample includes all movers, excluding a small number of movers whose physicians
had fewer than 100 visits in 2018. Standard errors in parentheses.  p < 0.1;  p < 0.05;  p < 0.01.




                                                            55
