                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                PRICING CURRENCY RISKS

                                      Mikhail Chernov
                                      Magnus Dahlquist
                                      Lars A. Lochstoer

                                      Working Paper 28260
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28260


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2020




We thank Valentin Haddad, Serhiy Kozak, Francis Longstaff, Tyler Muir, Adrien Verdelhan and
Irina Zviadadze for comments on earlier drafts, as well as participants in the seminar at UCLA.
We thank Felix Wilke for excellent research assistance. Dahlquist gratefully acknowledges
support from the Jan Wallander and Tom Hedelius Foundation. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Mikhail Chernov, Magnus Dahlquist, and Lars A. Lochstoer. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Pricing Currency Risks
Mikhail Chernov, Magnus Dahlquist, and Lars A. Lochstoer
NBER Working Paper No. 28260
December 2020
JEL No. F31,G12,G15

                                           ABSTRACT

The currency market features a relatively small cross-section and conditional expected returns
can be characterized by only a few signals ­ interest differentials, trend, and mean-reversion. We
exploit these properties to construct a conditional projection of the stochastic discount factor onto
excess returns of individual currencies. Our approach is implementable in real time and prices all
currencies and prominent strategies conditionally as well as unconditionally. We document that
the fraction of unpriced risk in these assets is at least 85%. Extant explanations of carry strategies
based on intermediary capital or global volatility are related to these unpriced components, while
consumption growth is related to the priced component of returns.


Mikhail Chernov                                   Lars A. Lochstoer
Anderson School of Management                     University of California, Los Angeles
University of California, Los Angeles             lars.lochstoer@anderson.ucla.edu
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C-417
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and CEPR
and also NBER
mikhail.chernov@anderson.ucla.edu

Magnus Dahlquist
Drottninggatan 98
SE-111 60 Stockholm
Sweden
magnus.dahlquist@hhs.se
1     Introduction

In this paper we argue that research on cross-sectional currency pricing can depart
fruitfully from the factor mining path established by the equity literature. That
is because direct conditional projection of the stochastic discount factor (SDF), as
advocated by Hansen and Richard (1987), is feasible in the exchange-rate setting.
The value of this approach, if it is empirically successful, is obvious. One obtains
a measure of the SDF that prices, both conditionally and unconditionally, the full
cross-section of currencies and trading strategies associated with them. This measure
can help with directing research that tries to develop an understanding of currency
risk pricing.

Specifically, the projection approach requires two critical ingredients: estimates of
the conditional mean and covariance matrix of currency returns. This is where ex-
change rates have an advantage over equities. First, the size of the cross-section of
exchange rates is small, not exceeding 40 as compared to thousands of stocks. That
feature dramatically affects the precision of the covariance matrix regardless of the
specifics of the estimation method. Second, exchange rates have a very particular eco-
nomic structure that helps with hypothesizing the functional form of the conditional
means. Research that goes back decades suggests the importance of the interest
rate differential (Covered Interest Parity, Keynes, 1923; Uncovered Interest Parity,
Porter, 1971; Random Walk Hypothesis, Meese and Rogoff, 1983), real exchange rate
(Purchasing Power Parity, Cassel, 1918), and trend in nominal exchange rate (weak
form of market efficiency, Cornell and Dietrich, 1978). These three drivers remain
the key ingredients in the modern currency trading strategies under the names of
Carry, Value, and Momentum, respectively.


                                          1
We work with a sample of G10 currencies, the most commonly used data in the
literature, with monthly returns based on forward rates from January 1985 through
May 2020. We construct monthly conditional expected excess returns using the three
aforementioned signals. The loading on the first signal is one as motivated by the
random walk hypothesis, while the loadings on the other signals are estimated on
a rolling basis via panel regressions. We construct a conditional covariance matrix
of currency returns using daily data within each month. Importantly, the overall
approach uses data that are available to investors in real time.

We consider nine leading trading strategies. The Dollar strategy represents the cur-
rency version of "the market" (Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan, 2011). The Dollar
Carry goes long or short the Dollar factor depending on the average carry signal
(Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan, 2014). Next, we evaluate the cross-sectional
and time-series Carry strategies (Burnside, Eichenbaum, Kleshchelski, and Rebelo,
2011, Daniel, Hodrick, and Lu, 2017, Koijen, Moskowitz, Pedersen, and Vrugt, 2018,
Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan, 2011). These strategies are followed by two ver-
sions of cross-sectional and time-series Momentum depending on whether one uses
the past month or year as the measure of past performance (Asness, Moskowitz, and
Pedersen, 2013, Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo, 2011, Burnside, Eichenbaum,
Kleshchelski, and Rebelo, 2011, Menkhoff, Sarno, Schmeling, and Schrimpf, 2012b,
Moskowitz, Ooi, and Pedersen, 2012). Lastly, we study cross-sectional Value that
sorts currencies based on the real exchange rate (Asness, Moskowitz, and Peder-
sen, 2013). As emphasized by Asness, Moskowitz, and Pedersen (2013) and Koijen,
Moskowitz, Pedersen, and Vrugt (2018), besides being the most common strategies
in FX, they are more broadly considered in other asset classes.

The estimated SDF can be represented as a linear function of the unconditional

                                          2
mean-variance efficient portfolio (UMVE). The UMVE is tradeable in real time, has
a Sharpe ratio in excess of one, and, conveniently, allows us to compare directly to
existing trading strategies using standard regression-based tests. We verify that it
prices both excess returns on nine individual exchange rates vs. the U.S. dollar and
the nine above-mentioned trading strategies via the unconditional and conditional
pricing tests of Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989) and Chernov, Lochstoer, and
Lundeby (2018), respectively.

Having tested the SDF, we proceed with evaluating its properties. The UMVE
portfolio, which is perfectly negatively correlated with the SDF, has approximately
zero skewness of -0.04 and modest excess kurtosis of 3.1. Thus, there is little prima
facie evidence of crash risk or extreme events as being key for risk pricing in our
sample. Further, the UMVE explains only a small fraction of the time-series variation
in strategy returns. For instance, less than 1% of the variation in the Dollar factor
returns (the currency "market factor") are priced, while the same for Carry strategies
is at most 15%. Thus, there are large unpriced components in strategy returns and
we show that hedging out these unpriced components in an out-of-sample manner
dramatically increases Sharpe Ratios of the hedged returns. As a model-check, we
verify that the average returns to the (out-of-sample) unpriced components are indeed
not significantly different from zero.

Next, we document that the factors that are the most important for time-series co-
variation among currencies and the currency trading strategies have little relation
to the UMVE portfolio. In other words, the main factors that drive the covari-
ance matrix of returns are not an important source of risk for the marginal currency
investor. For instance, the first two principal components of individual currency
returns capture 75% of the return variation and are strongly associated with the

                                          3
Dollar and cross-sectional Carry strategies, consistent with Verdelhan (2018).1 How-
ever, these principal components explain only around 5% of the variation in UMVE
returns. In fact, all nine of these principal components only explain around 10% of
the UMVE returns indicating that conditional currency risk premiums vary strongly
and underscoring the importance of correct conditioning.

The currency strategies involve a lot of timing and therefore potentially accounts
for these conditional dynamics. We investigate whether their principal components
are capable of explaining variation in the UMVE. The answer is no, although there
is some improvement. The first three principal components of the currency trading
strategies explain around 20% of the variation in the UMVE returns. Using all the
principal components, this increases to 50%. This evidence is consistent with the
uncovered large idiosyncratic component of strategy returns. Taken together, this
suggests a large role of optimal timing implicit in the construction of the UMVE
above and beyond the timing already implicit in existing trading strategies.

To give a sense of the magnitudes, consider the standard deviation of a strategy's
conditional expected returns. The average of this number across strategies, annual-
ized, is 3.4%. For comparison, the average unconditional return across strategies is
3.2%. The large variation in conditional returns suggests a substantial benefit also to
individual factor timing. We do so optimally in an out-of-sample fashion by scaling
a position in each strategy up or down depending on our estimates of the individual
currency conditional expected returns and covariance matrix. In six cases alphas of
the timed strategies with respect to their original counterparts are significant with
large Information ratios. Thus, there are large gains in terms of the unconditional
  1
   Aloosh and Bekaert (2019) and Greenaway-McGrevy, Mark, Sul, and Wu (2018) offer alternative
approaches to analysis of time-series behavior of exchange rates.


                                              4
Sharpe ratio to timing existing factors proposed in the literature.

General equilibrium models have struggled with explaining FX moments. The cur-
rent generation of models based on habit (Verdelhan, 2010), long-run risks (Bansal
and Shaliastovich, 2013; Colacito, Croce, Gavazzoni, and Ready, 2018), and rare
disasters (Farhi and Gabaix, 2016) tend to aim at explaining the forward premium
puzzle (and to some extent the carry trade). However, as our analysis shows, the
most popular carry factors together explain only about 20% of the variation in our
pricing factor. Thus, there is much left to explain and our empirical model can help
guide the specification and tests of future models on currency risk and return.

To that end, we first regress the UMVE returns on various candidate explanatory
factors. We find that quarterly and 3-year consumption growth, a proxy for long-run
consumption risk, both are significantly positively related to the UMVE returns, con-
sistent with Lustig and Verdelhan (2007) and Zviadadze (2017). We next find that
the factors in the Fama-French 5-factor model are only weakly related to the cur-
rency UMVE portfolio, with only the HML and CMA portfolios having a significant
relation. However, here the R2 s are only about 1%, so economically there appears
to be effectively no relation between priced risks in the equity and currency markets.
These results extend findings in Burnside (2012), who shows a similar weak relation
between the Carry trade returns and equity factors, to the UMVE portfolio. We also
find that intermediary capital factors and shocks to equity and currency variance
are unrelated to the UMVE returns. This may appear puzzling given that previous
literature has highlighted these factors as potential explanations of the carry trade,
but we show that this correlation comes from the large unpriced component in carry
factor returns.



                                          5
Finally, we show that the conditional price of risk, as given by the volatility of
our currency market SDF, has a downward trend over the sample, largely caused
by a trend decline in interest differentials across countries. The cyclical variation
in the price of risk is negatively related to measures of the conditional variance
of consumption and equity returns, and currency depreciation. In sum, our paper
provides a rich set of facts that can help guide future developments of equilibrium
models of currency market risk and return.

Related literature. A number of papers consider conditional mean-variance efficient
portfolios (CMVE) using Carry alone as a signal (Ackermann, Pohl, and Schmed-
ders, 2017, Baz, Breedon, Naik, and Peress, 2001, Daniel, Hodrick, and Lu, 2017,
Mauer, To, and Tran, 2018, 2020). Further, with the exception of Mauer, To, and
Tran (2018), these papers do not test if CMVE explains other versions of Carry or
individual currency returns. We reject this version of our model with respect to our
full model, which includes Value and Momentum, using the Barillas and Shanken
(2017) test. We also reject it using the conditional pricing test, even when using
Carry-based strategies only as test assets. Della Corte, Sarno, and Tsiakas (2009)
depart from the lone Carry signal by considering three monetary fundamentals vari-
ables. They perform an out-of-sample analysis of exchange rate predictability in a
mean-variance framework where the allocation choice is between the risk-free asset
and one of the three exchange rates they consider.

A large literature implements model-free SDF projections in the context of uncondi-
tional pricing of assets. Many authors use Hansen and Jagannathan (1991) bounds
as a diagnostic of their models, but not as a standalone tool for SDF estimation. A
variation on the unconditional version of the Hansen and Richard (1987) approach is
that of entropy minimization advocated by Stutzer (1996) in the context of deriva-

                                         6
tives pricing. Ghosh, Julliard, and Taylor (2019) develop and apply this framework
to cross-sectional asset pricing. Korsaye, Trojani, and Vedolin (2020), Orlowski,
Sokolowski, and Sverdrup (2019), and Sandulescu, Trojani, and Vedolin (2020) are
examples of international applications of this framework. We critically depart from
this work by constructing real-time conditional SDF projections. In particular, that
allows valuation of any trading strategies in the set of assets involved in the projec-
tion.




2       Linear factor models and exchange rates

Linear factor models are popular in empirical asset pricing, in general, and in cur-
rency pricing in particular. The pursuit of such a model has two ultimate objectives.
The first objective, common across all of asset pricing, is to achieve correct condi-
tional pricing. That is, find a stochastic discount factor (SDF), Mt,t+1 , such that

                                          ei
                              Et (Mt,t+1 Rt,t+1 ) = 0,                             (1)

       ei
where Rt,t +1 is a one-period excess return on asset i.


The second objective is to find a parsimonious factor representation of the risk-return
trade-off. To make an extreme argument, having as many factors as assets does
not help with understanding risk pricing in the economy. Further, a parsimonious
representation is helpful in developing economic explanations of risk pricing. That
is because it offers a succinct set of quantitative benchmarks, which an equilibrium
model should match.



                                           7
2.1    Conditional MVE portfolio

The ultimate parsimonious factor model is a single-factor one. The projection ap-
proach of Hansen and Richard (1987) offers a way to construct such a factor via a
CMVE portfolio (also, see Cochrane and Hansen, 1992 and Cochrane, 2004). Stack
                ei                                         e
excess returns Rt,t+1 on all assets into an Nt × 1 vector Rt,t+1 . Then


                        C          C    e
                       Rt,t +1 = (wt ) Rt,t+1 ,                                   (2)
                           C    -1 -1  e          e
                          wt = kt Vt  Rt,t +1 Et Rt,t+1                           (3)


is a CMVE portfolio. Here kt is any positive constant known at time t, governing
                                                     C      C
the leverage of the portfolio. In particular, given wt and Rt,t+1 above, this constant

governs the ratio of the conditional mean to the conditional variance,


                            kt = Vt-1 Rt,t
                                       C         C
                                          +1 Et Rt,t+1 .



The CMVE portfolio "prices" any combination of these assets. That is, a projected
SDF

                                         C            C
                       Mt,t+1 = 1 - kt (Rt,t+1 - Et (Rt,t+1 ))                    (4)


satisfies Equation (1). That there is a single factor driving this SDF does not mean
that it prices only one source of risk in the economy. The factor is capturing the
correct combination of the various risks that is priced.

The issue with this approach is practical. Implementation requires estimation of the
conditional covariance matrix and conditional mean of a potentially large number


                                          8
of assets. The literature has responded by searching for a small number of factors
whose linear combination with constant loadings in the SDF price assets uncondi-
tionally. That is, researchers use a low-dimensional factor approach to approximate
the unconditional MVE portfolio. See Chernov, Lochstoer, and Lundeby (2018) for
a recent distillation of the approach.



2.2    Exchange rates

Exchange rates differ from equities in two very important dimensions. First, the
cross-section of "assets" is limited. Indeed, the largest data panel considered in
the literature goes up to 39 currencies at any given point in time (e.g., Hassan and
Mano, 2019, Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan, 2011, Menkhoff, Sarno, Schmeling,
and Schrimpf, 2012a), while most studies limit their attention to ten currencies
representing developed economies.

Second, a voluminous literature on the forecasting of exchange rates suggests that
there are few variables outperform the random walk hypothesis (RWH) out of sample.
That observation, perhaps paradoxically, simplifies the modeling effort required to
construct conditional expectations. We exploit these differences from the equity
literature and construct a projection of the SDF on currency excess returns directly
via Equation (4). Before we show how we do it, we introduce notation and basic
concepts pertaining to exchange rates.

Let the USD be the base and measurement currency. Let Sti and Fti denote the spot
exchange rate and the one-month forward exchange rate of country i, respectively.
All exchange rates are expressed in USD per unit of foreign currency. Mt,t+1 is the
nominal USD-denominated SDF. Superscript i refers to a foreign country i.

                                         9
The payoff of a forward contract (when buying one unit of the foreign currency) is
Sti+1 - Fti . One common way to scale this payoff to define excess return is to divide
by Fti :

                              ei         i       i    i
                             Rt,t +1 = (St+1 - Ft )/Ft .



This definition implies that the amount of foreign currency bought is one "forward"
dollar. Thus, this is an excess return to a trading strategy regardless of whether
Covered Interest Parity (CIP) holds.

                                         e                e
Next, we proceed with estimation of Et (Rt,t+1 ) and Vt (Rt,t+1 ). We use daily data
                                                    e
within each month to construct our estimate of Vt (Rt,t +1 ) by combining the shrinkage

method of Ledoit and Wolf (2020) along with an exponential moving average. See
Appendix A.1 for details.

                            e
Our starting point for Et (Rt,t+1 ) is the Random Walk Hypothesis (RWH) for spot

rates. The reason for this is simple: the hypothesis leads to an exceptionally robust
forecaster of exchange rates (e.g., Meese and Rogoff, 1983). This is also a natural
straw man given the research in finance, starting with Baz, Breedon, Naik, and Peress
(2001), that uses RWH to develop trading stratgies.

The RWH implies that expected excess currency returns are given by:

                                 ei             i    i
                            Et (Rt,t +1 ) =  · St /Ft - 1



with  = 1. This is a particular violation of Uncovered Interest Parity (UIP), which
posits  = 0. Next, we add mean-reversion and trend signals for exchange rate fore-
casting. See Bilson (1984) and Sweeney (1986), respectively, for early contributions

                                           10
in the context of trading strategies. Thus, the use of the RWH, as well as mean-
reversion and trend signals, were all concepts that were in the public domain at the
start of our sample in 1985.

Our mean-reversion signal is motivated by the literature on the role of real exchange
rates (RER) in forecasting and capturing risk premiums. The RER is defined as


                                 Qi    i     i
                                  t = St · Pt /Pt ,                                  (5)


where Pt and Pti are the U.S. and foreign price levels, respectively. The weak form
of Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) implies mean-reversion in the RER. Thus, when
the RER is far from its long-run mean it should forecast the currency depreciation.

Combining the RER-based signal with the RWH goes as far back as Bilson (1984).
More recently, Chernov and Creal (2020) and Dahlquist and Penasse (2016) show
that PPP implies that RER forecasts nominal depreciation rate and that currency
risk premium depends on the RER. Eichenbaum, Johannsen, and Rebelo (2020)
demonstrate that RER outperforms random walk in forecasting of exchange rates at
horizons beyond one year.

As Jorda and Taylor (2012) emphasize, the RER's long-run mean is not a clearly
defined object empirically. We divide each RER by its 5-year smoothed lag (specifi-
cally the average RER from 4.5 to 5.5 years ago) as a way to remove the dependence
on the long-run mean while still preserving the long-run nature of mean-reversion
signals:
                                             6            -1
                                        1
                           Qi   i
                            t  Qt ·             Qi             .
                                        13 j =-6 t-60+j

Lastly, we cross-sectionally demean the signal at each time t to create a cross-sectional

                                           11
ranking of "cheap" and "expensive" currencies. That is, our signal is

                                                   N
                                Q              1
                               zit      Qi
                                         t   -           Qi
                                                          t.                        (6)
                                               N   i=1


This definition has the virtue of removing any time and currency fixed-effects. The
specific form of the reference point is inspired by the cross-sectional model of As-
ness, Moskowitz, and Pedersen (2013), who, in their turn, select the specifics to be
comparable with the equity and commodity literatures.

Our trend signal is motivated by the academic and practitioner literature on using
moving averages in trading and forecasting exchange rates. In contrast to the macro
literature, the finance literature suggests that using past performance could be fruit-
ful in improving trading performance. See, e.g., Kho (1996), Okunev and White
(2003), Sweeney (1986), and references therein. Motivated by this work, we add a
simple trend signal, which is a one-year depreciation rate.

In summary, we forecast excess returns out of sample via:

                   ei             i    i           Q         i   i
              Et (Rt,t+1 ) = t · St /Ft - 1 + t · zit + t · St /St-12 .



We set t = 1 to match the RWH baseline. The coefficients t and t are re-estimated
every month using a panel of Nt exchange rates and an expanding sample. Estimating
t in a similar fashion does not change the results. This specification departs from
the traditional forecasting exercises in the macro literature where all the coefficients
are presumed constant.




                                              12
2.3     Testing factor models

Tests


Factor models of expected returns are commonly tested using standard regression-
based methods. The conditional SDF projection in Equation (4) implies that  = 0
in the regression:

                          e              U
                         Rt,t+1 =  +  · Rt,t+1 + t,t+1 ,                         (7)

        U
where, Rt,t+1 is the UMVE portfolio, t,t+1 is an error term, and where the UMVE

portfolio is derived from the CMVE portfolio in the SDF projection as follows:

                            U               -1   C
                           Rt,t+1 = (1 + t ) kt Rt,t+1 ,                         (8)


where t is the maximal conditional squared Sharpe Ratio:

                              e            e      -1    e
                     t = Et (Rt,t+1 ) Vt (Rt,t+1 ) Et (Rt,t+1 ).



                      C         C    e
Alternatively, since Rt,t+1 = (wt ) Rt,t+1 , we can write the UMVE portfolio as a

function of the conditional mean and variance of the underlying set of currencies:

                U                -1   e              e       -1    e
               Rt,t +1 = (1 + t ) Et Rt,t+1      Vt Rt,t+1        Rt,t+1 .       (9)


See Chernov, Lochstoer, and Lundeby (2018) for derivation of these relationships.

The Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989) test is a standard time-series joint test of
 = 0 for all test assets in this setting. It is asking if it is possible to improve

                                           13
upon the Sharpe Ratio (SR) of the candidate UMVE portfolio by forming a portfolio
consisting of both the factor and the test assets. Obviously, this is always possible
in sample and so the test accounts for sampling uncertainty.

The typical testing challenge in the equity literature is to find a set of test portfolios
that are sufficiently informative about a given model (e.g., Barillas and Shanken,
2017, Daniel and Titman, 2012, Lewellen, Nagel, and Shanken, 2010). In the case
of currencies, major cross-sectional and time-series factors that were proposed in the
literature are natural test assets. Intuitively, factors that reflect dynamic trading
strategies are particularly informative about conditional properties of the SDF.

Furthermore, we follow Chernov, Lochstoer, and Lundeby (2018) and use multi-
horizon returns (MHR) on the selected assets to generate additional test assets that
are endogenous to the model of the SDF and pre-selected assets. Specifically, we test
if

                                                  i
                                       E (Mt,t+h Rt,t +h ) = 1



for a range of horizons h.2 The set of assets includes the same currency factors.
In addition, we include MHR on the unconditional MVE. Chernov, Lochstoer, and
Lundeby (2018) show that unconditional MHR pricing allows for testing most, if not
all, aspects of conditional model misspecification.
      2                                       h                                                    i
          The multihorizon SDF is Mt,t+h =    j =1 Mt+j -1,t+j . The multihorizon gross return is Rt,t+h =
     h i                    i          ei         f
      Rt
     j =1+j -1,t+j , where Rt,t+1 =   Rt,t+1 + Rt,t+1 with the latter denoting the one-month U.S. gross
funding rate.




                                                     14
Trading strategies


The portfolio excess return of a trading strategy is:

                                            Nt
                                P                      ei
                               Rt,t+1   =         wit Rt,t+1 ,                       (10)
                                            i=1


where wit is the weight in currency i and Nt is the number of currencies at time
t. The weight can be based on a signal, zit , and chosen such that the portfolio has
an exposure to the dollar or not. We use so-called rank weights for cross-sectional
(CS) strategies and sign weights for time-series (TS) strategies. The CS strategies
are dollar neutral; the TS strategies are dollar exposed. The rank and sign weights
are used and discussed by Moskowitz, Ooi, and Pedersen (2012), Asness, Moskowitz,
and Pedersen (2013), Koijen, Moskowitz, Pedersen, and Vrugt (2018), and others.
An alternative to rank weights is "high-minus-low" portfolios with currencies being
equal-, value-, or signal-weighted within the "high" and "low" portfolios (see, e.g.,
Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan, 2011).

We consider nine leading strategies proposed in the literature. The Dollar strategy is
an equal-weighted average of the individual currency (Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdel-
han, 2011, Verdelhan, 2018). The Dollar Carry uses the average forward discount,
Sti /Fti , as a signal. Specifically, it goes long (short) all currencies when the average
discount is positive (negative) (Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan, 2014).

The CS-Carry uses the currency's forward discount as a signal. Specifically, ranks
are based on the signal and weights are based on the ranks according to

                                                        Nt
                    wit = t rank(zit ) -         Nt-1          rank(zjt ) ,          (11)
                                                        j =1


                                                 15
where the scaling factor t makes the portfolio one dollar long and one dollar short
(Koijen, Moskowitz, Pedersen, and Vrugt, 2018). The TS-Carry uses the sign of
the currency's forward discount as a signal. It goes long (short) currencies with a
positive (negative) discount (Burnside, Eichenbaum, Kleshchelski, and Rebelo, 2011,
Daniel, Hodrick, and Lu, 2017).

We consider two CS-Momentum strategies, which use the currency's performance as
a signal. The first, CS-Mom 1, uses the performance in the most recent month as
a signal (Menkhoff, Sarno, Schmeling, and Schrimpf, 2012b, Burnside, Eichenbaum,
Kleshchelski, and Rebelo, 2011) and the second, CS-Mom 12, uses the performance in
the most recent year skipping the most recent month as a signal (Asness, Moskowitz,
and Pedersen, 2013). Specifically, weights are based on the signal ranks according
to Equation (11). We also consider two TS-Momentum strategies, which use the
sign of the currency's recent performance as a signal. The first, TS-Mom 1, uses the
currency's last month performance (Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo, 2011) and
the second, TS-Mom 12, uses the currency's performance in the last twelve months as
a signal (Moskowitz, Ooi, and Pedersen, 2012). They both go long (short) currencies
with a positive (negative) performance. Similar to Moskowitz, Ooi, and Pedersen,
2012, the second strategy also scales the weights inversely with the conditional return
volatilities (same estimates as those used in the construction of the UMVE portfolio,
see below).

Lastly, CS-Value uses the Bilson (1984) signal in Equation (6), whereby a relatively
low (high) real exchange rate today indicates that the currency is cheap (expensive).
Specifically, weights are based on the signal ranks according to Equation (11) (Asness,
Moskowitz, and Pedersen, 2013).



                                          16
3     Evidence

3.1    Data

We construct a dataset of daily spot and one-month forward exchange rates expressed
as USD per unit of the foreign currency for the G10 currencies (AUD, CAD, EUR
spliced with DEM, JPY, NZD, NOK, SEK, CHF, GBP, USD) from January 1, 1976
to May 31, 2020. Daniel, Hodrick, and Lu (2017) offer compelling arguments for ex-
clusion of emerging currencies and the European currencies other than the EUR. We
use data from several providers through Datastream. Our monthly dataset includes
the last day of every month from the daily dataset. Forward exchange rates for the
AUD and NZD are available from December 1984, which effectively determines that
January 1985 is the common starting month for currency excess returns.

We also collect monthly consumer price indices (CPIs) from the OECD for the period
January 1976 to May 2020. Only quarterly CPIs are available for the AUD and
NZD, so we forward fill the quarterly values to get monthly observations. As CPI is
published with a lag and we want to ensure that all the variables are observable at
time t, we construct the RER in Equation (5) using the price level lagged by three
months.

The returns on the trading strategies are constructed using data going as far back
as possible. All strategies use all nine currencies versus the USD from January 1985.
Note that since both the value and momentum signals rely on spot rates, for which
we have data going back to 1976, we have ten years of data to estimate the first
conditional means (per Equation (7)) and covariance matrix for January 1985 when


                                         17
the currency excess return sample starts. We then each month expand the sample
by one month to update these estimates in an out-of-sample fashion.



3.2     Preliminary evidence

Before we proceed with testing the model, we check if the main objects that we use
                                e                e
for constructing the UMVE, Et (Rt,t+1 ) and Vt (Rt,t+1 ), are plausible. Specifically, we
                       e           e            e         e            e
check if they predict Rt,t+1 and (Rt,t+1 - Et (Rt,t+1 ))(Rt,t+1 - Et (Rt,t+1 )) respectively.


                                             e             e             e
Table 1A demonstrates results of regressing Rt,t+1 on Et (Rt,t+1 ) and (Rt,t+1 -
     e         e            e                  e
Et (Rt,t+1 ))(Rt,t+1 - Et (Rt,t+1 ))   on Vt (Rt,t +1 ) for individual currencies in a panel

setting. Slopes in both regressions are significantly different from 0 and insignifi-
cantly different from 1. Even point-wise these coefficients are pretty close to 1: 0.84
and 0.93, respectively. Panel B performs the same analysis for strategies with the
same conclusion. The conditional expected return and variance of each strategy are
computed using the expected return vector and covariance matrix for the underlying
individual currencies, along with the conditional portfolio weights of each strategy.

                                          e                e
Table 1C documents time variation in Et (Rt,t+1 ) and Vt (Rt,t+1 ) for both individual

currencies and strategies. In both cases, the variation in expected excess returns is
substantial. For currencies, the volatility of conditional expectations is more than
double than the average conditional expectation. For strategies, the two objects are
about the same. As another perspective, conditional expectations are as variable as
conditional variances.

Lastly, Panel D explores the role of the three signals that we used to construct
conditional expectation. In the first row we report the unconditional SR for the full

                                              18
model, which equals 1.075. We emphasize that UMVE portfolio returns correspond
to a real-time implementable trading strategy. In the subsequent rows, we consider
UMVEs formed on the basis of using the Carry signal alone, or Carry and Momentum,
or Carry and Value. All of these combinations result in lower SR, albeit still high.

In order to assess the economic significance of using all the signals, we implement the
Barillas and Shanken (2017) test and check if these three alternative UMVEs have
an alpha with respect to the UMVE formed using all three signals. All of the alphas
are significant. The corresponding adjusted R2 s vary between 50% and 80%. In
unreported results, we reverse the direction of the regressions and find no significant
alphas. Thus, the UMVE portfolio from the first row can explain UMVE returns
from other versions of our model.



3.3    Testing the model's implications

Table 2 presents our initial testing results. Panel A displays summary statistics for
individual currencies (average excess returns and sample SR). SR for the UMVE
reported in Table 1D exceeds the largest currency SR, NZD, by 2.5 times. The panel
also shows alphas from individual regressions (7). The largest t-statistic is 1.67 for
NZD. The largest adjusted R2 from regressing a return on the UMVE is 2.5% for
AUD.

Panel B displays the same information for strategies. The UMVE SR exceeds the
largest strategy SR, TS-Carry, by 1.6 times. None of the strategies have a significant
alpha relative to the UMVE, with the highest individual t-statistic 1.75 for the Dollar
Carry strategy. On average, the alphas are about 70% smaller than the mean excess


                                          19
return on the strategies. Lastly, adjusted R2 s in these regressions are low, which
implies that only a small component of the variation in these portfolios' returns is
being priced. The Carry strategies and CS-Value exhibit the largest exposures to
the UMVE with R2 around 15%, followed by Momentum around 9%, and the rest
ranging between 0 and 6%.

The first row of Table 3, columns labeled "All strategies" display the GRS and MHR
tests applied to the nine strategies. The MHR test uses strategy returns at the 1,
3, 6, 12, 24 and 48 month horizons. The p-values are 0.47 and 0.25, respectively.
These results imply that the candidate UMVE prices single-horizon returns to the
strategies both unconditionally and conditionally.

This failure to reject is meaningful. Consider a simpler model in which conditional
expectations are computed on the basis of RWH/Carry alone and test it using the
first five strategy portfolios, which do not rely on Momentum or Value signals. See
the second row of Table 3, columns labeled "Dollar + All Carry". GRS fails to
reject with a p-value of 0.31, but MHR does reject with a p-value of 0.023. In
other words, the UMVE based only the conditional mean returns implied by the
random walk hypothesis does not price long-run returns to the Dollar and Carry-
based strategies.

The low R2 of strategy returns in Table 2 suggests a large idiosyncratic component
of these returns. Daniel, Mota, Rottke, and Santos (2020), in the context of equity
strategies, make a strong case for hedging out the unpriced component to enhance
strategy performance. It is easy to construct a conditional hedge in our setting
because we have an explicit UMVE portfolio.

In particular, we use the conditional covariance matrix of the underlying currencies

                                         20
to construct the conditional beta of each strategy on the UMVE:

                                            e        U
                                   wt Vt (Rt,t+1 )wt
                            t =     U         e        U
                                                         ,
                                  (wt ) Vt (Rt,t +1 )wt


where wt is a vector of strategy weights wit as used in Equation (10). A portfolio
                                                                    U
with systematic exposure, a.k.a. the hedged portfolio, is simply t Rt,t +1 . We refer

to the residual as the hedging portfolio return:

                             HP        P          U
                            Rt,t +1 = Rt,t+1 - t Rt,t+1 .



We note that this hedging strategy is implementable in real time.

Figure 1 compares the SR of the original strategies to those of the hedging and hedged
components. The SR for the hedging components are close to zero as should be the
case for the unpriced piece if our model is well-specified. The SR for the hedged
components are much larger than those of the original strategies as anticipated. For
instance, for CS Carry, the Sharpe ratio goes from about 0.5 to slightly higher than
1. The one exception is the Dollar strategy where hedging does not seem to make
much of a difference.

Table 3 reports GRS tests applied to the hedged portfolios in columns labeled "GRS
hedged". Specifically, we jointly test whether the average hedged returns to the
strategies are zero, as implied by the model. The use of the conditional betas means
that this is an unconditional test of the models' conditional implications. The ap-
proach is similar in spirit to that undertaken in Lewellen and Nagel (2006) but where
the pricing factor is the out-of-sample UMVE portfolio. Overall, this conditional test
yields results similar to the unconditional GRS test: only our full model is not re-


                                           21
jected in any of these tests.

To delineate the role of timing based on the conditional mean vs the conditional
covariance, we also report in Table 3 test results for these sub-optimal models in
rows three and four. The row labeled "V -weighted" corresponds to setting the con-
ditional mean to a constant (a column of ones), while the row labeled "E -weighted"
corresponds to setting the conditional covariance matrix to a constant (the identity
matrix). The SDF projection is not fully specified in these cases, so we cannot imple-
ment MHR tests. The column labeled "UMVE SR" documents a large drop in the
SR as compared to the optimal portfolio weights. GRS strongly rejects both models.



3.4    Time series implications

We analyze the factor structure implied by our model by performing principal com-
ponent (PC) analysis on the covariance matrix of currency returns. In this section,
we consider the unconditional covariance matrix of individual currencies. Figure 2A
displays the contributions of each of the nine PCs to the overall variation. The first
PC explains 58%, the second 18%, and the third 9% of the variation.

Panel B shows loadings on individual returns on the first three PCs. We see that
the first principal component loads similarly on each currency suggesting that it is
related to the Dollar strategy. Indeed, the correlation between this first PC and the
Dollar factor is 0.998. The second PC goes long the high interest currencies and
goes short the low interest currency and is thus related to Carry ­ their correlation is
0.718. The third PC is harder to associate with an extant strategy, though a possible
interpretation is geographical with largely positive loadings for European countries


                                          22
and largely negative for the other. These results are consistent with Verdelhan (2018)
who argues that Dollar and Carry capture exchange rate movements.

Panel C explores how much of the UMVE portfolio's variation can be explained by
the PCs. We start by repeating the information of Panel A. Rather than reporting
the individual contribution of each PC, we now report their cumulative contribution.
Next, starting with the first PC and gradually adding them one after another, we
compute how much of the variance of UMVE returns can be explained by a given
number of PCs.

The answer is not much. It is close to zero if we use the first PC alone. Recall
that this PC explains almost 60% of the variation in individual currency returns. If
we use all nine PCs, we progress to about 10% of the variation. This is consistent
with low R2 reported in Table 2B. The flipside of this result is that UMVE has a
significant alpha with respect to the PCs as evidenced in Figure 2D.

We conclude that time-series variation in currency returns can be summarized by
three factors, two of which are close to the Dollar and CS-Carry strategies. However,
these factors are weakly related to the UMVE, which prices the cross-section of both
currencies and strategies. That suggests that factor timing is an important ingredient
of the pricing success. We proceed with fleshing that out in the next section.



3.5    Factor timing

The leading currency strategies, which we study in this paper involve a substantive
amount of currency timing. Thus, a natural starting point is to investigate how well



                                         23
these trading strategies can explain UMVE portfolio returns. Figure 3 addresses this
issue via PC analysis of strategies. This analysis parallels that in Figure 2.

Panel A shows individual contributions of PCs to the overall variation in strategy
returns. Here three PCs explain 65% of the variation. Panel B displays the loadings
of these three PCs on strategy, but no clear interpretation of what these "strategies on
strategies" might entail emerges. Panel C shows how much of the variance of UMVE
returns can be explain by strategy PCs. The first three PCs explain only about 20%
of the variation in UMVE returns. Thus, again the main drivers of the time series
variation asset returns are not the main drivers of priced risk, as summarized by the
UMVE. The first five PCs can explain about 50% of the variation and this number
stays the same after adding the remaining PCs.

The improvement from 10% to 50% is a testament to the importance of currency
timing implicit in the strategies. Yet, there is a lot left on the table. UMVE alphas
with respect to these PCs continue to be significant as documented in Panel D.

As one manifestation of conditional dynamics not accounted for in existing strategies,
we implement optimal timing of each strategy. That is, every month we determine
the weight on a given (zero-investment) strategy that theoretically should yield the
highest unconditional SR. In particular, we apply Equation (8) to a strategy return
as opposed to the CMVE return. We can implement this equation because our model
produces real-time conditional expectations and variance for each currency and the
portfolio weights for each strategy are known.

Table 4 compares performance of the strategy returns to the returns of the corre-
sponding timing strategy. The first column reports an alpha from regressing the
timed strategy on the original strategy. Panel A reports the case of timing on both

                                          24
conditional expectations and variances. Panel B reports timing on conditional vari-
ance alone to highlight the role of conditional expectations.

Panel A of Table 2 shows that six timing alphas are significant and economically
meaningful relative to the original strategy returns. The annualized information ra-
tios (IR) are comparable or larger than strategy SR, also reported in Table 2A.3
Adjusted R2 s are small, in general. All these statistics are highlighting the impor-
tance of optimal conditioning that was foreshadowed in Figure 2. In Panel B, the
alphas and IRs are much smaller and R2 s are higher underscoring the importance of
variation in conditional expected returns for currency dynamics.



3.6     Properties of the projected SDF

The estimated UMVE corresponds to the linear projection of the SDF on the set of
currency excess returns. Figure 4 plots time series of both the conditional annualized
price of risk (the conditional annualized volatility of the SDF) and returns to the
UMVE portfolio, which is perfectly negatively correlated with this SDF. The price
of risk various strongly over the sample, from a high of about 4 to a low of about
0.5.

We see that the price of risk experiences its maximum value in a dramatic move
during the 1992 Exchange Rate Mechanism crisis. Outside of this event, the main
take-away is a substantial decline through the sample, mainly caused by a trend
decrease in interest differentials across countries. In particular, the same decline is
shared by the price of risk of the model that only uses the RWH when estimating
  3
                                              
    We define the Information ratio here as 12/ ( ), where  is the residual in the regression.
This definition is sometimes also referred to as the Appraisal Ratio.

                                             25
currency expected returns (red dashed line). Notably, recessions, showed as yellow
bars on the plot, are associated with a decline in the price of risk.

The bottom panel of Figure 4 shows the time series of returns to the UMVE portfolio.
First, the returns are relatively smooth, with little evidence of a disaster event. For
instance, the Global Financial Crisis is associated with small negative returns and
one big positive spike. Second, we can see a slow decrease in the volatility in returns
over the sample, consistent with the pattern in the price of risk.

As a next step, we make an attempt to relate these two objects to observable vari-
ables that have the potential to capture currency risk premiums. As the rest of the
literature we focus on macro and financial variables. Among macro variables, we have
a particular interest in consumption as it has a rich history and connection to equi-
librium models. Among financial variables, we focus on the Fama and French (2015)
model as the de-facto SDF projection on on the space of equity returns. Finally, we
consider measures of intermediary leverage. The full list of candidate covariates and
motivation for considering them are offered in Appendix A.2.

Table 5 reports the results. Panel A displays univariate regressions for the signifi-
cant covariates. We see that quarterly consumption growth and 3-year consumption
growth, a proxy for the long-run consumption component, are significant. This result
is consistent with Lustig and Verdelhan (2007) and Zviadadze (2017), who argue that
these variables are important for explaining the CS-Carry premium. Our results gen-
eralize theirs because we find significant relation to the UMVE, and not just Carry
returns. The R2 s of the regressions using consumption growth on the right hand side
are only 3% and 7% indicating that other elements than consumption risk may be
important for understanding the currency market conditional risk-return trade-off.


                                          26
Panel A also shows that only two out of the five Fama-French factors are significant,
value (HML) and investment (CMA). Even though they are significant, the relation
to the UMVE returns is weak as betas are very small. R2 s are small as well, at 0.6%
and 1.3%, respectively.

Panel B focuses on the properties of the CS-Carry, a strategy that has received a lot of
attention both in the empirical and equilibrium literatures. The middle section of the
Panel, labeled `CS-Carry', demonstrates that consistent with the literature returns to
this strategy are significantly related to intermediary leverage (He, Kelly, and Manela,
2017), realized variance of equity (Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan, 2011), and that
of exchange rates (Menkhoff, Sarno, Schmeling, and Schrimpf, 2012b). However, as
foreshadowed by Panel A, UMVE returns are not related to these variables. Indeed,
Panel B makes it explicit in the left panel labeled `UMVE'. Results in Table 2B
suggests reconciliation of that evidence. Only 15% of CS-Carry is explained by the
UMVE. Thus, it must be the idiosyncratic component of the strategy that is related
to these variables. Indeed, hedging out the systematic component just like we did
in Figure 1, we find that the idiosyncratic component of CS-Carry is related to the
three variables (see the right section of Table 5B).

Lastly, Panel C relates prices of risk to various measures of aggregate uncertainty:
conditional consumption variance, realized equity variance, and realized FX variance.
The conditional variance of consumption growth is estimated using a GARCH(1,1)
model. Due to the downward trend in the price of risk in the sample, we run these
regressions in 3-year differences. The conditional price of risk, that is, conditional
volatility of the SDF, is negatively related to consumption variance and FX return
variance. Thus, periods of high uncertainty are associated with lower Sharpe ratios
in the currency market. The sign is negative also for equity variance, though it is

                                          27
insignificant in this case. Figure 5 plots the price of risk vs. the conditional variance
of consumption growth. The common trend and the negatively correlated cyclical
relation are both clearly visible.




4     Conclusion

We construct a conditional linear projection of the SDF on the space of excess cur-
rency returns. That is feasible as most of the literature focuses on the G10 currencies
and the corresponding nine exchange rates versus the U.S. dollar. A small cross-
section makes estimation of the conditional covariance matrix relatively precise. We
then use standard rolling panel regressions and a limited set of longstanding currency
characteristics to obtain conditional expected returns. These inputs are all that is
needed to construct the projection.

The benefit of this approach is that it is a theoretically motivated empirical charac-
terization of the risk-return trade-off. The use of the conditional covariance matrix
means we also characterize the factor structure in realized returns, which allow us to
discuss the priced versus unpriced sources of common variation in currency returns.
Our analysis leads to a number of new insights.

First, the UMVE portfolio has a sample Sharpe ratio in excess of one and is not
explained by any existing factors. At the same time, the UMVE portfolio accounts
for known currency factors risk premiums and is not rejected as the pricing factor
in standard model tests. Thus, our proposed estimation methodology is validated in
the data and uncovers heretofore undiscovered sources of risk.



                                           28
Second, we show that most of the common variation in currency returns is due to
unpriced risks ­ that is, factors that do not command a risk premium. We show that
existing currency strategies indeed have large uncompensated components that can
be hedged away to obtain much higher factor Sharpe ratios.

Third, we document large gains to timing many of the existing factors, owing to
the fact that the conditional dynamics of these factors are strongly time-varying. In
fact, the standard deviation of conditional risk premiums is as large as the level of
unconditional risk premiums.

Fourth, the priced currency risks are effectively unrelated to priced risks in the
equity market, as well as shocks to equity and currency market return variance
and intermediary capital. Consumption growth, however, is related to priced risks,
though the relation is not economically very strong. That said, our results support
a role for consumption risk in understanding currency risk and return.

Fifth, the conditional price of risk is strongly downward trending through the sample,
with a cyclical component that is negatively related with measures of the conditional
variance of macroeconomic aggregates and market returns.




                                         29
References
Ackermann, Fabian, Walt Pohl, and Karl Schmedders, 2017, Optimal and naive
  diversification in currency markets, Management Science 63, 3147­3529.

Adrian, Tobias, Erkko Etula, and Jan J.J. Groen, 2011, Financial amplification of
  foreign exchange risk premia, European Economic Review 55, 354­370.

Adrian, Tobias, Erkko Etula, and Tyler Muir, 2014, Financial intermediaries and the
  cross-section of asset returns, Journal of Finance 69, 2557­2596.

Aloosh, Arash, and Geert Bekaert, 2019, Currency factors, working paper.

Asness, Clifford S., Tobias J. Moskowitz, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2013, Value and
  momentum everywhere, Journal of Finance 68, 929­985.

Bansal, Ravi, and Ivan Shaliastovich, 2013, A long-run risks explanation of pre-
  dictability puzzles in bond and currency markets, Review of Financial Studies 26,
  1­33.

Barillas, Fancisco, and Jay Shanken, 2017, Which alpha?, Review of Financial Stud-
  ies 30, 1316­1338.

Baz, Jamil, Francis Breedon, Vasant Naik, and Joel Peress, 2001, Optimal portfolios
  of foreign currencies, Journal of Portfolio Management 28, 102­111.

Bilson, John, 1984, Purchasing power parity as a trading strategy, Journal of Finance
  39, 715­724.

Burnside, Craig, 2012, Carry trades and risk, in Jessica James, Ian Marsh, and Lucio
  Sarno, ed.: Handbook of Exchange Rates (John Wiley and Sons, Ltd: Hoboken
  NJ).

                                         30
         , Martin Eichenbaum, Isaac Kleshchelski, and Sergio Rebelo, 2011, Do peso
  problems explain the returns to the carry trade?, Review of Financial Studies 24,
  853­891.

Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, 2011, Carry trade and
  momentum in currency markets, Annual Review of Financial Economics 3, 511­
  535.

Cassel, Gustav, 1918, Abnormal deviations in international exchanges, Economic
  Journal 28, 413­415.

Chernov, Mikhail, and Drew Creal, 2020, The PPP view of multihorizon currency
  risk premiums, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Chernov, Mikhail, Lars Lochstoer, and Stig Lundeby, 2018, Conditional dynamics
  and the multi-horizon risk-return trade-off, working paper.

Cochrane, John, 2004, Asset Pricing (Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ)
  revised edn.

         , and Lars Hansen, 1992, Asset pricing explorations for macroeconomics, in
  Oliver Blanchard, and Stanley Fischer, ed.: NBER Macroeconomics Annual (MIT
  Press: Cambridge MA).

Colacito, Riccardo, and Mariano M. Croce, 2011, Risks for the long run and the real
  exchange rate, Journal of Political Economy 119, 153­181.

Colacito, Ric, Mariano M. Croce, Federico Gavazzoni, and Robert Ready, 2018,
  Currency risk factors in a recursive multicountry economy, Journal of Finance 73,
  2719­2756.


                                         31
Cornell, W.B., and J. K. Dietrich, 1978, The efficiency of the market for foreign
  exchange under floating exchange rates, Review of Economics and Statistics 60,
  111­120.

Cumby, Robert E., 1988, Is it risk? Explaining deviations from uncovered interest
  parity, Journal of Monetary Economics 22, 279­299.

Dahlquist, Magnus, and Julien Penasse, 2016, The missing risk premium in exchange
  rates, working paper, SSE.

Daniel, Kent, Robert J. Hodrick, and Zhongjin Lu, 2017, The carry trade: Risks and
  drawdowns, Critical Finance Review 6, 211­262.

Daniel, Kent, Lira Mota, Simon Rottke, and Tano Santos, 2020, The cross-section
  of risk and return, Review of Financial Studies 33, 1927­1979.

Daniel, Kent, and Sheridan Titman, 2012, Testing factor-model explanations of mar-
  ket anomalies, Critical Finance Review 1, 103­139.

Della Corte, Pasquale, Lucio Sarno, and Ilias Tsiakas, 2009, An economic evaluation
  of empirical exchange rate models, Review of Financial Studies 22, 3491­3530.

Eichenbaum, Martin, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and Sergio Rebelo, 2020, Monetary
  policy and the predictability of nominal exchange rates, Review of Economic Stud-
  ies, forthcoming.

Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French, 2015, A five-factor asset pricing model, Journal
  of Financial Economics 116, 1­22.

Farhi, Emmanuel, and Xavier Gabaix, 2016, Rare disasters and exchange rates,
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 131, 1­52.

                                        32
Ghosh, Anisha, Christian Julliard, and Alex P. Taylor, 2019, An information-
  theoretic asset pricing model, working paper.

Gibbons, Michael, Stephen A. Ross, and Jay Shanken, 1989, A test of the efficiency
  of a given portfolio, Econometrica 59, 1121­1152.

Greenaway-McGrevy, Ryan, Nelson C. Mark, Donggyu Sul, and Juh-Lin Wu, 2018,
  Identifying exchange rate common factors, International Economic Review 59,
  2193­2218.

Hansen, Lars, and Ravi Jagannathan, 1991, Implications of security market data for
  models of dynamic economies, Journal of Political Economy 99, 225­262.

Hansen, Lars, and Scott Richard, 1987, The role of conditioning information in de-
  ducing testable restrictions implied by dynamic asset pricing models, Econometrica
  55, 587­613.

Hassan, Tarek K., and Rui C. Mano, 2019, Forward and spot exchange rates in a
  multi-currency world, Quarterly Journal of Economics 134, 397­450.

He, Zhiguo, Bryan Kelly, and Asaf Manela, 2017, Intermediary asset pricing: New
  evidence from many asset classes, Journal of Financial Economics 126, 1­35.

Jorda, Oscar, and Alan M. Taylor, 2012, The carry trade and fundamentals: Nothing
  to fear but FEER itself, Journal of International Economics 88, 74­90.

Keynes, John Maynard, 1923, A Tract on Monetary Reform (MacMillan and Co.,
  Ltd., London).

Kho, Boing-Chan, 1996, Time varying risk premia, volatility, and technical reading



                                        33
  profits: Evidence from foreign currency futures markets, Journal of Financial
  Economics 41, 249­290.

Koijen, Ralph S.J., Tobias J. Moskowitz, Lasse Heje Pedersen, and Evert B. Vrugt,
  2018, Carry, Journal of Financial Economics 127, 197­225.

Korsaye, Sofonias Alemu, Fabio Trojani, and Andrea Vedolin, 2020, The global factor
  structure of exchange rates, working paper.

Ledoit, Olivier, and Michael Wolf, 2020, Analytical nonlinear shrinkage of large-
  dimensional covariance matrices, Annals of Statistics 48, 3043­3065.

Lettau, Martin, Matteo Maggiori, and Michael Weber, 2014, Conditional risk premia
  in currency markets and other asset classes, Journal of Financial Economics 114,
  197­225.

Lewellen, Jonathan, and Stefan Nagel, 2006, The conditional CAPM does not explain
  asset pricing anomalies, Journal of Financial Economics 79, 289­314.

       , and Jay Shanken, 2010, A skeptical appraisal of asset-pricing tests, Journal
  of Financial Economics 96, 175­194.

Lustig, Hanno, Nikolai Roussanov, and Adrien Verdelhan, 2014, Countercyclical
  currency risk premia, Journal of Financial Economics 111, 527­553.

Lustig, Hanno, and Adrien Verdelhan, 2007, The cross section of foreign currency
  risk premia and consumption growth risk, American Economic Review 97, 89­117.

Lustig, Hanno N., Nikolai Roussanov, and Adrien Verdelhan, 2011, Common risk
  factors in currency markets, Review of Financial Studies 24, 3731­3777.



                                        34
Mauer, Thomas, Thuy-Duong To, and Ngoc-Khanh Tran, 2018, Pricing implications
  of covariances and spreads in currency markets, working paper.

          , 2020, Market timing and predictability in FX markets, working paper.

Meese, Richard A., and Kenneth Rogoff, 1983, Empirical exchange rate models of
  the seventies: Do they fit out of sample?, Journal of International Economics 14,
  3­24.

Menkhoff, Lukas, Lucio Sarno, Maik Schmeling, and Andreas Schrimpf, 2012a, Carry
  trades and global foreign exchange volatility, Journal of Finance 67, 681­718.

          , 2012b, Currency momentum strategies, Journal of Financial Economics
  106, 660­684.

Moskowitz, Tobias J., Yao Hua Ooi, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2012, Time series
  momentum, Journal of Financial Economics 104, 228­250.

Okunev, John, and Derek White, 2003, Do momentum-based strategies still work
  in foreign currency markets?, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 38,
  425­447.

Orlowski, Piotr, Valeri Sokolowski, and Erik Sverdrup, 2019, Benchmark currency
  stochastic discount factors, working paper.

Porter, Michael, 1971, A theoretical and empirical framework for analyzing the term
  structure of exchange rate expectations, Staff Papers (International Monetary
  Fund) 18, 613­645.

Sandulescu, Mirela, Fabio Trojani, and Andrea Vedolin, 2020, Model-free interna-
  tional stochastic discount factors, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

                                          35
Sarkissian, Sergei, 2003, Incomplete consumption risk sharing and currency risk pre-
  miums, Review of Financial Studies 16, 983­1005.

Stutzer, Michael, 1996, A simple nonparametric approach to derivative security val-
  uation., Journal of Finance 60, 1633­1652.

Sweeney, Richard, 1986, Beating the foreign exchange market, Journal of Finance
  41, 163­182.

Verdelhan, Adrien, 2010, A habit-based explanation of the exchange rate risk pre-
  mium., Journal of Finance 65, 123­146.

       , 2018, The share of systematic variation in bilateral exchange rates, Journal
  of Finance 73, 375­418.

Zviadadze, Irina, 2017, Term-structure of consumption risk premia in the cross-
  section of currency returns, Journal of Finance 72, 1529­1566.




                                        36
Appendix A              Appendix

Appendix A.1          Estimating covariance matrix

First, for each month t, we compute the realized covariance matrix based on daily
depreciation rates. That is, define Xj,t as the vector of percentage changes in spot
currency rates over day j in month t. The realized covariance matrix is then
                                       Dt
                                ^t =
                                              Xj,t Xj,t
                                       j =1


where Dt is the number of trading days in the month. Given a potentially large cross-
section and short time-series, we apply the shrinkage method of Ledoit and Wolf
(2020) to ^ t to improve the mean-squared-error of this sample covariance estimate.
Denote the resulting shrunk matrix as   ~ t.

Second, we apply a simple exponentially weighted average to    ~ t to arrive at the
estimate of the conditional covariance matrix for month t + 1 currency percentage
price changes:

                            Vt = (1 - )~ t + Vt-1 ,

where we set  = 0.94 following, e.g., the RiskMetrics model. Finally, to get to the
conditional covariance matrix of excess currency returns, we pre- and post-multiply
this matrix by a diagonal matrix with (i, i)th element set to Sti /Fti .


Appendix A.2          Additional data sources

This appendix lists and motivates the macroeconomic and financial variables used
as covariates in Section 3.6 to characterize the properties of the projected SDF. We
consider several groups of covariates.

The first group of covariates are based on a per capita series of real consumption
expenditure on nondurables and services that we construct from the NIPA Table 7.1.
at the Bureau of Economic Analysis. The data and more detailed information about
the series are available through the webpage:

                                              37
  https://apps.bea.gov/iTable/index_nipa.cfm.
We construct quarterly log consumption growth, three-year log consumption growth,
and consumption growth volatility on a quarterly basis from 1985:Q1 to 2020:Q1.
These consumption growth measures are appealing as they naturally relate to equi-
librium models of asset prices. Several studies have attempted to explain cur-
rency returns or trading strategies to short-term consumption growth (Cumby, 1988;
Sarkissian, 2003; Lustig and Verdelhan, 2007), long-term consumption growth (Co-
lacito and Croce, 2011), and consumption growth volatility (Lustig, Roussanov, and
Verdelhan, 2014).

The second group of covariates are the equity factors in the Fama and French (2015)
five-factor model. The data are available through the webpage:
  http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/Data_Library/.
More specifically, the equity factors are: the return on a world market portfolio
minus the U.S. one-month T-bill rate (market, MKT); the return on a small stock
portfolio minus the return on a big stock portfolio (small minus big, SMB); the
return on a value portfolio minus the return on a growth portfolio (high minus low,
HML); the return on a robust-operating-profitability portfolio minus the return on
a weak-operating-profitability portfolio (robust minus weak, RMW); and the return
on a conservative investment portfolio minus the return on an aggressive investment
portfolio (conservative minus aggressive, CMA). We use monthly observations from
January 1985 to May 2020. Examples of studies relating carry trades to equity
factors include Lettau, Maggiori, and Weber (2014) and Daniel, Hodrick, and Lu
(2017).

The third group of covariates are based on the literature of financial intermediaries
and their leverage (Adrian, Etula, and Groen, 2011; Adrian, Etula, and Muir, 2014;
He, Kelly, and Manela, 2017). More specifically, we consider the monthly interme-
diary capital measures of He, Kelly, and Manela (2017) from January 1985 to May
2020. The data are available through the webpage:
 http://apps.olin.wustl.edu/faculty/manela/data.html.
Adrian, Etula, and Groen, 2011 decompose currency risk premiums into compo-
nents associated with macroeconomic and balance sheet variables. He, Kelly, and
Manela (2017) explain currency trading strategies based on cross-sectional carry and
momentum.

The fourth group of covariates are based on measures of global equity and foreign
exchange rate volatility. Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011) and Menkhoff,
Sarno, Schmeling, and Schrimpf (2012a) find that cross-sectional carry strategies

                                         38
relate to global equity and foreign exchange rate volatility, respectively. We construct
monthly realized variances from daily changes in equity prices and spot exchange
rates similar to these authors. We consider the period January 1985 to May 2020.




                                          39
Figure 1
Sharpe ratio of original, hedging, and hedged strategies



       1.2
                        Original
                        Hedging
          1
                        Hedged

       0.8

       0.6

       0.4

       0.2

          0

      -0.2
                     r       rry       rry       rry       1     12     1       12 alue
                olla       a          a        a       o m     m    o m       m
              D           C         C        C                                        V
                    ll ar     C  S-      T S-      S -M    - Mo S-M     - M o
                                                                                 C S-
                Do                              C       CS       T   TS


The blue bars show the sample annualized Sharpe ratios of each strategy. The red bars shows the
same for each strategy's hedging portfolio, defined as the component of the strategy returns that is
unpriced according to the model. The yellow bars show the Sharpe ratio of the factor returns when
unpriced risks are hedged out. All portfolios are tradeable in real time. The sample is monthly
from January 1985 to May 2020.




                                                 40
Figure 2
Principal component analysis of currencies

           (A) Fraction of V explained                                 (B) Loadings of first three PCs
     0.6                                                             0.6


     0.5                                                             0.4


                                                                     0.2
     0.4

                                                                      0
     0.3
                                                                    -0.2
     0.2
                                                                    -0.4

     0.1                                                                          First PC
                                                                    -0.6          Second PC
                                                                                  Third PC
      0                                                             -0.8
             1       2      3       4   5   6   7      8   9               AUS CAD CHF EUR GBP JPY NOK NZD SEK
                         Principal component number


  (C) Cumulative fraction of V explained                                                 (D) UMVE 
     1.2                                                            0.16
                 Currency returns
                 UMVE returns                                       0.14
      1
                                                                    0.12
     0.8
                                                                     0.1

     0.6                                                            0.08

                                                                    0.06
     0.4
                                                                    0.04
     0.2
                                                                    0.02

      0                                                               0
             1       2      3       4   5   6   7      8   9                  1      2    3    4   5    6    7    8      9
                         Number of currency PCs used                               Number of Principal Components used


Panel A shows the fraction of variance across the nine individual currencies that each principal
component (PC) explains. The PCs are obtained from the unconditional covariance matrix of
individual currency returns. Panel B shows the loadings of the three first PCs on each currency.
Panel C shows in blue the cumulative amount of currency variance explained as one goes from using
one to all nine PCs. In red is the R2 of a regression of the UMVE returns on an increasing number
of PCs. Panel D shows the "alpha" of a regression of the UMVE returns on an increasing number of
PCs. The error bars correspond to the 95% confidence interval computed using heteroskedasticity-
adjusted standard errors. The sample is monthly from January 1985 to May 2020.

                                                               41
Figure 3
Principal component analysis of strategies

            (A) Fraction of V explained                                (B) Loadings of first three PCs
     0.35

                                                                     0.6
      0.3
                                                                     0.4
     0.25
                                                                     0.2

      0.2                                                             0

                                                                    -0.2
     0.15
                                                                    -0.4
      0.1
                                                                    -0.6
                                                                                    First PC
                                                                    -0.8            Second PC
     0.05
                                                                                    Third PC
                                                                      -1
       0                                                                         r   rry rry rry    1   12
                                                                             lla                              1   12 lue
              1       2      3       4   5   6   7     8   9               Do r Ca S-Ca S-Ca -Mom om -Mom om S-Va
                                                                              o l la  C    T C S   S -M TS   S -M  C
                          Principal component number                        D                    C         T



  (C) Cumulative fraction of V explained                                                    (D) UMVE 
       1                                                            0.15
                  Strategy returns
                  UMVE returns
      0.8

                                                                     0.1
      0.6



      0.4
                                                                    0.05

      0.2



       0                                                              0
              1       2      3       4   5   6   7     8   9                    1      2      3    4   5    6    7       8   9
                   Number of Principal Components used                                     Number of strategy PCs used


Panel A shows the fraction of variance across the nine currency trading strategies that each principal
component (PC) explains. The PCs are obtained from the unconditional covariance matrix of these
currency strategies. Panel B shows the loadings of the three first PCs on each strategy. Panel C
shows in blue the cumulative amount of strategy variance explained as one goes from using one to
all nine PCs. In red is the R2 of a regression of the UMVE returns on an increasing number of these
PCs. Panel D shows the "alpha" of a regression of the UMVE returns on an increasing number of
PCs. The error bars correspond to the 95% confidence interval computed using heteroskedasticity-
adjusted standard errors. The sample is monthly from January 1985 to May 2020.

                                                               42
Figure 4
Properties of UMVE



                                     Conditional Price of Risk
                        4
                                                                            UMVE
                                                                            RW case
                        3
        Price of Risk




                        2

                        1

                        0
                        1985 1989 1993 1997 2001 2005 2009 2013 2017
                                               Date
                                Unconditional MVE portfolio returns
                        1
     UMVE Returns




                        0

                    -1
                                                                          UMVE
                    -2                                                    RW case

                    -3
                     1985 1989 1993 1997 2001 2005 2009 2013 2017
                                               Date
The top plot shows the annualized conditional price of risk as implied by the stochastic discount
factor derived in the paper. The lower plot shows the realized returns to the UMVE portfolio
implied from this SDF. The blue solid lines corresponds to the full model, whereas the dashed red
lines shows the case where only the random walk assumption is used for estimating currency risk
premiums. The sample is monthly from January 1985 to May 2020.


                                               43
Figure 5
Price of risk and consumption's variance




                     5
                                                                      Price Of Risk
                                                                      Cons. Variance
                     4


                     3
     Price of Risk




                     2


                     1


                     0


                     -1


                     -2
                      1985 1989 1993 1997 2001 2005 2009 2013 2017
                                                Date
The blue solid line is the conditional price of risk as implied by the stochastic discount factor
derived in the paper. The dashed red line shows the conditional variance of quarterly, real per-
capita nondurable+services log consumption growth, as estimated by a GARCH(1,1). Both series
are standardized to be mean zero and unit variance to facilitate comparison. The sample is quarterly
from end of December 1984 to end of April 2020.




                                                44
          Table 1: Predictive ability of conditional expectations and variance
   Panel A                  Currency returns

                   e                           e            e        e            e
                  Rt,t +1                    (Rt,t +1 - Et Rt,t+1 )(Rt,t+1 - Et (Rt,t+1 ))

        e                                                 e
   Et (Rt,t+1 )                     0.838            Vt (Rt,t+1 )                    0.931
   s.e.                             0.253                    s.e.                    0.068
     2                                                        2
   Radj                             0.009                  Radj                      0.053


   Panel B                  Strategy returns

                   e                           e            e        e            e
                  Rt,t +1                    (Rt,t +1 - Et Rt,t+1 )(Rt,t+1 - Et (Rt,t+1 ))

        e                                                 e
   Et (Rt,t+1 )                     0.791            Vt (Rt,t+1 )                    1.055
   s.e.                             0.237                    s.e.                    0.087
     2                                                        2
   Radj                             0.003                  Radj                      0.072


   Panel C                  Summary statistics of conditional means and variances

                                    e             1/2     e                                           1/2
                            E [Et (Rt,t+1 )] E [Vt      (Rt,t+1 )]       V 1/2 [Et (Rt,t
                                                                                     e
                                                                                        +1 )] V
                                                                                                1/2
                                                                                                    [Vt       e
                                                                                                            (Rt,t+1 )]


   Currencies                       0.021                  0.107                     0.044                     0.048
   Strategies                       0.032                  0.079                     0.034                     0.036


   Panel D                  UMVE portfolios

                                                                                                                 2
   Signals used                        SR                  alpha                    t-stat                      Radj

   Carry+Mom+Val                    1.075                    n/a                       n/a                       n/a
   Carry                            0.871                 0.0440                    2.5369                     0.515
   Carry+Mom                        0.871                 0.0400                    2.6327                     0.586
   Carry+Val                        0.998                 0.0181                    2.1292                     0.796

                                                                e
Panel A shows panel regressions of currency excess returns Rt,t   +1 on the conditional expected
                                             e              e          e     2
returns as estimated from our model, Et Rt,t+1 , and (Rt,t+1 - Et Rt,t   +1 ) on the conditional
                                         e
variance as estimated by our model, Vt (Rt,t+1 ). Panel B shows the same for the strategy returns.
                                                                                            e
Panel C shows summary statistics for estimated conditional means and variances. E [Et (Rt,t   +1 )]
                                                        e        1/2
denotes the grand average risk premium, E [Vt (Rt,t       +1 )] is the grand average conditional
                     1/2    e
standard deviation, V [Et (Rt,t+1 )] is the standard deviation of conditional expected returns, and
       1/2
V 1/2 [Vt (Rt,t
             e
               +1 )] is the standard deviation of conditional standard deviations. Panel D shows
the Sharpe ratio (SR) if the UMVE portfolio as a function of the signals used in its construction,
along with the "alpha" of alternative UMVE portfolios regressed on the full model UMVE portfolio.
                                                            45
                                 Table 2: Testing the UMVE

       Panel A    Currency returns

                  Currency               SR      E [Re ]     t-stat          t-stat    2
                                                                                      Radj

                  AUD                    0.241        2.83    1.44    0.73     0.34    0.025
                  CAD                    0.099        0.74    0.59   -0.03    -0.02    0.007
                  CHF                    0.149        1.68    0.89    3.22     1.56    0.014
                  EUR                    0.145        1.52    0.86    1.83     0.95   -0.002
                  GBP                    0.217        2.17    1.29    1.08     0.65    0.008
                  JPY                    0.054        0.60    0.32    2.45     1.20    0.022
                  NOK                    0.205        2.26    1.22    1.27     0.63    0.005
                  NZD                    0.427        5.29    2.54    3.72     1.67    0.012
                  SEK                    0.134        1.48    0.80    0.28     0.14    0.008


       Panel B    Strategy returns

                  Strategy               SR      E [Re ]     t-stat          t-stat    2
                                                                                      Radj

                  Dollar                 0.258        2.06    1.54    1.61     1.14    0.000
                  Dollar Carry           0.576        4.56    3.43    2.40     1.75    0.062
                  CS-Carry               0.469        4.14    2.79    0.43     0.28    0.151
                  TS-Carry               0.685        3.44    4.08    1.25     1.47    0.163
                  CS-Mom 1               0.179        1.46    1.06    0.61     0.36    0.007
                  CS-Mom 12              0.175        1.47    1.04   -1.22    -0.82    0.087
                  TS-Mom 1               0.440        2.73    2.62    1.45     1.30    0.034
                  TS-Mom 12              0.473        5.19    2.82    1.65     0.86    0.088
                  CS-Value               0.529        4.02    3.15    0.98     0.69    0.136


Panel A gives the annualized Sharpe ratio (SR), average return, and t-statistic of excess returns to
each currency, along with its "alpha" and R2 with respect to the UMVE portfolio. The t-statistics
are heteroskedasticity-adjusted. Panel B shows the same for the strategy returns. The sample is
monthly from January 1985 to May 2020.




                                                 46
                                Table 3: Asset pricing tests

                  UMVE               All strategies               Dollar + All Carry
  Model            SR        GRS     MHR GRS hedged            GRS MHR GRS hedged
  Optimal          1.075     0.470    0.247        0.475       0.467   0.532        0.434
  Carry only       0.871     0.010    0.000        0.010       0.309   0.023        0.156
  V -weighted      0.165     0.000      ­          0.001       0.002     ­          0.023
  E -weighted      0.565     0.000      ­          0.000       0.084     ­          0.002

The GRS p-value is for the joint test of all "alpha" equal to zero. The MHR p-value is for the
conditional test of the model as implied by multi-horizon returns. The horizons are 1, 3, 6, 12,
24, and 48 months. See the text for details. The "GRS hedged" p-value is for the joint test of
all average hedged strategy returns equal to zero. For each strategy, we compute the conditional
beta on the UMVE portfolio out-of-sample and thus hedge out the priced component, according
to our model, in real time. This test is also an unconditional test of each model's conditional
implications. The sample is monthly from January 1985 to May 2020.




                                              47
                                    Table 4: Factor timing

                 Panel A            Optimal timing

                                                          2
                 Strategy      timing t-stat IR timing Radj
                 Dollar           3.75  2.72      0.482 0.055
                 Dollar-Carry     1.49  1.54      0.234 0.348
                 CS-Carry         0.48  0.46      0.083 0.568
                 TS-Carry         1.40  1.95      0.384 0.472
                 CS-Mom 1         2.40  2.14      0.304 0.070
                 CS Mom 12        2.69  2.42      0.384 0.296
                 TS-Mom 1         2.66  2.92      0.471 0.164
                 TS-Mom 12        2.18  2.06      0.319 0.609
                 CS-Value        -0.53 -0.62     -0.097 0.478


                 Panel B            Volatility timing

                                                          2
                 Strategy      timing t-stat IR timing Radj
                 Dollar          -1.31 -2.13     -0.446 0.861
                 Dollar-Carry     0.44  0.92      0.146 0.855
                 CS-Carry        -0.13 -0.20     -0.039 0.815
                 TS-Carry         1.14  1.29      0.257 0.687
                 CS-Mom 1         0.00  0.00      0.000 0.801
                 CS Mom 12        0.97  1.81      0.295 0.828
                 TS-Mom 1         1.13  1.20      0.219 0.571
                 TS-Mom 12        1.05  1.32      0.244 0.703
                 CS-Value        -0.76 -1.93     -0.291 0.890

Panel A gives the annualized "alpha" and t-statistic, Information Ratio (IR), and adjusted R2 for
all timed strategy returns regressed on the original strategy returns. A positive and significant
alpha implies that the timing provides a significant Sharpe ratio that cannot be explained by the
original strategy. The timing weights are calculated in an out-of-sample fashion using the estimated
conditional means and covariance matrix of the underlying currencies. Panel B shows the same
when only the conditional strategy variance is used in the timing strategy (volatility timing). The
t-statistics are heteroskedasticity-adjusted. The sample is monthly from January 1985 to May 2020.



                                                48
                                           Table 5: Covariates

                         Panel A     UMVE returns vs. observable factors

                                     Quarterly c         3-year c         HML      CMA

                         Beta                32.452             6.740     0.011    0.021
                         t-stat               2.516             3.167     2.039    2.724
                           2
                         Radj                 0.031             0.073     0.006    0.013
                         N                      141               131       425      425



      Panel B    UMVE, CS-Carry, its idiosyncratic component and covariates

                           UMVE                          CS-Carry                  CS-Carry idiosyncratic
                 HKM     Equity RV   FX RV     HKM      Equity RV     FX RV       HKM Equity RV FX RV

      Beta       0.309      -3.633 -28.499      0.111        -2.066     -6.023    0.099     -1.814   -4.858
      (t-stat)   1.066      -0.565 -1.494       3.482        -6.743     -6.628    3.572     -4.954   -4.752
      R2adj      0.001           0   0.017      0.084         0.117      0.151    0.086      0.116    0.126
      N            425         425     425        425           425        425      425        425      425




                         Panel C     Price of risk vs. aggregate variance

                                      Cons. Variance          Equity RV           FX RV

                         Beta                -22508.189               -1.478      -12.372
                         t-stat                  -3.928               -0.717       -2.806
                           2
                         Radj                     0.140                0.000        0.032
                         N                          129                  399          399


Panel A gives the results from regressing the UMVE portfolio returns on various factors in
univariate regressions. c denote log real, per capita nondurable+services consumption growth.
HML is the high-minus-low book-to-market factor from the Fama-French 5-factor model, whereas
CMA is the Conservative minus Aggressive investment factor from the same. Panel B shows
regressions of UMVE, the CS Carry strategy, and the unpriced component of CS carry returns on
the intermediary capital factor from He, Kelly, and Manela (2018), HKM , as well as shocks to
realized variance in the equity and currency markets. Panel C displays a regression of the 3-year
change in the conditional price of risk on the 3-year change in conditional consumption variance
(obtained from a GARCH(1,1)), equity variance, and currency (FX) variance, respectively. We use
3-year changes instead of levels due to a downward drift in the price of risk over the sample. The
t-statistics are heteroskedasticity-adjusted. The sample is monthly from January 1985 to May 2020.

                                                        49
